--------------------------The Air Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE AIR CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1962  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. Change of name of Act India International.  
8. Dissolution of Air Transport Council.  
 
  2 
 THE AIR CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 17  OF 1962  
[30th March, 1962.]  
An Act further to amend the Air Corporations Act, 1953.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1.  Short title. —This Act may  be called the Air Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1962.  
1*                     *                         *                        *                           *                             *  
7. Change of name of Act India International. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, the Corporation established under 
section 3 of the principal Act known as “Air India International” shall be renamed as “Air India”.  
(2) The change of name of “Air I ndia International” by sub -section ( 1) shall not affect any rights and 
obligations of that Corporation or render defective any legal proceedings by or against it, and any legal 
proceedings which might have been continued or commenced by or against that Cor poration by its former 
name may be continued or commenced by or against it, by its new name.  
8. Dissolution of Air Transport Council.—As from the commencement of this Act, the Air 
Transport Council constituted under section 30 of the principal Act and in e xistence at such 
commencement shall stand dissolved.  
 
 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 6 rep.  by Act 56 of 1974 , s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
  
--------------------------The Atomic Energy Act, 1962--------------------------
1 THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions and interpretation . 
3. General powers of the Central Government . 
4. Notification of discovery of uranium or thorium . 
5. Control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium . 
6. Disposal of uranium . 
7. Power s to obtain information regarding materials, plant or processes . 
8. Power s of entry and inspection . 
9. Power to do work for discovering minerals . 
10. Compulsory acquisition of rights to work minerals . 
11. Compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals and plants . 
11A. Removal of doubts . 
12. Compensation in case of compulsory acquisition of a mine . 
13. Novation of certain contracts . 
14. Control over production and use of atomic energy . 
15. Requisitioning of any substance for extracting uranium or plutonium . 
16. Control over radioactive substances . 
17. Special provisions as to safety . 
18. Restriction on disclosure of information . 
19. Prevention of entry into prohibited areas . 
20. Special Provisions as to inventions . 
21. Principles relating to payment of compensation . 
22. Special provisions as to electricity . 
23. Administration of Factories Act, 1948 . 
24. Offences and penalties . 
25. Offences by companies . 
26. Cognizance of offences . 
27. Delegation of powers . 
28. Effect of other laws  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
30. Power to make rules . 
31. Act binding on Government . 
32. [Repealed .] 2 THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962  
ACT 33 OF 1962  
[15th September , 1962 .] 
An Act to provide for the development, control and use of atomic energy for the welfare of the 
people of India and for other peaceful purposes and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may b e called the Atomic Energy                   
Act, 1962 . 
(2) It extends  to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may , by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Definitions and interpretation .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “atomic energy ” means energy released from atomic nuclei as a result of any process, 
including the fission and fusion processes;  
(b) “fissile material ” means uranium 233, uranium 235, plutonium or any material containing 
these substances or any other material that may be declared as such by notification by the Central 
Government;  
2[(b) “Government company” means a company in which not less than fifty -one per cent. of the 
paid up share capital is hel d by the Central Government; ] 
(c) “minerals ” include all substances obtained or obtainable from the soil (including alluvium or 
rocks) by underground or surface working;  
(d) “notification ” means notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “Plant” includes machinery, equ ipment or appliance, whether affixed to land or not;  
(f) “prescribed equipment ” means any property which the Central Government may, by 
notification, prescribe, being a property which in its opinion is specially designed or adapted or which 
is used or intended to be used for the production or util isation of any prescribed substance, or for the 
production or utili sation o f atomic energy, radio active substances, or radiation, but does not include 
mining, milling, laboratory and other e quipment not so specially designed or adapted and not 
incorporated in equipment used or intended to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid;  
(g) “prescribed substance ” means any substance including any mineral which the Central 
Government may, by notific ation, prescribe, being a substance which in its opinion is or may be used 
for the production or use of atomic energy or research into matters  connected therewith and includes 
uranium, plutonium, thorium, beryllium, deuterium or any of their respective der ivatives or 
compounds or any other materials containing any of the aforesaid substances;  
(h) “radiation ” means gamma rays, X -rays, and rays consisting of alpha particles, beta particles, 
neutrons, protons and other nuclear and sub -atomic particles; but not  sound or radio waves,  or visible, 
infrared or ultraviolet  light;  
(i) “radioactive substance ” or “radioactive material ” means any substance or material which 
spontaneously emits radiation in excess of the levels prescribed by notification by the Central 
Government.  
                                                           
1. 21st September, 1962, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1254(E), dated 18th September, 1962, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( i). 
2. Clause ( bb) shall stand substitute (date to be notified) by Act 5 of 2016, s. 2, to read as under: — 
(bb) “Government company” means a company in which — 
(i) not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central Government; or  
(ii) the whole of the paid -up share capital is held by one or more of the companies specified in sub -clause ( i) and 
which, by its articles of association, empowers the Central Government to constitute and reconstitute  its Board of 
Directors.  3 (2) Any reference in this Act to the working of minerals shall be construed as including a reference to 
the m ining, getting, carrying away, transporting, sorting, extracting or otherwise treating of minerals.  
(3) Any  reference in this Act to the production or use of atomic energy shall be construed as including 
a reference to the carrying out of any process, prep aratory or ancillary to such product ion or use.  
3. General powers of the Central Government .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government shall have pow er— 
(a) to produce, develop, use and dispose of atomic energy  1[either by itself or through any 
authority or corporation established by it or a Government company] and carry out research into any 
matters connected therewith;  
2[(b) to manufacture or otherwise produce any prescribed or radioactive substance and any 
articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to be, required for or in connection with, the production, 
development or use of atomic energy or such research as aforesaid and to dispose of such prescribed 
or radioactive substance or any articles manufacture d or otherwise pro duced ; 
(bb) (i) to buy or otherwise acquire, store and transport any prescribed or radioactive 
substance and any articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to be, required for, or in 
connection with, the production, development or use o f atomic energ y; and  
(ii) to dispose of such prescribed or radioactive substance or any articles boug ht or otherwise 
acquired by it,  
either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it, or a Government company;]  
(c) to declare as “restricted infor mation ” any information not so far published or oth erwise made 
public relating to — 
(i) the location, quality and quantity of prescribed substances and transactions for their 
acquisition, whether by purchase or otherwise, or disposal, whether by sale or otherwise;  
(ii) the processing or prescribed substances and the extraction or production of fissile 
materials from them;  
(iii) the theory, design, construction and operation of plants for the treatment and production 
of any of the pr escribed substances and  for the separation or isotopes;  
(iv) the theory , design, construction and operation of nuclear reactors;  
(v) research and technological work on materials and process es involved in or derived from 
items ( i) to ( iv); 
(d) to declare as “prohibited area ” any area or premises where work including research, design or 
development is carried on in respect of the production, treatment, use, application or disposal of 
atomic energy or of any prescribed substances;  
(e) to provide for control over radioactive substanc es or radiatio n generating plant in order to — 
(i) prevent radiation hazards;  
(ii) secure public safety and safety or persons hand ling radioactive substances or radiation 
generating plant; and  
(iii) ensure safe disposal of radioactive wastes;  
(f) to provide  for the production and supply of electricity from atomic energy and for taking 
measures conducive to such production and supply and for all matters incidental thereto  1[either by 
itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company] ; and 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).   4 (g) to do all such thing s (including the erection of buildings and execution of works and the 
working of minerals) as the Central Government considers necessary or expedient for the exercise of 
the foregoing powers.  
4. Notification of discovery of uranium or thorium .—(1) Every person who, whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act, has discovered or discovers that uranium or thorium occurs at any 
place in India shall, within three  months after the date of comm encement of this Act or after the 
discovery , whichever is later , report the discovery in writing to the Central Government or to any person 
or authority authorised by the Central Government in this behalf.  
(2) Every person who has reason to believe that uranium or thorium occurs at any place in India shall, 
without delay, send intimation of such belief and the reasons therefor to the Central Government or to any 
such person or authority as aforesaid.  
 5. Control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium .—(1) If the Central 
Government is satisfied that any person is mining or is about to mine any substance from which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, uranium can be or may reasonably be expected to be, isolated or 
extracted, or i s engaged or is about to be engaged in treating or concentrating by any physical, chemical 
or metallurgical process any substance from which, in the opinion of the Central Government, uranium 
can be or may reasonably be expected to be, isolated or extracte d, the Central Government may b e notice 
in writi ng given to that person either — 
(a) require him in conducting the mining operations or in treating or concentrating the substance 
aforesaid to comply with such terms and conditions and adopt such processes as  the Central 
Government may in the notice , or from time to time thereafter, think fit to specify, or  
(b) totally prohibit him from conducting the mining operations or treating or concentrating the 
substance aforesaid.  
(2) Where any terms and conditions are  imposed on any person conducting any mining operations or 
treating or concentrating any substance under clause  (a) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, 
having regard to the nature of the terms and conditions, decide as to whether or not to pay any 
compensation to that person and the decision of the Ce ntral Government shall be final : 
Provided that where the Central Government decides not to pay any compensation, it shall record in 
writing a brief statement giving the reasons for such decision.  
(3) Where the Central Government decides to pay any compensation under sub -section ( 2), the 
amount thereof shall be determined in accordance with section 21 but in calculating the compensation 
payable, no account shall be taken of the value of any uranium co ntained in the substance referred to in 
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) Where any mining operation or any process o f treatment or concentration of any substance is 
prohibited under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall pay compensation to the 
person conducting the mining operations or using the process of treatment or concentration and the 
amount of such compensation shall be determined in accordance with section 21 but in calculating the 
compensation payable, no account shall be taken of the val ue of any uranium contained in the substance.  
6. Disposal of uranium .—(1) No minerals, concentrates and other materials which contain uranium 
in its natural state in excess of such proportion as may be prescribed by notification by the Central 
Government shall be disposed of except with the previous permission in writing of the Central 
Government and in accordance with such terms and conditions as it may impose.  
(2) The Central Government may serve notice on any person who has produced any mineral, 
concent rate or other material referred to in sub -section ( 1) that the Central Government  1[proposes to 
compulsorily acquire it and upon the service of the notice], the mineral, concentrate or other material 
shall become the property o f the Central Government and shall be delivered to the Central  Government or 
as it may direct : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1986, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962),  5 1*   *   *   *   * 
2[(3) Compensation in respect of acquisition under sub -section ( 2) shall be paid in accordance with 
section 21 and in determining such compensation regard shall be had to the cost of production of such 
mineral, concentrate or other material and such other factors as may be relevant but no account shall be 
taken of the value of uranium in its natural state contained therein.]  
7. Power s to obtain information regarding materia ls, plant or processes .—The Central 
Government may, by notice in writing served on any person, require him to make such periodical and 
other returns, or statements at such times and containing such  particulars and accompanied by such plans, 
drawings, and other documents as may be speci fied in the notice relating to — 
(a) any prescribed substance, specified in the notice, in his possession or under his control or 
present in or on any land or mine owned or occupied by him which in the opinion of the Central 
Government is or can be a source of any of the prescribed substances, including returns in respect of 
any such land or mine;  
(b) any plant in his possession or under his control designed for mini ng or processing of minerals 
so specified, or adapted for the production or use of atomic energy or research into matters connected 
therewith;  
(c) any contract entered into by him or any licence granted by or to him relating to prospecting or 
mining o f minerals so specified or the production or use o f atomic energy or research into matters 
connected therewith;  
(d) any other information in his possession relating to any work carried out by him or on his 
behalf or under his directions, in connection with pros pecting or mining of materials so specified or 
the production or use of atomic energy or research into matters connected therewith.  
8. Power of entry and inspection .—(1) Any person authorised by the Central Government may, on 
producing, if so required, a duly authenticated document showing his authority, enter an y mine, premises 
or land— 
(a) where he has reason to believe that work is being carried out for the purpose of or in 
connection with production and processing of any prescribed substances or substa nces from which a 
prescribed substance can be obtained or production, development or use o f atomic energy or research 
into matters connected therewith, or  
(b) where any such plant as is mentioned in clause ( b) of section 7 is situate,  
and may inspect the m ine, premises or land and any articles contained therein.  
(2) The person carrying out the inspection may make copies of or extracts from any drawing, plan or 
other document found in the mine, premises or land and for the purpose of making such copies or 
extracts, may remove any such drawing, plan or other document after giving a duly signed receipt for the 
same and retain possession thereof for a period not exceeding seven days.  
 9. Power to do work for discovering minerals .—(1) The Central Government may, subject to the 
provisions of this section, do on, over or below the surface of any land such work as it considers 
necessary for the purpose of discovering whether there is present in or on the land, either in a natural state 
or in a deposit o f waste m aterial obtained from any under ground or surface working, any substance f rom 
which in its opinion any of the prescribed substances can be obtained, and the extent to which such 
substance is so present.  
(2) Before any powers are exe rcised under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any land, the Central 
Government shall serve on every owner, lessee and occupier of the land a notice in writing specifying the 
nature of the work proposed to be done and the extent of the land affected, and the time, not being less 
than twenty -eight days, within which and the manner in which objections can be made thereto, and no 
such powers shall be exercised otherwise than in pursuance of the notice or before the expiration of the 
time specified therein for mak ing objections.  
                                                           
1. The p roviso omitted by Act 59 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).   6 (3) The Central Government may, after giving the person making the objection an opportunity of 
appearing before and being heard by a person appointed by the Central Government for the purpose, and 
after considering any such objection and th e report of the person so appointed, make such orders as it may 
deem proper but not so as to increase the extent of the land affected.  
(4) Compensation shall be determined and paid in accordance with section 21 in respect of any 
diminution in the value of any land or property situate thereon resulting from the exercise of powers 
under this section.  
10. Compulsory acquisition of rights to work minerals .—(1) Where it appears to the Central 
Government that any minerals from which in its opinion any of the pres cribed substances can be obtained 
are present in or on any land, either in a natural state or in  a deposit of waste material obtained from any 
underground or surface working, it may by order provide for compulsorily vesting in the Central 
Government the ex clusive right, so long as the order remains in force to work those minerals and any 
other minerals which it appears to the Central Government to be necessary to work with those minerals, 
and may also provide, by that order or a subsequent order, for compul sorily vesting in the Central 
Government any other ancillary rights which appear to the Central Government to be necessary for the 
purpose of working the minerals aforesaid including (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provisions)  — 
(a) rights to withdraw support;  
(b) rights necessary for the purpose of access to or conveyance of the minerals aforesaid or the 
ventilation or drainage of the working;  
(c) rights to use and occupy the surface of any land for the purpose of erecting any necessary 
building s and installing any necessary plant in connection with the working of the minerals aforesaid;  
(d) rights to use and occupy for the purpose of working the minerals aforesaid any land forming 
part of or used in connection with an existing mine or quarry, and to use or acquire any plant used in 
connection with any such mine or quarry; and  
(e) rights to obtain a supply or water for any of the purposes connected with the working of the 
minerals aforesaid, or to dispose of water or other liquid  matter obtained in consequence of working 
such minerals.  
(2) Notice of any order proposed to be made under this section shall be se rved by the Central 
Government — 
(a) on all persons who, but for the order, would be entitled to work the minerals affected; and 
(b) on every owner, lessee and occupier (except tenants for a month or for less than a month) of 
any land in respect of which rights are proposed to be acquired under the order.  
(3) Compensation in respect of any right acquired under this section shall  be paid in accordance with 
section 21, but in calculating the compensation payable, no account shall be taken of the value of any 
minerals present in or on land affected by the order, being minerals specified in the order as those from 
which in the opinio n of the Central Government uranium or any concentrate or derivative of uranium can 
be obtained.  
11. Compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals and plants .—(1) Save as 
otherwise provided in any other provision of this Act, the Central Govern ment may compulsorily acquire 
in accordance with the provisions of this section — 
(a) any prescribed substance;  
(b) any minerals from which in the opinion of the Central Government any o f the prescribed 
substances can be obtained;  
(c) any prescribed equipment;  7 (d) any plant which is designed or adapted for the mining or processing of any minerals referred 
to in clause ( b) or substances obtained therefrom or for the production or use of any prescribed 
substance or a radioactive substanc e or for the production, use or disposal of such articles as are or 
are likely to be required for or in connection with the production, use or disposal o f atomic energy or 
for research into matters connected therewith.  
(2) Where the Central Government acqu ires any plant referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), it 
shall also have the right to acquire any buildings, railway sidings, tramway lines, or aerial ropeways 
serving such plant.  
(3) Where the Central Government proposes to acquire any property under sub -section ( 1), it shall 
serve upon the person appearing to be the owner thereof, a notice in writing specifying the property to be 
acquired and requiring that person to make to the Central Government within the time specified  in the 
notice a writte n declaration containing such particulars as may be so specified  regarding the ownership of 
such property and any agreement or charge by virtue of which any other person has an interest in such 
property.  
(4) Upon the service of a notice under sub -section ( 3), no property to which the notice relates shall be 
disposed of without the previous permission in writing of the Central Government.  
(5) If it appears to the Central Government in consequence of any written declaration made to                  
it in pursu ance of sub -section ( 3) that any person other than the person on whom the notice under                   
sub-section ( 3) was served is the owner of, or has any interest in, the property to which the notice relates, 
the Central Government shall serve a copy  of the notice on that other person.  
(6) A notice served under sub -section ( 3) shall contain a statement to the effect that an objection may 
be made thereto within such time and in such manner as may be specified , and if any such objection is 
duly made and  not withdrawn, the Central Government shall afford an opportunity to the person making 
the objection of appearing before and being heard by a person appointed by the Central Government for 
the purpose.  
(7) After considering any such objection, and the rep ort of the person appointed by it under                    
sub-section ( 6), the Central Government may serve on the person s upon whom the notice under            
sub-section ( 3) or a copy thereof was served a further notice in writing either withdrawing th e notice of 
acquisition or confirming the said notice as respects the property to which it relates or such part of the 
property as may be specified.  
(8) Any property with respect to which a notice of acquisition is s erved under this section shall — 
(a) if no objection is duly made to the notice, vest in the Central Government at the expiration of 
the time for making such objection;  
(b) if such an objection is duly made and the notice is confirmed as respect the whole or any part 
of that property by a notice  served under sub -section ( 7), vest accordingly in the Central Government 
on the servic e of the last mentioned notice;  
and shall in either case vest free from all encumbrances.  
(9) Compensation in respect of acquisition under this section shall be paid in accordance with            
section 21.  
1[11A. Removal of doubts .— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the compulsory 
acquisition of any mineral, concentrate or other material under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, or of any 
substance, minerals, equipment or plant under sub -section ( 1) of section 11, shall not be deemed to be a 
sale for any purpose whatsoever.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 59 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).  8 12. Compensation in case of compulsory acquisition of a mine .—Where the Central Government 
acquires, in accordance with any law,  any mine or part of a mine from which in the opinion of the Central 
Government any of the prescribed substances can be obtained, compensation in respect of such 
acquisition shall be pai d in accordance with section 21 : 
Provided that in determining the amou nt of such compensation, no account shall be taken of the value 
of uranium which may be obtained from such mine or part of a mine.  
13. Novation of certain contracts .—(1) The Central Government may serve on the parties to a 
contract relating to prospecting or mining of any substance from which any of the prescribed substances 
can be obtained or to production or use of atomic energy or to research into matters connected therewith, 
not being a contract for the rendering of personal services, a notice in writin g stating that on such date as 
may be specified in the notice the rights and liabilities of any of the parties to the contract specified in the 
notice (hereinafter referred to as the specified party) will be transferred to the Central Government, and 
there upon subject to any withdrawal of the notice under the following provisions of this section, the 
contract shall , as regards any rights exercisable, or liabilities incurred, on or a fter the said date, have 
effect s as if the Central Government were a party to the contract instead of the specified party and as if 
for any reference in the contract to the specified party there were substituted a reference to the Central 
Government.  
(2) A notice served under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a statement to the effect that an objection may 
be made thereto within such time and in such manner as may be specified, and if any such objection is 
duly made and not  withdrawn, the Central Government shall afford an opportunity to the person making 
the objection of appeari ng before and being heard by person appointed by the Central Government for the 
purpose.  
(3) After considering any such objection and the report of the person appointed by it under                     
sub-section ( 2), the Central Government may make such o rder as it may deem proper.  
(4) Where the rights and liabilities of a party to a contract are transferred to the Central Government 
under this section, there shall be paid to that party such compensation in respect of any loss suffered by 
that party as may  be agreed between him and the Central Government, and in default of such agreement, 
as may be determined by arbitration.  
14. Control over production and use of atomic energy .—(1) The Central Government may, subject 
to such rules as may be made in this behalf, by order prohibit except  under a licence granted by it — 
(i) the working of any mine or minerals specified in the order, being a mine or minerals from 
which in the opinion of the Central Government any of the prescr ibed substances can be obtained;  
(ii) the acquisition, production, possession, u se, disposal, export or import — 
(a) of any of the prescribed substances; or  
(b) of any minerals or other substances specified in the rules, from which in the opinion of the 
Central Government any of the prescri bed substances can be obtained ; or 
(c) of any plant designed or ad opted or manufactured for the production, development and 
use of atomic energy or for research into matters connected therewith; or  
(d) of any prescribed equipment.  
1[(1A) No licence under sub-clause ( c) of clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) shall be granted to a person 
other than a Department of the Central Government or any authority or an institution or a corporation 
established by the Central Government, or a Government company.  
(1B) Any lic ence granted to a Government company under sub -section ( 1) shall stand cancelled in 
case the licensee ceases to be a Government company and, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in f orce, all assets thereof shall v est in t he Central Government free from any 
liability and the Central Government shall take such measures for safe operation of the plant and disposal 
of nuclear material so vested in it, as may be necessary in accordance with the provisions of section 3. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2016, s. 3 (date to be notified).  9 (2) Not hing in this section shall affect the authority of the Central Government to refuse a licence for 
the purpose of this section or to include in a licence such conditions as the Central Government thinks fit 
or to revoke a licence and the Central Government may take any action as aforesaid.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the rules referred to in this section  
may provide for — 
(a) the extent to which information in the possession  of, or which has been made available to, the 
person granted a licence for purposes of this section, should be regarded as restricted information;  
(b) the extent to which the area or premises under the control of the person to whom a licence has 
been grant ed for purposes of this section, should be regarded as a prohibited area;  
(c) the conditions and criteria for location of any installation or operation of any plant in respect 
of which a licence has been granted or is intended to be granted for the purpose s of this section 
including those necessary for protection against radiation and safe disposal of harmful by -product s or 
wastes;  
(d) the extent of the licensee ’s liability in respect of any hurt to any person or any damage to 
property caused by ionising ra diations or any radioactive contamination either at the plant under 
licence or in the surrounding area;  
(e) provision by licensee either by insurance or by such other means as the Central Government 
may approve, of sufficient funds to be available at all t imes to ensure settlement of any claims in 
connection with the use of the site or the plant under licence which have been or may be duly 
established against the licensee in respect of any hurt to any person or any damage to any property 
caused by ionising radiations emitted at the plant under licence or radioactive contamination either at 
the plant under licence or in surrounding areas;  
(f) obligatory qualifications, security clearances, hours of employment, minimum leave and 
periodical medical examination of the persons employed and any other requirement or restriction or 
prohibition on the employer, employed persons and other persons; and  
(g) such other incidental and supplementary provisions including provisions for inspection and 
also for the sealing or premises and seizure, retention and disposal of any article in respect of which 
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that a contravention of the rules has been committed, as 
the Central Government considers necessary.  
(4) The Central Government may also prescribe the fees payable for issue of licences under                     
sub-section ( 1). 
15. Requisitioning of any substance for extracting uranium or plutonium .—(1) The Central 
Government shall have the right to require that any substance which, in  the opinion of the Central 
Government, contains uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes, shall be delivered to it and the Central 
Government may extract from that substance the uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes contained 
therein and return t he substance to the person concerned on payment of compensation which shall be 
determined in accordance with section 21 : 
Provided that such compensation shall not, in any case, exceed the cost incurred by the person in the 
production , mining or irradiation  of the substance and in determining the same no account shall be taken 
on the value of the uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes extracted from the substance.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Central Government from permitting, subject to such 
conditions as it may deem fit to impose, the use of small quantities of natural uranium for the purpose of 
examination, test or analysis.  
16. Control over radioactive substances .—The Central Government may prohibit the manufacture, 
possession, use,  transfer by sale or otherwise, export and import and in any emergency, transport and 
disposal, of any radioactive substances without its written consent.  
17. Special provisions as to safety .—(1) The Central Government may, as regards any class or 
descript ion of premises or places, being premises, or places, in which radioactive substances ar e 
manufactured, produced, mined, treated, stored or used or any radiation generating plant, equipment or 
appliance is used, make such provision by rules as appear to th e Central Government to be necessary — 
(a) to prevent injury being caused to the health of persons employed at such premises or places or 
other persons either by radiations, or by the ingestion of any radioactive substance;  10 (b) to secure that any radioactive waste products resulting from such manufacture, production, 
mining, treatment, storage, or use as aforesaid are disposed of safely;  
(c) to prescribe qualifications of the persons for employment at such premises or places and the 
regulation of t heir hours of employment , minimum leave and  periodical medical examination;  
and the rules may, in particular and without prejudice to the generality of this sub -section, provide for 
imposing requirements as to the erection or structural alterations of buildings or the carrying out of works.  
(2) The Central Government may, as respects the transport of any radioactive substance or any 
prescribed substance specified by an order issued under this Act as being dangerous to health, make such 
rules as appear t o be necessary to prevent injury being caused by such transport to the health of persons 
engaged therein and other persons.  
(3) Rules made under this section may provide for imposing requirements, prohibitions and 
restrictions on employers, employed person s and other persons.  
(4) Any person authorised by the Central Government under this section, may, on producing, if so 
required, a duly authenticated document showing his authority, enter at all reasonable hours any premises, 
or any vehicle, vessel or aircr aft for the purpose of ascertaining whether there has been committed, or is 
being committed, in or in connection with the premises, vehicle, vessel or aircraft, any contravention of 
the rules made under this section.  
(5) In the event of any contravention o f the rules made under this section, the Central Government 
shall have the right to take such measures as it may deem necessary to prevent further injury to persons or 
damage to property arising from radiation or contamin ation by radioactive substances  including, without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, and to the right to take further action for the 
enforcement of penalties under section 24, the sealing or premises, vehicle, vessel, or aircraft, and the 
seizure of radioactive substa nces and contaminated equipment.  
18. Restriction on disclosure of information .—(1) The Central Government may by order restrict 
the disclosure of information, whether contained in a document, drawing , photograph, plan, model, or in 
any other form whatsoever, which relates to, represents or illustrat es— 
(a) an existing or proposed plant used or proposed to be used for the purpose of producing, 
developing or using atomic energy, or  
(b) the purpose or met hod of operation of any such existing or proposed plant, or  
(c) any process operated or proposed to be operated in any such existing or proposed plant.  
(2) No person shall — 
(a) disclose, or obtain or attempt to obtain any information restricted under sub -section ( 1), or 
(b) disclose, without the authority of the Central Government, any information obtained in the 
discharge of any functions under this Act or in the performance of his official duties.  
(3) Nothi ng in this section shall apply — 
(i) to the disclo sure of information with respect to any plant of a type in use for purposes other 
than the production, development or use of atomic energy, unless the information disclose that plant 
of that type is used or proposed to be used for the production, developme nt or use of atomic energy or 
research into any matters connected therewith; or  
(ii) where any information has been made available to the general public otherwise than in 
contravention of this section, to any subsequent disclosure of that information.  
19. Prevention of entry into prohibited areas .—The Central Go vernment may by order prohibit — 
(a) entry of any person, without obtaining permission, into a prohibited area, and  
(b) taking by any persons, without permission, of any photograph, sketch, pictures,  drawing, map 
or other document from a prohibited area and any permission, if given to do these things, may be 
subject to stipulations which the Central Government may consider necessary.  11 20. Special Provisions as to inventions .—(1) As from the commencement of this Act, no patents 
shall be granted for inventions which in the opinion of the Central Government are useful for or relate to 
the production, control, use or disposal of atomic energy or the prospecting, mining, extraction, 
production, ph ysical and chemical treatment, fabrication, enrichment, canning or use of any prescribed 
substance or radioactive substance or the ensuring of safety in atomic energy operations.  
(2) The prohibition under sub -section ( 1) shall also apply to any invention of the nature specified in 
that sub -section in respect of which an application for the grant of a patent has been made to the 
Controller of Patents and Designs appointed under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911  (2 of 1911) , 
before the commencement of  this Act and is pending with him at such commencement.  
(3) The Central Government shall have the power to inspect at any time any pending patent 
application and specification before its acceptance and if it considers that the invention relates to atomic 
energy , to issue directions to the Controller of Patents and Designs to refuse the application on that 
ground.  
(4) Any person, who has made an invention which he has reason to believe relates to atomic energy, 
shall communicate to the Central Government the  nature and description of the invention.  
(5) Any person desiring to apply for a patent abroad for an invention relating to or which he has 
reason to believe relates to atomic energy shall obtain prior permission from the Central Government 
before making t he application abroad or communicating the invention to any person abroad, unless three 
months have elapsed since his request for permission was made to the Central Government and no reply 
was received by him.  
(6) The Controller of Patents and Designs shal l have the power to refer any application to the Central 
Government for direction as to whether the invention is one relating to atomic energy and the direction 
given by the Central Government shall be final.  
(7) Any invention in the field of atomic energy  conceived whether in establishments controlled by the 
Central Government or under any contract, sub -contract, arrangement or other relationship with the 
Central Government shall be deemed to have been made or conceived by the Central Government, 
irrespect ive of whether such contract, sub -contract, arrangement or other relationship involves financial 
participation of or assistance from the Central Government.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911  (2 of 1911) , the 
decision of the Central Government on points connected with or arising out of this section shall be final.  
21. Principles relating to payment of compensation .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, 
where by reason of exercise of any powers under this  Act, any compensation is payable, the amount of 
such compensation shall be determined in the manner and in accordance with the principles hereinafter 
set out, that is to say — 
(a) where the amount of compensation is fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance with 
such agreement;  
(b) where no such agreement is reached, the Central Government shall appoint as arbitrator a 
person having expert knowledge as to the nature of the right affected who shall determine the amount 
of compensation payable.  
(2) In making his award, the arbitrator appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall have regard — 
(a) in the case of any compen sation payable under section 9 — 
(i) to the nature of the work done;  
(ii) the manner, extent and duration of the exercise of any powers under that section;  
(iii) the diminution in the rent of the land and of the property situated thereon, which might 
reasonably be expected over any period or diminution in the market value of the land and 
property on the date when the exercise of powers comes to an end; and  
(iv) the provisions of sub -section  (1) of section  23 of the Land Acquisition                                    
Act, 1894  (1 of 1894) , in so far as such provisions can be made applicable to the exercise of 
powers under section 9; and  12 (b) in the case of any compensation payable under section 11 or under section 12, to the price 
which the owner might reasonably have been expected to obtain on a sale of the property effected by 
him immediately before the date of the acquisition.  
(3) An appe al shall lie to the High Court against an award of the arbitrator except in cases where the 
amount claimed thereof does not exceed an amount prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government may make rules prescribing the proc edure to be followed in arbitrations 
under this Act and the principles to be followed in the apportionment of the cost of proceedings before the 
arbitrator and on appeal.  
(5) Save as provided in this Act, nothing in any law for the time being in force rela ting to arbitration 
shall apply to arbitrations under this Act.  
 22. Special provision  as to electricity .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) , the Central G overnment shall have authority — 
(a) to develop  a sound and adequate national policy in regard to atomic power, to co -ordinate 
such policy with the Central Electricity Authority and the State Electricity Boards constituted under 
sections 3 and 5 respectively of that Act and other similar statutory corp orations concerned with the 
control and utilisation of other power resources, to implement schemes for the generation of 
electricity in pursuance of such policy and to operate  1[,either by itself or through any authority or 
corporation established by it or  a Government company ,] atomic power stations in the manner 
determined by it in consultation with the Boards or Corporations concerned, with whom it shall enter 
into agreement regarding the su pply or electricity so produced;  
(b) to fix rates for and regulate the supply of electricity from atomic power stations  2[either by 
itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company, in 
consultation with] of the Central Electricity Authority;  
(c) to enter into arrangements w ith the Electricity Board of the State in which an at omic power 
station is situated 1[either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or 
a Government company] for the transmission of electricity to any other State:  
Provided that in case there is difference of opinion between the Central Government 1[or such 
authority or corporation or Government company, as the case may be,] and any State Electricity Board in 
regard to the construction of necessary transmission lines, the matter s hall be referred to the Central 
Electricity Authority whose decision shall be binding on the parties concerned.  
(2) No provision of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910  (9 of 1910) , or any rule made thereunder or of 
any instrument having effect by virtue of su ch law or rule shall have any effect so far as it is inconsistent 
with any of the provisions of this Act.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and                    
not in derogation of, the Indian Electricity Act, 1910  (9 of 1910) , and the Electricity (Supply)                         
Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) . 
23. Administration of Factories Act, 1948 .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Factories 
Act, 1948  (63 o f 1948) , the authority to administer the said Act and to do all things for the enforcement of 
its provisions, including the appointment of inspecting staff and the making of rules thereunder, shall vest 
in the Central Government in relation to any factory owned by the Central Government 3[or any authority 
or corporation established by it or a Government company ] and engaged in carrying out the purposes of 
this Act.  
24. Offences and penalties .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) contravenes any order made under section 14 or any condition subject to which a licence is 
granted under that section; or  
(b) contravenes any rule made under section 17 or any requirement, prohibition or restriction 
imposed under any such rule; or  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 29 of 1987, s. 4 (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “with the concurrence of”  (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).   13 (c) obstructs any person authorised by the Central Government under sub -section ( 4) of                
section 17 in the exercise of powers under that sub -section; or  
(d) contravenes sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine,  or with 
both.  
25. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of , and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in  this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of , any director, manager, secre tary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm and other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
26. Cognizance of offences .—(1) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , but no action shall be taken in respect of any person for any 
offence under this Act except on the bas is of a written complaint made — 
(a) in respect of contravention of section 8, 14 or 17 or any rule or order made thereunder, by the 
person authorised to exercise powers of entry and inspection ; 
(b) in respect of any other contravention, by a person duly authorised to make such complaints by 
the Central Government.  
(2) Proceedings in respect of contravention of section 18 shall not be instituted except w ith the 
consent of the Attorney General of India.  
27. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by order, direct that any power conferred 
or any duty imposed on it by this Act shall, in such circumstances a nd subject to such conditions as may 
be specified in the direction, be e xercised or discharged also by — 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to a State Government as may 
be specified in the direction.  
28. Effect of other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any thing 
inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or any other instrument having 
effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any person or authority in respect of anything done by it or him in good 
faith in pursuance of this A ct or of any rule of order made  thereunder.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification , make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  14 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) declaring any information not so far published or otherwise made public as restricted 
information and prescribing the measures to be taken to guard against unauthorised dissemination or 
use thereof;  
(b) declaring any area or premises as prohibited area and prescribing the measures to be taken to 
provide against unauthorised entry into or departure from such prohibited area;  
(c) reporting of information relating to the discovery of uranium, thorium and other  prescribed 
substances and for payment of rewards for such discoveries;  
(d) control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium;  
(e) regulating by licensing and encouraging by award of concessions including rewards, floor 
prices and guara ntees, mining of and prospecting for other prescribed substances;  
(f) compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals and plants;  
(g) regulating the production, import, export, transfer, refining, possession , ownership, sale, use 
or disposal of the prescribed substances and any other articles that in the opinion of the Central 
Government may be used for, or may result as a consequence of, the production, use or application of 
atomic energy;  
(h) regulating the use of prescribed equipment;  
(i) regulating the manufacture, custody, transport, transfer, sale, export, import, use or disposal of 
any radioactive substance;  
(j) regulating the transport of such prescribed substances as are declared dangerous to health 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 17;  
(k) developing, controlling, supervising and licensing the production, application and use of 
atomic energy;  
(l) fees for issue of licences under this Act;  
(m) the manner of serving notices under this Act;  
(n) generally  promoting co -operation among person, institutions and countries in the production, 
use, application of atomi c energy and in research and in vestigation s in that field.  
(3) Rules made under this Act may provide that a contravention of the rules shall, save as otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions , and if  1[before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session] or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi fication in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudi ce to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
31. Act binding on Government .—The provisions of this Act shall be binding on Government.  
32. [Repeal of Act  29 of 1948]. —Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1974 (56 of 1974) , s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “before the expiry of the session in which it is so  laid” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Customs Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 * 
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
OFFICERS OF CUSTOMS  
3. Classes of officers of customs.  
4. Appointment of officers of customs.  
5. Powers of officers of customs.  
6. Entrustment of functions of Board and customs officers on certain other officers.  
 
CHAPTER III  
APPOINTMENT OF CUSTOM S PORTS, AIRPORTS, E TC. 
7. Appointment of customs ports, airports, etc.  
8. Power to approve landing places and spe cify limits of customs area.  
9. [Omitted .] 
10. Appointment of boarding stations.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROHIBITIONS ON IMPOR TATION AND EXPORTATI ON OF GOODS  
11. Power to prohibit importation or exportation of goods.  
 
CHAPTER IVA  
DETECTION OF ILLEGALL Y IMPORTED GOODS AND  PREVENTION OF THE DI SPOSAL THEREOF  
11A. Definitions.  
11B. Power of Central Government to notify goods.  
11C. Persons possessing notified goods to intimate the place of storage, etc.  
11D. Precautions to be taken by persons acquiring notified goods.  
11E. Pers ons possessing notified goods  to maintain accounts.  
11F. Sale, etc., of notified goods to be evidenced by vouchers.  
11G. Sections 11C, 11E and 11F not to apply to goods in personal use.  
* Subject to verification and confirmation by the administrative minis try. 2 
 CHAPTER IVB  
PREVENTION OR DETECTION OF ILLEGAL EXPORT OF GOODS  
SECTIONS  
11H. Definitions.  
11-I. Power of Central Governm ent to specify goods.  
11J. Persons possessing specified goods to intimate the place of storage, etc.  
11K. Transport of specified goods to be covered by vouchers.  
11L. Persons possessing specified goods to maintain accounts.  
11M. Steps to be taken by persons selling or transferring any specified goods.  
 
CHAPTER IVC  
POWER TO EXEMPT FROM THE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTERS IVA AND IVB  
11N.  Power to exempt . 
 
CHAPTER V  
LEVY OF, AND EXEMPTION FROM, CUSTOMS  DUTIES  
12. Dutiable goods.  
13. Duty on pilfered goods.  
14. Valuation of goods . 
15. Date for determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation of imported goods.  
16. Date for determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation of export goods.  
17. Assessment of duty.  
18. Provisional assessment of duty.  
19. Determination of duty where goods consist of articles liable to different rates of duty.  
20. Re-importation of goods.  
21. Goods derelict, wreck, etc.  
  22. Abatement of duty on d amaged  or deteriorated goods.  
  23. Remission of duty on lost, destroyed or abandoned goods.  
  24. Power to make rules for denaturing or mutilation of goods.  
25. Power to grant exemption from duty.  
25A. Inward processing of goods.  
25B. Outward processing of goods.  
26. Refund of export duty in certain cases.  
26A. Refund of import duty in certain cases.  
27. Claim for refund of duty.  
 27A. Interest on delayed refunds.  
28. Recovery of duties not levied or not paid or short -levied or short -paid or erroneously refunded.  
28A. Power not to recover duties not levied or short -levied as a result of general practice . 
28AA. Interest on delayed payment of duty.  
28AAA. Recovery of duties in certain cases.  
28B. Duties collected from the buyer to be deposited with the Central Governmen t. 
28BA. Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain cases.  
 3 
 CHAPTER VA  
INDICATING AMOUNT OF DUTY IN THE PRICE OF GOODS, ETC., FOR PURPOSE OF REFUND  
SECTIONS  
28C.  Price of goods to indicate the amount of duty paid thereon.  
28D. Presumption that incidence of duty has been passed on to the buyer.  
 
 
CHAPTER VB  
ADVANCE RULINGS  
28E. Definitions.  
28EA. Customs Authority for Advance Rulings.  
28F. Authority for advance rulings.  
28G. [ Omitted .] 
28H. Application for advance ruling.  
28-I. Procedure on recei pt of application . 
28J. Applicability of advance ruling.  
28K. Advance ruling to be void in certain circumstances . 
28KA. Appeal.  
28L. Powers of Authority  or Appellate Authority . 
28M. Procedure for Authority  and Appellate Authority . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CONVEYANCES CARRYING IMPORTED OR EXPORTED GOODS  
29. Arrival of vessels and aircrafts in India.  
30. Delivery of arrival manifest or import manifest  or import report.  
30A.Passenger and crew arrival manifest and passenger name record information.  
31. Imported  goods not to be unloaded from vessel until entry inwards granted.  
32. Imported goods not to be unloaded unless mentioned in arrival manifest or import manifest  or 
import report.  
33. Unloading and loading of goods at approved places only.  
34. Goods not to be unloaded or loaded except under supervision of customs officer.  
35. Restrictions on goods being water -borne.  
36. Restrictions on unloading and loading of goods on holidays, etc.  
37. Power to board conveyances.  
38. Power to require production of documents and ask questions.  
39. Export goods not to be loaded on vessel until entry -outwards granted.  
40. Export goods not to be loaded unless duly passed by proper officer.  
41. Delivery of departure manifest or export manifest  or export report.  
41A. Passenger and crew departure manifest and passenger name record information.  
42. No conveyance to leave without written order.  
43. Exemption of certain classes of conveyances from certain provisions of this Chapter.  
CHAPTER VII  
CLEARANCE OF IMPORTED GOODS AND EXPORT GOODS  
44. Chapter not to apply to baggage and postal articles . 4 
 Clearance of imported goods  
 
SECTIONS  
45. Restrictions on custody and removal of imported goods.  
46. Entry of goods on importation.  
47. Clearance of goods for home consumption.  
48. Procedure in case of goods no t cleared, warehoused, or trans hipped within thirty days after 
unloading.  
49. Storage of imported goods in warehouse pending clearance.  
Clearance of export goods  
50. Entry of goods for exportation.  
51. Clearance of goods for exportation.  
CHAPTER VIIA  
PAYMENTS THROUGH ELECTRONIC CASH LEDGER  
 
51A. Payment of duty, interest, penalty, etc.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
GOODS IN TRANSIT  
52. Chapter not to apply to baggage, postal articles and stores.  
53. Transit of certain goods without payment of duty.  
54. Transhipment of certain goods without payment of duty.  
55. Liability of duty on goods transited under section 53 or transhipped under section 54.  
56. Transport of certain classes of goods subject to prescribed conditions.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
WAREHOUSING  
57. Licensing of public warehouses.  
58. Licensing of private warehouses.  
58A. Licensing of special warehouses.  
58B. Cancellation of licence.  
59. Warehousing bond.  
59A. [Omitted.]  
60. Permission for removal of goods for deposit in warehouse.  
61. Period for which goods may remain warehoused.  
62. [Omitted.]  
63. [Omitted.]  
64. Owner’s right to deal with warehoused goods.  
65. Manufactu re and other operations in relation to goods in a warehouse.  
66. Power to exempt imported materials used in the manufacture of goods in warehouse.  
67. Removal of goods from one warehouse to another.  
68. Clearance of warehoused goods for home consumption.  
69. Clearance of warehoused goods for export.  
70. Allowance in case of volatile goods.  
71. Goods not to be taken out of warehouse except as provided by this Act.  
72. Goods improperly removed from warehouse, etc.  5 
 SECTIONS  
73. Cancellation and return of warehousing  bond . 
73A.Custody and removal of warehoused goods.  
 
 
CHAPTER X  
DRAWBACK  
74. Drawback allowable on re -export of duty -paid goods.  
75. Drawback on imported materials used in the manufacture of goods which are exported.  
75A. Interest on drawback.  
76. Prohibition and regulation of drawback in certain cases.  
 
76A to 76N [ Omitted .] 
 
CHAPTER XI  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING BAGGAGE, GOODS IMPORTED OR EXPORTED BY POST,  COURIER  AND 
STORES  
Baggage  
77. Declaration by owner of baggage.  
78. Determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation in respect of beggage.  
79. Bona fide baggage exempted from duty.  
80. Temporary detention of baggage.  
81. Regulations in respect of baggage.  
Goods imported or exported by post  
82. [Omitted .] 
83. Rate of duty and tariff valuation in respect of goods imported or exported by post  or courier . 
84. Regulations regarding goods imported or to be exported by post  or courier . 
Stores  
85. Stores may be allowed to be warehoused without assessment to duty . 
86. Transit and  transhipment  of stores . 
87. Imported stores may be consumed on board a foreign -going vessel or aircraft . 
88. Application of section 69 and Chapter X to stores . 
89. Stores to be free of export duty . 
90. Concessions in respect of imported stores for the Navy . 
 
CHAPTER XII  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO COASTAL GOODS AND VESSELS CARRYING COASTAL GOODS  
91. Chapter not to apply  to baggage and stores.  
92. Entry of coastal goods.  
93. Coastal goods not to be loaded until bill relating thereto is passed, etc.  
94. Clearance of coastal goods at destination.  
95. Master of a coasting vessel to carry an advice book.  
96. Loading and unloading of coastal good s at customs port or coastal port only.  
97. No coasting vessel to leave without written order.  
98. Application of certain provisions of this Act to coastal goods, etc.  6 
 SECTIONS  
98A.  Power to relax.  
99. Power to make rules in respect of coastal goods and coasting vessels.  
CHAPTER XIIA  
AUDIT  
 
99A. Audit.  
CHAPTER XIII  
SEARCHES, SEIZURE AND ARREST  
100. Power to search  suspected persons entering or leaving India, etc.  
101. Power to search suspected persons in certain other cases.  
102. Persons to be searched may require to be taken before gazetted officer of customs or magistrate.  
103. Power to screen or X -ray bodies of suspected persons for detecting secreted goods.  
104. Power to arrest.  
105. Power to search premises.  
106. Power to stop and search conveyances.  
106A. Power to inspect.  
107. Power to examine persons.  
108. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce documents.  
108A. Obligation to furnish information.  
108B. Penalty for failure to furnish information return.  
109. Power to require  production of order permitting clearance of goods imported by land.  
109A. Power to undertake controlled delivery.  
110. Seizure of goods, documents and things.  
110A. Provisional release of goods, documents and things seized pending adjudication.  
CHAPTER XI V 
CONFISCATION OF GOODS AND CONVEYANCES AND IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES  
111. Confiscation of improperly imported goods, etc.  
112. Penalty for improper importation of goods, etc.  
113. Confiscation of goods attempted to be improperly exported, etc.  
114. Penalty for attempt to export goods improperly, etc.  
114A. Penalty for short -levy or non -levy of duty in certain cases.  
114AA. Penalty for use of false and incorrect material.  
115. Confiscation of conveyances . 
116. Penalty  for not accounting for goods.  
117. Penalties for contravention, etc., not expressly mentioned . 
118. Confiscation of packages and their contents . 
119. Confiscation of goods used for concealing smuggled goods . 
120. Confiscation of smuggled goods notwithstanding any change in form, etc . 
121. Confiscation of sale -proceeds of smuggled goods . 
122. Adjudication of confiscations and penalties . 
122A. Adjudication Procedure . 
  7 
 SECTIONS  
123. Burden of proof in certain cases . 
124. Issue of show cause notice before confiscation of goods, etc . 
125. Option  to pay fine in lieu of confiscation . 
126. On confiscation, property to vest in Central Government . 
127. Award of confiscation or penalty by customs officers not to interfere with other punishments . 
 
CHAPTER XIVA  
SETTLEMENT OF CASES  
127A.  Definitions.  
127B . Application for settlement of cases.  
127C. Procedure on receipt of an application under section 127B.  
127D. Power of Settlement Commission to order provisional attachment to protect revenue.  
127E. [Omitted.]  
127F. Power and procedure of Settlement Commis sion.  
127G. Inspection, etc., of  reports.  
127H. Power of Settlement Commission to grant immunity from prosecution and penalty.  
127-I. Power of Settlement Commission to send a case back to the proper officer.  
127J. Order of Settlement to be conclusive.  
127K. Recovery of sums due under order of settlement.  
127L. Bar on subsequent application for settlement in certain cases.  
127M. Proceedings before Settlement Commission to be judicial proceedings.  
127MA. [Omitted.]  
127N . Applications of certain provisions  of Central Excise Act.  
 
CHAPTER XV  
APPEALS  
128. Appeals to Commissioner (Appeals).  
128A.  Procedure in appeal.  
129. Appellate Tribunal . 
129A. Appeals to the Appellate Tribunal.  
129B. Orders of Appellate Tribunal.  
129C. Procedure of Appellate Tribunal.  
129D. Powers of Committee of Principal Chief Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner of                                                                 
Customs or Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs to pass certain orders.  
129DA . Powers of revision of Board or Collector of Customs in certain cases.  
129DD. Revision by Central Government.  
129E. Deposit of certain percentage of duty demanded or penalty imposed before filing appeal . 
129EE. Interest on delayed refund of amount depo sited under section 129E.  
130. Appeal to High Court.  
130A. Application to High Court.  
130B. Power of High Court or Supreme Court to require statement to be amended.  
130C. Case before High Court to be heard by not less than two judges.  8 
 SECTIONS  
130D. Decision of High Court or Supreme Court on the case stated.  
130E. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
130F. Hearing before Supreme Court . 
131. Sums due to be paid notwithstanding reference, etc.  
131A.  Exclusion of time taken for copy.  
131B. Transfer of certain pendin g proceedings and transitional provisions.  
131BA. Appeal not to be filed in certain cases.  
131C. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER XVI  
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTIONS  
132. False declaration, false documents, etc.  
133. Obstruction of officer of customs.  
134. Refusal to be X-rayed.  
135. Evasion of duty or prohibitions.  
135A. Preparation.  
135B. Power of court to publish name, place of business, etc., of persons convicted under the Act.  
136. Offences by officers of customs.  
137. Cognizance of offences.  
138. Offences to be tried summarily.  
138A. Presumption of culpable mental state.  
138B. Relevancy of statements under certain circumstances.  
138C. Admissibility of micro films, facsimile copies of documents and computer print outs as 
documents and as evidence.  
139. Presumption  as to documents in certain cases.  
140. Offences by companies.  
140A. Application of section 562 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and of the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958.  
 
CHAPTER XVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
141. Conveyances and goods in a customs area subject to control of officers of customs.  
142. Recovery of sums due to Government.  
142A. Liability under Act to be first charge.  
143. Power to allow import or export on execution of bonds in certain cases.  
143A . [Omitted .] 
143A A. Power to simplify or provide different procedure, etc., to facilitate trade.  
144. Power to take samples.  
145. Owner, etc., to perform operations incidental to compliance with customs law.  
146. Licence for Customs broke rs. 
146A. Appearance by authoris ed representative . 
147. Liability of principal and agent.  
148. Liability of agent appointed by the person in charge of a conveyance.  
149. Amendment of documents.  9 
 SECTIONS  
150. Procedure for sale of goods and application of sale proceeds.  
151. Certain officers required to assist o fficers of customs.  
151A. Instructions to officers of customs.  
151B. Reciprocal arrangement for exchange of information facilitating trade.  
152. Delegation of powers.  
153. Modes for service of notice, order, etc. 
154. Correction of clerical errors, etc.  
154A. Rounding off of duty, etc.  
154B. Publication of information respecting persons in certain cases.  
155. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
156. General power to make rules.  
157. General power to make regulations.  
158. Provisions with respect to rules and regulations.  
159. Rules, certain notifications and orders to be laid before Parliament.  
159A. Effect of amendments, etc., of rules, regulations, notifications or orders.  
160. Repeal and savings.  
161. Removal of difficulties.  
       THE SCHEDULE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10 
 THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 * 
ACT NO. 52 OF 19621 
[13th December , 1962]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Customs.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Customs Act, 1962.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2[and, save as otherwise provided in this Act , it applies also to any 
offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India b y any person] . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2.  Definitions. —In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires ,— 
4[(1) ―adjudicating authority ‖ means any authority competent to pass any order or decision under 
this Act, but does not include the  Board, 5[Commissioner (A ppeals)] or Appellate Tribunal;  
(1A) ―aircraft ‖ has the same meaning as in the A ircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934);  
(1B) ―Appellate Tribunal ‖ means the Customs, Excise and  6[Service Tax] Appellate Tribunal 
constituted under section 129;]  
7[(2) ―assessment‖ means determination of the dutiability of any goods and the amount of duty, tax, 
cess or any other sum so payable, if any, under this Act or under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975   
(51 of 1975)  (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Tariff Act) or under any other law for the time being 
in force, with reference to — 
(a) the tariff classification of such goods as determined in accordance with the provisions of 
the Customs Tariff Act;  
(b) the value of such goods as determined in accordance with the provisions of this Act and 
the Customs Tariff Act;  
(c) exemption or concession of duty, tax, cess or any other sum, consequent upon any notifica tion 
issued therefor under this Act or under the Customs Tariff Act or under any other law for the time 
being in force;  
(d) the quantity, weight, volume, measurement or other specifics where such duty, tax, cess or 
any other sum is leviable on the basis of  the quantity, weight, volume, measurement or other 
specifics of such goods;  
                                                           
1. The Act shall come in to force  in the State of Sikkim (w.e.f. 1-10-1979), vide Notific ation No. G.S.R. 527(E), dated 1 -9-1979 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 57 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. 1st February, 1963, vide notification No. G.S.R. 155, dated 23rd January, 1963, see Gazette of India, Extra ordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 1980, s. 50 and Fifth Schedule, Part I, for clause ( 1) ( w.e.f. 11 -10-1982).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s.  51, for ―Collector (Appeals)‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995 ). 
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 104, for ―Gold  (Control)‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
7. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 58, for clause ( 2) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
* Subject to verification and confirmation by the administrative ministry.  
 11 
 (e) the origin of such goods determined in accordance with the provisions of the Customs 
Tariff Act or the rules made thereunder, if the amount of duty, tax, cess or any other sum is 
affected by the origin of such goods;  
(f) any other specific factor which affect s the duty, tax, cess or any other sum payable on such 
goods,  
and includes provisional assessment, self -assessment, re -assessment and any assessment in which the 
duty assessed is nil;] 
 (3) ―baggage ‖ includes unaccompanied baggage but does not include motor vehicles;  
1[(3A) ―beneficial owner ‖ means any person on whose behalf the goods are being imported or 
exported or who exercises effective control over the goods being imported or exported;]  
(4) ―bill of entry ‖ means a bill of entry referred to in section 46;  
(5) ―bill of export ‖ means a bill of export referred to in section 50;  
(6) ―Board ‖ means the  2[3[Central Board of Indirect Taxes  and Customs ] constituted under the 
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 (54 of 1963)];  
(7) ―coastal goods ‖ means goods, other than imported goods, transported in a vessel from one port in 
India to another;  
4[(7A) ―Commissioner (Appeals) ‖ means a person appointed to be a Commissioner of Customs 
(Appeals) under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
 (8) 5[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs], except for the purposes of 
Chapter XV, includes an Additional Commissioner of Cust oms;]  
(9) ―conveyance ‖ includes a vessel, an aircraft and a vehicle;  
(10) ―customs airport ‖ means any airport appointed under clause ( a) of section 7 to be a customs 
airport  6[and includes a place appointed under clause ( aa) of that section to be an air freight station];  
(11) ―customs area ‖ means the area of a customs station  7[or a warehouse] and includes any area in 
which imported goods or export ed goods are ordinarily kept before clearance by Customs Authorities;  
(12) ―customs port ‖ means any port appo inted under clause ( a) of section 7 to be a customs port   
8[, and includes a place appointed under clause ( aa) of that section to be an inland container depot];  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 89 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1963 , s. 5, for certain words  and figures  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1964).  
3. Sub s. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 58, for ―Central Board of Excise and Customs‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 51, for clauses ( 7A) and ( 8) (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 25 of  2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
6. Ins. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 120 (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  
7. Ins. by Act 18 of 2017, s. 2 ( w.e.f 4 -5-2017). 
8. Ins. by Act 11 of 1983, s. 46 (w.e.f. 13 -5-1983).  12 
 (13) ―customs  station ‖ means any customs port,  1[customs airport, international courier terminal, 
foreign post office] or land customs station;  
(14) ―dutiable goods ‖ means any goods which are chargeable to duty and on which duty has not been 
paid;  
(15) ―duty‖ means a duty of customs leviable under this Act;  
(16) ―entry ‖ in relation to goods means an entry made in a bill of entry, shipping bill or bill of export 
and includes  2*** the entry made under the regulations made under section 84;  
(17) ―examination ‖, in relation to any goods, includes measurement and weighment the reof; 
(18) ―export ‖, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means taking out of India to a 
place outside India;  
(19) ―export goods ‖ means any goods which are to be taken out of India to a place outside India;  
(20) ―exporter ‖, in relation to any goods at any time between their entry for export and the time when 
they are exported, includes  3[any owner, beneficial owner] or any person holding himself out to be the 
exporter;  
4[(20A) ―foreign post office ‖ means any post office appointed under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 7 to be a foreign post office;]  
(21) ―foreign -going vessel or aircraft ‖ means any vessel or aircraft for the time being engaged in the 
carriage of goods or passengers between a ny port or airport in India and any port or airport outside India, 
whether touching any intermediate port or airport  in India or not, and includes — 
(i) any naval vessel of a foreign Government taking part in any naval exercises;  
(ii) any vessel engaged in fishing or any other operations outside the territorial waters of India;  
(iii) any vessel or aircraft proceeding to a place outside India for any purpose whatsoever;  
5[(21A) ―Fund ‖ means the Consumer Welfare Fund established under section 12C of the Centra l 
Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944);]  
(22) ―goods ‖ includes — 
(a) vessels, aircrafts and vehicles;  
(b) stores;  
(c) baggage;  
(d) currency and negotiable instruments; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 89, fo r ―customs airport‖ (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
2. The words ―in the case of goods imported or to be exported by post, the entry referred to in section 82 or‖ omitted by s. 89,  
ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
3. Subs. by s. 89, ibid., for ―any owner‖ (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
4. Ins. by s. 89, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
5. Ins. by Act 40 of 1991, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1991).  13 
 (e) any other kind of movable property;  
(23) ―import ‖, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means bringing into India 
from a place outside India;  
(24) ―1[arrival manifest or import manifest ]‖ or ―import report ‖ means the manifest or report required 
to be delivered under section 30;  
(25) ―imported goods ‖ means any goods brought into India from a place outside India but does not 
include goods which have been cleared for home consumption;  
(26) ―importer ‖, in relation to any goods at any time between their importation and the time when 
they are cleared for h ome consumption, includes  2[any owner, beneficial owner] or any person holding 
himself out to be the importer;  
(27) ―India ‖ includes the territorial waters of India;  
(28) ―Indian Customs Waters ‖ means the 3[waters extending into the sea up to the limit of 4[Exclusive 
Economic zone under section 7 ] of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone 
and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976) ,] and includes any bay, gulf, harbour, creek or tidal 
river;  
 5[(28A) ―international courier terminal ‖ means any place appointed under clause ( f) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 to be an international courier terminal;]  
(29) ―land customs station ‖ means any place appointed under clause ( b) of section 7 to be a land 
customs station;  
(30) ―market p rice‖, in relation to any goods, means the wholesale price of the goods in the ordinary 
course of trade in India;  
6[(30A) ―National Tax Tribunal ‖ means the National Tax Tribunal established under section 3 of the 
Natio nal Tax Tribunal Act, 2005 (49 o f 2005);]  
7[(30AA ) ―notification‖ means notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
―notify‖ with its cognate meaning and grammatical variation shall be construed accordingly;]  
5[(30B) ―passenger name record information ‖ means the records prepared by an operator of any 
aircraft or vessel or vehicle or his authorised agent for each journey booked by or on behalf of any 
passenger;]  
(31) ―person -in-charge ‖ means, — 
(a) in relation to a vessel, the master of the vessel;  
(b) in relation to an aircraft, the commander or pilot -in-charge of the aircraft;  
(c) in relation to a railway train, the conductor, guard or other person having the chief direction of 
the train;  
(d) in relation to any other conveyance, the driver or other perso n-in-charge of the conveyance;  
(32) ―prescribed ‖ means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(33) ―prohibited goods ‖ means any goods the import or export of which is subject to any prohibition 
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force but does not include any such goods in respect 
of which the conditions subject to which the goods are permitted to be imported or exported have been 
complied with;  
(34) ―proper officer ‖, in relation to any functions to be performed under this Act, means the officer of 
customs who is assigned those functions by the Board or the  8[Principal Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs];  
(35) ―regulations ‖ means the regulations made by the Board under any provision of this Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 56 , for ―import manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 89, for ―any owner‖ (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1978, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-1978).  
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 58, for ―contiguous zone of India under section 5‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 89 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
6. Ins. by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 and the Schedule, Part VI (w.e.f. 28 -12-2005).  
7. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 58 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  14 
 (36) ―rules ‖ means  the rules made by the Central Government under any provision of this Act;  
(37) ―shipping bill ‖ means a shipping bill referred to in section 50;  
(38) ―stores ‖ means goods for use in a vessel or aircraft and includes fuel and spare parts and other 
articles of equipment, whether or not for immediate fitting;  
(39) ―smuggling ‖, in relation to any goods, means any act or omission which will render such goods 
liable to confiscation under section 111 or section 113;  
(40) ―tariff value ‖, in relation to any goods, means the tariff value fixed in respect thereof under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 14;  
(41) ―value ‖, in relation to any goods, means the value thereof determined in accordance with the 
provisions of  1[sub-section ( 1) or sub -section (2) of s ection 14];  
(42) ―vehicle ‖ means conveyance of any kind used on land and includes a railway vehicle;  
2[(43) ―warehouse ‖ means a public warehouse licensed under section 57 or a private warehouse 
licensed under section 58 or a special warehouse li censed under section 58A;]  
(44) ―warehoused goods ‖ means goods deposited in a warehouse;  
3*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER II  
OFFICERS OF CUSTOMS  
4[3. Classes of officers of customs. —There shall be the following classes of officers of customs, 
namely: — 
5[(a) Principal Chief Commissioners of Customs;  
(b) Chief Commissioners of Customs;  
(c)  Principal Commissioners of Customs;  
(d)  Commissioners of Customs;  
(e)  Commissioners of Customs (Appeals);  
(f)   Joint Commissioners of Customs;  
(g)  Deputy Commissioners of Customs;  
(h)  Assistant Commissioner of Customs;  
(i)   such other class of officers of customs as may be appointed for the purposes of this Act.]  
4. Appointment of officers of  customs .—(1) The  6[Board] may appoint such persons as it thinks fit 
to be o fficers of customs.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), 7[Board may authorise a  8[Principal Chief 
Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner of Customs ] or] a 9[Principal Commissioner of 
Customs or Commissioner of Customs] or a  10[Joint ] or 11[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy 
Commissioner of Customs] to appoint officers of customs below the rank of 11[Assistant Commissioner of 
Customs  or Deputy Commissioner of Customs .] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 94, for ―sub -section ( 1) of section 14‖ (w.e.f. 1 -7-1978).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 116, for clause( 43) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016) . 
3. Clause ( 45) omitted by s. 116, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 52, for sections 3 and 4 (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 79, for clauses (a), (b), (c), (cc), (d), (e) and ( f) (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
6. Subs. by Act 20 of 2002, s. 117, for ―Central Governement‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2002).  
7. Subs. by s. 117, ibid., for ― Central Government may authorise the Board‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2002).  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Chief Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
9. Subs. by s. 78, ibid., for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
10. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s . 100, for ―Deputy Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
11. Subs. by s. 100, ibid., for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  15 
 5. Powers  of officers of customs. —(1) Subject to suc h conditions and limitations as the Board may 
impose, an officer of customs may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on 
him under this Act.  
(2) An officer of customs may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or  imposed 
under this Act on any other officer of customs who is subordinate to him.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,  1[a 2[Commissioner (Appeals)]] shall not 
exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on an offi cer of customs other than 
those specified in Chapter XV and section 108.  
6. Entrustment of functions of Board and customs officers on certain other officers .—The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, entrust either conditionall y or 
unconditionally to any officer of the Central or the State Government or a local authority any functions of 
the Board or any officer of customs under this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
3[APPOINTMENT OF CUSTOMS PORTS, AIRPORTS, ETC .] 
7.  Appointment of customs port s, airports, etc .—4[(1)] The  5[Board] may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint — 
(a) the ports and airports which alone shall be customs ports or customs airports for the unloading 
of imported goods and the loading of export goods or any class of such goods;  
6[(aa) the places which alone shall be inland  7[container depots or air freight stations] for the 
unloading of imported goods and the loading of export goods or any class of such goods;]  
(b) the places which alone shall be land customs stati ons for the clearance of goods imported or to 
be exported by land or inland water or any class of such goods;  
(c) the routes by which alone goods or any class of goods specified in the notification may pass 
by land or inland water into or out of India, or to or from any land customs station from or to any   
land frontier;  
(d) the ports which alone shall be coastal ports for the carrying on of trade in coastal goods or any 
class of such goods with all or any specified ports in India.  
8[(e) the post offices wh ich alone shall be foreign post offices for the clearance of imported goods 
goods or export goods or any class of such goods;  
(f) the places which alone shall be international courier terminals for the clearance of imported 
goods or export goods or any class of such goods.]  
9[(2) Every notification issued under this section and in force immediately before the commencement 
of the Finance Act, 2003  (32 of 2003)  shall, on such commencement, be deemed to have been issued 
under the provisions of this section as amended by section 105 of the Finance Act, 2003 and shall 
continue to have the same force and effect after such commencement until it is amended, rescinded or 
superseded under the provisions of this section.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1980, s. 50 and the Fifth Schedule for, ―an Appellate Collector of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -10-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 50, for ―Collector  (Appeals)‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 117, for the chapter heading (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
4. Section 7 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 32 of 2003, s. 105 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
5. Subs. by s. 105, ibid., for ―Central Government‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
6. Ins. by Act 11 of 1983, s. 47 (w.e.f.13 -5-1983).  
7. Subs. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 121, for ―container depots‖ (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  
8. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 90 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
9. Ins. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 105 (w.e.f . 14-5-2003).  
 16 
 8. Power  to approve landing places and specify limits of customs area .—The 1[Principal 
Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs]  may, — 
(a) approve proper places in any customs port or customs airport or coastal port for the unloading 
and loading of goods or for any class of goods;  
(b) specify the limits of any customs area.  
 9. [Powers to declare places to be warehousing stations ].Omitted by The Finance Act,  2016  (28 of 
2016), s. 118 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
10. Appointment of boarding stations .—The 1[Principal Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, in or near any customs 
port, a boarding station for the purpose of boarding of, or disembarkation from, vessels by officers of 
customs.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROHIBITIONS ON IMPORTATION AND EXPORTATION OF GOODS  
11.  Power to prohibit importation or exportation of goods .—(1) If the Central Government is 
satisfied that it is necessary so to do for an y of the purposes specified in sub -section ( 2), it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit either absolutely or subject to such conditions (to be fulfilled 
before or after clearance) as may be specified in the notification, the import or exp ort of goods of any 
specified description.  
 (2) The purposes referred to in su b-section ( 1) are the following: — 
(a) the maintenance of the security of India;  
(b) the maintenance of public order and standards of decency or morality;  
(c) the prevention of smuggling;  
(d) the prevention of shortage of goods of any description;  
(e) the conservation of foreign exchange and the safeguarding of balance of payments;  
(f) the prevention of injury to the economy of the country by the uncontrolled import or export of 
gold or silver;  
(g) the prevention of surplus of any agricultural product or the product of fisheries;  
(h) the maintenance of standards for the classification, grading or marketing of goods 
in international  trade;  
(i) the establishment of any industry;  
(j) the prevention of serious injury to domestic production of goods of any description;  
(k) the protection of human, animal or plant life or health;  
(l) the protection of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value;  
(m) the conservation of exhaustible natural resources;  
(n) the protection of patents, trademarks  2[, copyrights, designs and geographical indications];  
(o) the prevention of deceptive practices;  
(p) the carrying on of foreign trade in any goods by the State, or by a Corporation owned 
or controlled by the State to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens of India;  
(q) the fulfilment  of obligations under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance 
of international peace and security;   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 64, for ―and copyrights‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  17 
 (r) the implementa tion of any treaty, agreement or convention with any country;  
(s) the compliance of imported goods with any laws which are applicable to similar goods 
produced or manufactured in India;  
(t) the prevention of dissemination of documents containing any matter  which is likely to 
prejudicially affect friendly relations with any foreign State or is derogatory to national prestige;  
(u) the prevention of the contravention of any law for the time being in force; and  
(v) any other purpose conducive to the interests of the general public.  
1[(3) Any prohibition or restriction or obligation relating to import or export of any goods or class of 
goods or clearance thereof provided in any other law for the time being in force, or any rule or regulation 
made or any order or  notification issued thereunder, shall be executed under the provisions of that Act 
only if such prohibition or restriction or obligation is notified under the provisions of this Act, subject to 
such exceptions, modifications or adaptations as the Central Government deems fit. ] 
  
2[CHAPTER IVA  
DETECTION OF ILLEGALLY IMPORTED GOODS AND PREVENTION OF THE DISPOSAL THEREOF  
11A.  Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―illegal import ‖ means the import of any goods in contravention of the provisions of this Act 
or any other law for the time being in force;  
(b) ―intimated place ‖ means a place intimated under sub -section ( 1), sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3), as the case may be, of sec tion 11C;  
(c) ―notified date ‖, in relation to goods of any description, means the date on which the 
notification in relation to such goods is issued under section 11B;  
(d) ―notified goods ‖ means goods specified in the notification issued under section 11B.  
11B. Power  of Central Government to notify goods .—If, having regard to the magnitude of the 
illegal import of goods of any class or description, the Central Government is satisfied that it is expedient 
in the public interest to take special measures for the purpose of checking the illegal import, circulation or 
disposal of such goods, or facilitating the detection of such goods, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette,  specify goods of such class or description.  
11C. Persons  possessing notified go ods to intimate the place of storage, etc .—(1) Every person 
who owns, possesses or controls, on the notified date, any notified goods, shall, within seven days from 
that date, deliver to the proper officer a statement (in such form, in such manner and cont aining such 
particulars as may be specified by rules made in this behalf) in relation to the notified goods owned, 
possessed or controlled by him and the place where such goods are kept or stored.  
(2) Every person who acquires, after the notified date, any  notified goods, shall, before making such 
acquisition, deliver to the proper officer an intimation containing the particulars of the place where such 
goods are proposed to be kept or stored after such acquisition and shall, immediately on such acquisition , 
deliver to the proper officer a statement (in such form, in such manner and containing such particulars as 
may be specified by rules made in this behalf) in relation to the  notified goods acquired by him : 
Provided that a person who has delivered a statem ent, whether under sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2), in relation to any notified goods, owned, possessed, controlled or acquired by him, shall 
not be required to deliver any further statement in relation to any notified goods acquired by him, after the 
date of delivery of the said statement, so long as the notified goods so acquired are kept or stored at the 
intimated place.  
                                                           
1. Sub-section (3) shall stand i nserted (date to be notified) by Act 13 of 201 8, s. 59. 
2. Chapters IVA, IVB and IVC i ns. by Act 12 of 1969, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -1-1969).  18 
 (3) If any  person intends to shift any notified goods to any place other than the intimated place, he 
shall, before taking out such  goods from the intimated place, deliver to the proper officer an intimation 
containing the particulars of the place to which such goods are proposed to be shifted.  
(4) No person shall, after the expiry of seven days from the notified date, keep or store any notified 
goods at any place other than the intimated place.  
(5) Where any notified goods have been sold or transferred, such goods shall not be taken from one 
place to another unless they are accompanied by the voucher referred to in section 11F.  
(6) No notified goods (other than those which have been sold or transferred) shall be taken from one 
place to another unless they are accompanied by a transport voucher (in such form and containing such 
particulars as may be specified by rules made in this beh alf) prepared by the persons owning, possessing 
or controlling such goods.  
 11D.  Precautions to be taken by persons acquiring notified goods .—No person shall acquire 
(except by gift or succession, from any other individual in India), after the not ified dat e, any notified 
goods — 
(i) unless such goods are accompani ed by, — 
(a) the voucher referred to in section 11F or the memorandum referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 11G, as the case may be, or  
(b) in the case of a person who has himself imported any go ods, any evidence showing 
clearance of such goods by the Customs Authorities; and  
(ii) unless he has taken, before acquiring such goods from a person other than a dealer having a 
fixed place of business, such reasonable steps as may be specified by rules m ade in this behalf, to 
ensure that the goods so acquired by him are not goods which have been illegally imported.  
11E.  Persons possessing notified goods to maintain accounts .—(1) Every person who, on or after 
the notified date, owns, possesses, controls or  acquires any notified goods shall maintain (in such form 
and in such manner as may be specified by rules made in this behalf) a true and complete account of such 
goods and shall, as often as he acquires or parts with any notified goods, make an entry in t he said 
account in relation to such acquisition or parting with, and shall also state therein the particulars of the 
person from whom such goods have been acquired or in whose favour such goods have been parted with, 
as the case may be, and such account sh all be kept, along with the goods, at the place of storage of the 
notified good s to which such accounts relate : 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to maintain separately accounts in the form and manner 
specified by rules made in this behalf in the cas e of a person who is already maintaining accounts which 
contain the particulars specified by the said rules.  
 (2) Every person who owns, possesses or controls any notified goods and who uses any such goods 
for the manufacture of any other goods, shall main tain (in such form, in such manner and containing such 
particulars as may be specified by rules made in this behalf) a true and complete account of the notified 
goods so used by him and shall keep such account at the intimated place.  
11F. Sale, etc., of no tified goods to be evidenced by vouchers .—On and from the notified date, no 
person shall sell or otherwise transfer any notified goods, unless every transaction in relation to the sale or 
transfer of such goods is evidenced by a voucher in such form and co ntaining such particulars as may be 
specified by rules made in this behalf.  
  19 
 11G.  Sections  11C, 11E and 11F not to apply to goods in personal use .—(1) Nothing in sections 
11C, 11E and 11F shall apply t o any notified goods which are — 
(a) in personal use of  the person by whom they are owned, possessed or controlled, or  
(b) kept in the residential premises of a person for his personal use.  
(2) If any person, who is in possession of any notified goods referred to in sub -section ( 1), sells, or 
otherwise transfe rs for a valuable consideration, any such goods, he shall issue to the purchaser or 
transferee, as the case may be, a memorandum containing such particulars as may be specified by rules 
made in this behalf and no such goods shall be taken from one place to  another unless they are 
accompanied by the said memorandum.  
CHAPTER IVB  
PREVENTION OR DETECTION OF ILLEGAL EXPORT OF GOODS  
11-H. Definitions. —In this Chapter, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―illegal export ‖ means the export of any goods in contravention of the provisions of this  
Act or any other law for the time being in force;  
(b) ―intimated place ‖ means a place intimated under sub -section ( 1), sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3), as the case may be, of s ection 11J;  
(c)  ―specified area ‖ includes the Indian customs waters, and such inland area, not exceeding one 
hundred kilometres in width from any coast or other border of India, as the Central Government may, 
having regard to the vulnerability of that are a to smuggling, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf : 
 Provided  that where a part of any village, town or city falls within a specified area, the whole of 
such village, town or city shall, notwithstanding that the whole of it is not within one hundred 
kilometres from any coast or other border of India, be deemed to be included in such specified area;  
(d) ―specified date ‖, in relation to specified goods, means the date on which an y notification is 
issued under s ection 11 -I in relat ion to those goods in any specified area;  
(e) ―specified goods ‖ means goods of any description specified in  the notification issued under 
section 11 -I in relation to a specified area.  
11-I. Power  of Central Government to specify goods. —If, having regard to  the magnitude of the 
illegal export of goods of any class or description, the Central Government is satisfied that it is expedient 
in the public interest to take special measures for the purpose of checking the illegal export or facilitating 
the detection  of goods which are likely to be illegally exported, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify goods of such class or description.  
 11J. Persons possessing specified goods to intimate the place of storage, etc. —(1) Every person 
who owns, possesses or controls, on the specified date, any specified goods, the market price of which 
exceeds fifteen thousand rupees shall, within seven days from that date, deliver to the proper officer an 
intimation containing the particulars of the place where such goods are kept or stored within the specified 
area.  
(2) Every person who acquires (within the specified area), after the specif ied date, any specified 
goods, — 
(i) the market price of which, or  
(ii)  the market price of which together with the market p rice of any specified goods of the   same 
class or description, if any, owned, possessed or controlled by him on the date of  such acquisition,  
exceeds fifteen thousand rupees shall, before making such acquisition, deliver to the proper officer an 
intimatio n containing the particulars of the place where such goods are proposed to be kept o r stored after 
such acquisition : 20 
 Provided  that a person who has delivered  an intimation, whether under sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2), in relation to any specified goods, owned, possessed, controlled or acquired by him, shall 
not be required to deliver any further intimation so long as the specified goods are kept or stored at the 
intimated place.  
(3) If any person intends to shift any specified goods to which sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) 
applies, to any place other than the intimated place, he shall, before taking out such goods from the 
intimated place, deliver to the proper officer an intimation containing the particulars of the place to which 
such goods are proposed to be shifted.  
(4) No person shall, after the expiry of seven days from the specified date, keep or store any specified 
goods to which sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) applies, at any place other than the intimated place.  
11K. Transport  of speci fied goods to be covered by vouchers. —(1) No specified goods shall be 
transported from, into or within any specified area or loaded on any animal or conveyance in such area, 
unless they are accompanied by a transport voucher (in such form and containing su ch particulars as may 
be specified by rules made in this behalf) prepared by the person owning, possessing, co ntrolling or 
selling such goods : 
         Provided  that no transport voucher shall be necessary for the transport, within a village, town or 
city, of any specified goods the market price of which, on the date of transport, does not exceed one 
thousand rupees.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where the Central Government, after 
considering the nature of any specified goods, the time, mode, route and the market price of the goods 
intended to be transported, the purpose of the transportation and the vulnerability of the specified area 
with regard to the illegal export of such goods, is satisfied that it is expedient in the publ ic interest so to 
do, it may,  — 
(i) by notification in the Official Gazette, specify goods of such class or description and of a 
market price exceeding such sum as that Government may notify; and different sums in relation to the 
specified goods of the sam e class or description, or different classes or descriptions, may be notified 
for the same specified area or for different specified areas, and  
(ii) direct that no person shall transport any goods so specified unless the transport voucher in 
relation to th em has been countersigned by the proper officer.  
11L.  Persons  possessing specified goods to maintain accounts .—(1) Every person who, on or after 
the specified date, owns, possesses or controls, within a specified area, any specified goods of a market 
price  exceeding fifteen thousand rupees, shall maintain (in such form and in such manner as may be 
specified by rules made in this behalf) a true and complete account of such goods and shall, as often as he 
acquires or parts with any specified goods, make an en try in the said account in relation to such 
acquisition or parting with, and shall also state therein the particulars of the person from whom such 
goods have been acquired or in whose  favour  such goods have been parted with, as the case may be, and 
such ac count shall be kept, along with the goods, at the place of storage of the specified good s to which 
such accounts relate : 
Provided  that it shall not be necessary to maintain separately accounts in the form and manner 
specified by rules made in this behalf i n the case of a person who is already maintaining accounts which 
contain the particulars specified by the said rules.  
(2) Every person who owns, possesses or controls any specified goods to which the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1) apply, and who uses any s uch goods for the manufacture of any other goods, shall 
maintain (in such form, in such manner and containing such particulars as may be specified by rules made 
in this behalf) a true and complete account of the specified goods so used by him and shall kee p such 
account at the intimated place.  
(3)  If at any time, on a verification made by a proper officer, it is found that any specified goods 
owned, possessed or controlled by a person are lesser in quantity than the stock of such goods as shown, 
at the tim e of such verification, in the accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1), read with the accounts 
referred to in sub -section ( 2), it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that such goods, to the 21 
 extent that  they are lesser than the stock shown in the said accounts, have been illegally exported and that 
the person owning, possessing or controlling such goods has been concerned with the illegal export 
thereof.  
11M.  Steps to be taken by persons selling  or transferring any specified goods .—Except where he 
receives payment by cheque drawn by the purchaser, every person who sells or otherwise transfers within 
any specified area, any specified goods, shall obtain, on his copy of the sale or transfer voucher, the 
signature and full postal addres s of the person to whom such sale or transfer is made and shall also take 
such other reasonable steps as may be specified by rules made in this behalf to satisfy himself as to the 
identity of the purchaser or the transferee, as the case may be, and if afte r an inquiry made by a proper 
officer, it is found that the purchaser or the transferee, as the case may be, is not either readily traceable or 
is a fictitious  person, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that such goods have been 
illegally  exported and the person who had sold or otherwise transferred such goods had been c oncerned in 
such illegal export : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to petty sales of any specified goods if the aggregate 
market price obtained by such pett y sales, made in the course of a day, does not exceed two thousand and 
five hundred rupees.  
Explanation .—In this section ―petty sale ‖ means a sale at a price which does not exceed one thousand 
rupees.  
CHAPTER IVC  
POWER TO EXEMPT FROM THE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTERS IVA  AND IVB  
11N.    Power to exempt .—If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public 
interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt generally, either absolutely or 
subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, goods of any class or description from 
all or any of the provisions of Chapter IVA or Chapter IVB.]  
CHAPTER V  
LEVY OF, AND EXEMPTION FROM, CUSTOMS DUTIES  
12.  Dutiable goods .—(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, or any other law for the time 
being in force, duties of customs shall be levied at such rates as may be specified under  the 1[Customs 
Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975)], or any other law for the time being in force, on goods imported into, or 
exported from, India.  
2 [(2)  The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply in respect of all goods belonging to Government 
as they apply in respect of goods not belonging to Government.]  
13.  Duty on pilfered goods .—If any imported goods are pilfered after the unloading thereof and 
before the proper officer has made an order for clearance for home consumption or deposit in a 
warehouse, the importer shall not be liable to pay the duty  leviable on such goods except where such 
goods are restored to the importer after pilferage.  
3[14.  Valuation of goods .—(1)  For the purposes of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975), or 
any other law for the time being in force, the value of the imported goods and export goods shall be the 
transaction value of such goods, that is to say, the price actually paid or payable for the goods when sold 
for export to India for delivery at the time and place of importation, or as the case may be, for export from 
India for delivery at the time and plac e of exportation, where the buyer and seller of the goods are not 
related and price is the sole consideration for the sale subject to such other conditions as may be specified 
in the rules made in this behalf : 
Provided  that such transaction value in the ca se of imported goods shall include, in addition to the 
price as aforesaid, any amount paid or payable for costs and services, including commissions and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1975, s. 13, for ―Indian Tariff Act, 1934  (32 of 1934) ‖ (w.e.f. 2 -8-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 1963, s. 2, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 95, for section 14 (w.e.f. 10 -10-2007).  22 
 brokerage, engineering , design work, royalties and  licence  fees, costs of transportation to the place of  
importation, insurance, loading, unloading and handling charges to the extent and in the manner specified 
in the rules made in this behalf:  
Provided  further that the rules made in this behalf may provide for, — 
(i) the circumstances in which the buyer and the seller shall be deemed to be related;  
(ii) the manner of determination of value in respect of goods when there is no sale, or the  buyer 
and the seller are related, or price is not the sole consideration for the sale or in any  other case;  
(iii)  the manner  of acceptance or rejection of value declared by the importer or exporter, as 
the case may be, where the proper officer has reason to doubt the truth or accuracy of such  value, and 
determination of value f or the purposes of this section :            
Provided  also that such price shall be calculated with reference to the rate of exchange as in force on 
the date on which a bill of entry is presented under section 46, or a shipping bill of export, as the case 
may be, is presented under section 50.  
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if the Board is satisfied that it is necessary 
or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix tariff values for any class of 
imported goods or export goods, having regard to the trend of value of such or like goods, and where any 
such tariff values are fixed, the duty shall be chargeable with reference to such tariff value.  
 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) ―rate of exchange ‖ means the rate of exchange — 
(i)   determined by the Board, or  
(ii) ascertained in such manner as the Board may direct,  
for the conversion of Indian currency  into foreign currency or foreign currency into Indian currency;  
(b)  ―foreign currency ‖ and ―Indian currency ‖ have the meanings respectively assigned to them 
in clause ( m) and clause ( q) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999  
(42 of  1999).]  
15.   Date for determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation of imported goods .—
(1)   1[The rate of  duty 2***] and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to any imported goods, shall be th e 
rate and valuation in force, — 
(a) in the case of goods entered for home consumption under section 46, on the date on which  a 
bill of entry in respect of such goods is presented under that section ; 
(b) in the case of goods cleared from a warehouse under section 68, on the date on which 3[a bill 
of entry for home consumption in respect of such goods is presented under that section ]; 
(c) in the case of any other goods,  on the date of payment of duty :            
4[Provided  that if a bill of entry has been presented before the date of entry inwards of the vessel or 
the arrival of the aircraft  5[or the vehicle] by which the goods are imported, the bill of entry shall be 
deemed to have been presented on the date of such entry inwards or the arrival, as the case may be.]  
(2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to baggage and goods imported by post.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1966, s. 3, for ―The rate of duty‖ (w.e.f. 31 -8-1966).  
2. The words ―, rate of exchange‖ omitted by Act 25 of 1978, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1978).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 200 3, s. 106, for ―the goods are actually removed from the warehouse‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 1996, s. 59, for the proviso (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
5. Ins. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 80 (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  23 
 1*   *  *   *   * 
16.   Date for determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation of export goods .—2[(1) The rate 
of duty and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to any export goods, shall be th e rate and valuation in  
force, — 
(a) in the case of goods entered for export under section 50, on the date on which the proper 
officer makes an order permitting clearance and loading of the goods for exportation under  
section 51;  
(b) in the case of any other goods, on the date of payment of duty.]  
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to baggage and goods exported by post.  
3[17.  Assessment of duty .—(1) An importer entering any imported goods under section 46, or an 
exporter entering any export goods under section 50, shall, save as otherwise provided in section 85,  
self-assess the duty, if any, leviable on such goods.  
(2) The proper officer may verify  4[the entries made under section 46 or section 50 and the  
self-assessment of goods referred to in sub -section ( 1)] and for this purpose, examine or test any imported 
goods or export goods or such part thereof as may be necessary.  
5[Provided that the sele ction of cases for verification shall primarily be on the basis of risk evaluation 
through appropriate selection criteria.]  
6[(3) For 7[the purposes of verification ] under sub -section ( 2), the proper officer may require the 
importer, exporter or any other person to produce any document or information, whereby the duty 
leviable on the imported goods or export goods, as the case may be, can be ascertained and thereupon, the 
importer, exporter or such other person shall produce such document or furnish such in formation.]  
(4) Where it is found on verification, examination or testing of the goods or otherwise that the  
self- assessment is not done correctly, the proper officer may, without prejudice to any other action which 
may be taken under this Act, re -assess  the duty leviable on such goods.  
(5) Where any re -assessment done under sub -section ( 4) is contrary to the  self-assessment done by 
the importer or exporter 8*** and in cases other than those where the importer or exporter, as the case 
may be, confirms  his acceptance of the said re -assessment in writing, the proper officer shall pass a 
speaking order on the re -assessment, within fifteen days from the date of  
re-assessment of the bill of entry or the   shipping bill, as the case may  be. 
9*   *   *   *   * 
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that in cases where an importer has 
entered any imported goods under section 46 or an exporter has entered any export goods under section 
50 before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2011 re ceives the assent of the President, such imported 
goods or export goods shall continue to be governed by the provisions of section 17 as it stood 
immediately before the date on which such assent is received.]  
  
                                                           
1. Sub -Section ( 3) omitted by Act 25 of 1978,  s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1978). Earlier sub -section ( 3) inserted by Act 20 of 1966, s. 3 
(w.e.f. 31 -8-1966).  
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 1986, s. 50, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 13 -5-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 38, for section 17 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
4. Subs. by  Act 13 of 2018, s. 60, for ―the self -assessment of such goods‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Ins. by s. 60, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 91, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
7. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 60, for ―verification o f self -assessment‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
8. The words ― regarding valuation of goods, classification, exemption or concessions of duty availed consequent to any 
notification issued therefor under this Act‖ omitted by s. 60 , ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
9. Sub -section ( 6) omitted by s. 60, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  24 
 18.   Provisional  assessment of duty —1[(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act but 
without prejudice to the provisions of section 46  2[and section 50] ,— 
(a) where the importer or exporter is unable to make self -assessment under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 17 and makes a request in writing  to the proper officer for assessment; or  
(b) where the proper officer deems it necessary to subject any imported goods or export goods to 
any chemical or other test; or  
(c) where the importer or exporter has produced all the necessary documents and furnis hed full 
information but the proper officer deems it necessary to make further enquiry; or  
(d) where necessary documents have not been produced or information has not been furnished 
and the proper officer deems it necessary to make further enquiry,   
the pr oper officer may direct that the duty leviable on such goods be assessed provisionally if the importer 
or the exporter, as the case may be, furnishes such security as the proper officer deems fit for the payment 
of the deficiency, if any, between the duty as may be finally assessed or re -assessed as the case may be, 
and the duty provisionally assessed.]  
2[(1A) Where, pursuant to the provisional assessment under sub -section ( 1), if any document or 
information is required by the proper officer for final assessment, the importer or exporter, as the case 
may be, shall submit such document or information within such time, and the proper officer shall finalise 
the provisional assessment within such time and in such manner, as may be prescribed. ] 
(2) When the duty leviable  on such goods is assessed finally  3[or re -assessed by the proper officer] in 
accordance with th e provisions of this Act, then — 
(a) in the case of goods cleared for home consumption or exportation, the amount paid shall be 
adjusted against the  duty 4[finally assessed or re -assessed, as the case may be,] and if the amount so 
paid falls  short of, or is in excess of   5[the duty   4[finally assessed or re -assessed, as the case may 
be,]], the importer or the exporter of the goods shall pay the deficiency or be entitled to a refund, as 
the case may be;  
(b) in the case of warehoused goods, the proper officer may, where the duty  4[finally assessed or 
re-assessed, as the case may be,] is in excess of the duty provisionally assessed, require the impo rter 
to execute a bond, binding himself in a sum equal to twice the amount of the excess duty.  
6[(3) The importer or exporter shall be liable to pay interest, on any amount payable to the Central 
Government, consequent to the final assessment order  3[or re -assessment order]  under sub -section ( 2), at 
the rate fixed by the Central Government under section 7[28AA]  from the first day of the month in which 
the duty is provisionally assessed till the date of payment thereof.]  
(4)   Subject the sub -section ( 5), if any refundable amount referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) 
is not refunded under that sub -section within three months from the date of assessment, of duty 
finally  3[or re -assessment  of duty, as the case may be,]  there shall be paid an interest on such un -refunded 
amount at such rate fixed by the Central Government under section 27A till the date of refund of such 
amount.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 39, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 61 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 39 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for ―finally assessed‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
5. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for ―the finally assessed‖ (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
6. Ins. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 21 (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
7. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 61, for ―28AB‖ (w.e.f. 8-4-2011).  25 
 (5)   The amount  of duty refundable under sub -section ( 2) and the interest under sub -section ( 4), if 
any, shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to the importer or the exporter, as the case may 
be, if such amount is relatable to — 
(a) the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty paid by the importer, or the exporter, as the 
case may be, if he had not passed on  the incidence of such duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty 
to any other person;  
(b)  the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty on imports made by an individual for his 
personal use;  
(c)  the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty born e by the buyer, if he had not passed on the 
incidence of such duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty to any other person;  
(d)  the export duty as specified in section 26;  
(e) drawback of duty payable under sections 74 and 75.]  
19.  Determination of duty where goods consist of articles liable to different rates of duty .—
Except as otherwise provided in any law for the time being in force, where goods consist of a set of 
articles, duty  shall be calculated as  follows: — 
(a) articles liable to duty with reference to quantity shall be chargeable to that duty;  
(b) articles liable to duty with reference to value shall, if they are liable to duty at the same rate, 
be chargeable to duty at that rate, and if they are liable to duty at different rates, be charge able to duty 
at the highest of such rates;  
(c) articles not liable to duty shall be chargeable to duty at the rate at which articles liable to duty 
with reference to value are liable under clause ( b): 
Provided  that, — 
(a) accessories of, and spare parts or  maintenance and repairing implements for, any article which 
satisfy the conditions specified in the rules made in this behalf shall be chargeable at the same rate of 
duty as that article;  
(b) if the importer produces evidence to the satisfaction of the pr oper officer  1[or the evidence is 
available] regarding the value of any of the articles liable to different rates of duty, such article shall 
be chargeable to duty separately at the rate applicable to it.  
2[20. Re -importation of goods .—If goods are importe d into India after exportation therefrom, such 
goods shall be liable to duty and be subject to all the conditions and restrictions, if any, to which goods of 
the like kind and value are liable or subj ect, on the importation thereof:]  
3[*   *   *   *   *] 
21. Goods derelict, wreck, etc .—All goods, derelict, jetsam, flotsam and wreck brought or coming 
into India, shall be dealt with as if they were imported into India, unless it be shown to the satisfaction of 
the proper officer that they are entitled to be admitted duty -free under this Act.  
22.   Abatement of duty on damaged or deteriorated goods .—(1)   Where  it is shown to the 
satisfaction of the  4[Assistant  Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] — 
(a) that any imported goods had been damaged or had deteriorated at any time before or during 
the unloading of the goods in India; or  
(b) that any imported goods, other than warehoused goods, had been damaged at any time after 
the unloading thereof in India but before their examination under section 17, on account of any 
accident not due to any  wilful act, negligence or default of the importer, his employee or agent; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 8 of 2011, s. 40 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1994, s. 60, for section 20 (w.e.f. 13 -5-1994).  
3. The provisos and the Explanations  omitted by Act 22 of 1995, s. 53 (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  26 
 (c) that  any warehoused goods had been damaged at any time before clearance for home 
consumption on account of any accident not due to any  wilful  act, negligence or default of the owner, 
his employee or agent,   
such goods shall be chargeable to duty in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The duty to be charged on the goods referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall bear the same proportion 
to the duty chargeable on the goods before the damage or deterioration which the value of the damaged or 
deteriora ted goods bears to the value of the goods before the damage or deterioration.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, the value of damaged or deteriorated goods may be ascertained 
by either of the following meth ods at the option of the owner: — 
(a) the value of such goods may be ascertained by the proper officer, or  
(b) such goods may be sold by the proper officer by public auction or by tender, or with the 
consent of the owner in any other manner, and the gross sale proceeds shall be deemed to be the value 
of such goods.  
23.   Remission of duty on lost, destroyed or abandoned goods .—(1) 1[Without prejudice to the 
provisions of section 13, where it is shown] to the satisfaction of the  2[Assistant  Commissioner of 
Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] that any imported goods have been lost  3[(otherwise than 
as a result of pilferage)] or destroyed, at any time before clearance for home consumption, the  2[Assistant  
Commissioner of Customs or Depu ty Commissioner of Customs] shall remit the duty on such goods.  
4[(2) The owner of any imported goods may, at any time before an order for clearance of goods for 
home consumption under section 47 or an order for permitting the deposit of goods in a warehou se under 
section 60 has been made, relinquish his title to the goods and thereupon he shall not be liable to pay the 
duty thereon;]  
5[Provided  that the owner of any such imported goods shall not be allowed to relinquish his title to 
such goods regarding wh ich an offence appears to have been committed under this Act or any other law 
for the time being in force.]  
24. Power to make rules for denaturing or mutilation of goods .—The Central Government may 
make rules for permitting at the request of the owner the denaturing or mutilation of imported goods 
which are ordinarily used for more than one purpose so as to render them unfit for one or more of such 
purposes; and where any goods are so denatured or mutilated they shall be chargeable to duty at such rate 
as would be applicable if the goods had been imported in the denatured or mutilated form.  
25.  Power  to grant exemption from duty. —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is 
necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt generally 
either absolutely or subject to such conditions (to be fulfilled before or after clearance) as may be 
specified in the notification goods of any specified description from the whole or any part of duty of 
customs leviable  thereon.  
 6[(2)   If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, it may, 
may, by special order in each case, exempt from the payment of duty, under circumstances of an 
exceptional nature to be stated in such order,  any goods on which duty is  leviable. ] 
7 [(2A)  The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose 
purpose of clarifying the scope or applicability of any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or order 
issued under s ub-section ( 2), insert an explanation in such notification or order, as the case may be, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, at any time within one year of issue of the notification under           
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 11 of 1983, s. 48, for ―Where it is shown‖ (w.e.f. 13 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 1 of 1983, s. 48 (w.e.f. 13 -5-1983).  
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 1994, s. 60, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 13 -5-1994).  
5. The proviso i ns. by Act 21 of 2006, s. 58 (w.e.f. 18 -4-2006).  
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 107, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
7. Ins. by Act 20 of 2002, s. 119 (w.e.f. 11 -5-2002).  27 
 sub-section ( 1) or order under sub -section ( 2), and e very such explanation shall have effect as if it had 
always been the part of the first such notification or order, as the case may be.]  
 1[(3) An exemption under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) in respect of any goods from any part of 
the duty of custom s leviable  thereon (the duty of customs  leviable  thereon being hereinafter referred to as 
the statutory duty) may be granted by providing for the levy of a duty on such goods at a rate expressed in 
a form or method different from the form or method in whic h the statutory duty is  leviable  and any 
exemption granted in relation to any goods in the manner provided in this sub -section shall have effect 
subject to the condition that the duty of customs chargeable on such goods shall in no case exceed the 
statutor y duty.  
 Explanation. —”Form or method ‖, in relation to a rate of duty of customs, means the basis, namely, 
valuation, weight, number, length, area, volume or other measure with reference to which the duty 
is leviable.]  
2[(4)   Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2A) shall,  unless otherwise 
provided, come into force on the date of its issue by the Central Government for publication in the 
Official Gazette.]  
3*   *   *   *   * 
4[(6)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this A ct, no duty shall be collected if the amount of 
duty leviable  is equal to, or less than, one hundred rupees.]  
5[(7)   The mineral oils (including petroleum and natural gas) extracted or produced in the continental 
continental shelf of India or exclusive economic zone of India as referred to in section 6 and section 7, 
respectively, of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime 
Zones   
Act, 1976 (80 of 1976 ), and imported prior to the 7th day of February, 2002 shall be deemed to be and 
shall always be deemed to have been exempted from the whole of the duties of customs leviable on such 
mineral oils and accordingly, notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment , decree or order of any 
court, tribunal or other authority, no suit or other proceedings in respect of such mineral oils shall be 
maintained or continued in any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  
(8)   Notwithstanding the exemption provided under sub -section ( 7), no refund of dut ies of customs 
paid in respect of the mineral oils s pecified therein shall be made.]  
6[25A.  Inward processing of goods .—Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary 
in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification, exempt such of the goods which are imported for 
the purposes of repair, further processing or manufacture, as may be specified therein, from the whole or 
any part of duty of customs leviable thereon, subject to the following conditions, namely: — 
(a) the goods shall be re-exported after such repair, further processing or manufacture, as the case 
may be, within a period of one year from the date on which the order for clearance of the imported 
goods is made;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 1983, s. 49 (w.e.f. 13 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 119, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).   
3. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by, s. 119, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
4. Ins. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 107, (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
5. Ins. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 81, (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
6. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 62 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  28 
 (b) the imported  goods are identifiable in the export goods; and  
(c) such other conditions as may be specified in that notification.  
25B.  Outward processing of goods .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 20, where the 
Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, it may,  by notification, 
exempt such of the goods which are re -imported after being exported for the purposes of repair, further 
processing or manufacture, as may be specified therein, from the whole or any part of duty of customs 
leviable thereon, subject to the  following conditions, namely: — 
(a) the goods shall be re -imported into India after such repair, further processing or manufacture, 
as the case may be, within a period of one year from the date on which the order permitting clearance 
for export is made;  
(b) the exported goods are identifiable in the re -imported goods; and  
(c) such other conditions as may be specified in that notification. ] 
 26.  Refund of export duty in certain cases.  —Where on the exportation of any goods any duty has 
been paid, such duty shall be refunded to the person by whom or on whose behalf it was paid, if — 
(a)  the goods are returned to such person otherwise than by way of re -sale; 
(b)  the goods are re -imported within one year from the date of exportation; and  
(c)  an application for refund of such duty is made before the expiry of six months from the date 
on which the proper officer  makes an order for the clearance of the goods.  
1[26A.   Refund of import duty in certain cases. —(1) Where on the importation of any goods 
capable of be ing easily identified as such imported goods, any duty has been paid on clearance of such 
goods for home consumption, such duty shall be refunded to the person by whom or on whose behalf it 
was paid, if — 
(a)  the goods are found to be defective or otherwise not in conformity with the specifications 
agreed upon between the importer and the supplier of goods:  
Provided  that the goods have not been worked, repaired or used after importation except where 
such use was indispensable to discover the defects  or non -conformity with the specifications;  
(b)  the goods are identified to the satisfaction of the Assistant Commissioner of Customs or 
Deputy Commissioner of Customs as the goods which were imported;  
(c)  the importer does not claim drawback under any o ther provisions of this Act; and  
(d)  (i)    the goods are exported; or  
      (ii)   the importer relinquishes his title to the goods and abandons them to customs; or  
(iii)  such goods are destroyed or rendered commercially valueless in the presence of the       
proper officer,   
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 33 of 2009, s. 85 (w.e.f. 19 -8-2009).  29 
 in such  manner as may be prescribed and within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date on 
which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of imported goods for home consumption under 
section 47:  
Provided  that the p eriod of thirty days may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended by the  
1[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] for a period not exceeding three 
months:  
Provided  further  that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the goods regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed under this Act or any other law for the time being in force.  
(2) An application for refund of duty shall be made before the expiry of  six months from the relevant 
date in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, ―relevant date ‖ means,  — 
(a)   in cases where the goods are exported out of India, the date on which the proper off icer 
makes an order permitting clearance and loading of goods for exportation under section 51;  
(b)  in cases where the title to the goods is relinquished, the date of such relinquishment;  
(c)  in cases where the goods are destroyed or rendered commerciall y valueless, the date of  such 
destruction or rendering of goods commercially valueless.  
(3) No refund under sub -section ( 1) shall be allowed in respect of perishable goods and goods 
which have exceeded their shelf life or their recommended storage -before -use period.  
(4) The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify any other condition subject to 
which the refund under sub -section ( 1) may be allowed.]  
2[27. Claim for refund of duty. —3[(1) Any person claiming refund of any duty or interest,  — 
(a) paid by him; or  
(b) borne by him,  
may make an application in such form and manner as may be prescribed for such refund  to the Assistant 
Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs, before the expiry of one year, from the 
date of paymen t of such duty or interest:  
Provided  that where an application for refund has been made before the date on which the Finance 
Bill, 2011 receives the assent of the President, such application shall be deemed to have been made under 
sub-section ( 1), as it st ood before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2011 receives the assent of the 
President and the same shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2): 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissio ner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1991, s. 10, for section 27 (w.e.f.  20-9-1991).  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 41, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f.  8-4-2011).  30 
  Provided  further that the limitation of one year shall not apply where any duty  or interest has been 
paid under protest.  
1[Provided also that where the amount of refund claimed is less than rupees one hundred, the same 
shall not be refunded.]  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, ―the date of payment of duty or interest ‖ in 
relation to a person, other than the importer, shall be construed as ―the date of purchase of goods ‖ by such 
person.  
 (1A) The application under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by such documentary or other 
evidence (including the documents referr ed to in section 28C) as the applicant may furnish to establish 
that the amount of duty or interest, in relation to which such refund is claimed was collected from, or paid 
by him and the incidence of such duty or interest, has not been passed on by him to  any other person.  
 (1B) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the period of limitation of one year shall be 
computed i n the following manner, namely: — 
 (a) in the case of goods which are exempt from payment of duty by a special order issued under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 25, the limitation of one year shall be computed from the date of issue of 
such order;  
(b) where the duty becomes refundable as a consequence of any judgment, decree, order or 
direction of the appellate authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court, the limitation of one year shall 
be computed from the date of such judgment, decree, order or direction;  
(c) where any duty is paid provisionally under section 18, the limitation of one year shall be 
computed from the date of adjustm ent of duty after the final assessment thereof or in case of              
re-assessment, from the date of such re -assessment.]  
 (2)   If, on receipt of any such application, the  2[Assistant  Commissioner of Customs or Deputy 
Commissioner of Customs] is satis fied that the whole or any part of the  3[duty and  interest, if any, paid on 
such duty] paid by the applicant is refundable, he may make an order accordingly and the amount so 
determine d shall be credited to the Fund : 
 Provided  that the amount of  3[duty and  interest , if any, paid on such duty] as determined by 
the 2[Assistant  Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] under the foregoing 
provisions of this sub -section shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to the applicant, if such 
amount is relatable to — 
 (a) the  3[duty and interest , if any, p aid on such duty] paid by the importer,  4[or the exporter, as the 
case may be] if he had not passed on the incidence of such  3[duty and interest , if any, paid on such duty] 
to any other p erson;  
(b)  the 3[duty and interest , if any, paid on such duty] on imports made by an individual for his 
personal use;  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 65 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of  1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
3. Subs. by Act 55 of 1991, s. 2, for ―duty‖ (w.e.f. 23 -12-1991).  
4. Ins. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 108, (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  31 
 (c)  the 1[duty and interest , if any, paid on such duty] borne by the buyer, if he had not passed on the 
incidence of such  1[duty and interest , if any, paid on such duty] to any other person;  
(d)  the export duty as specified in section 26;  
(e)  drawback of duty payable under sections 74 and 75;  
(f)   the  1[duty and interest , if any, paid on such duty] borne by any other such class of applicants as 
the Central Government may, by notification i n the Official Gazette, specify ; 
2[(g) the duty paid in excess by the importer before an order permitting clearance of goods for home 
consumption is made where — 
(i) such excess payment of duty is evident from the bill of entry in the case of self -assessed bill of 
entry; or  
(ii) the duty actually payable is reflected in the reassessed bill of en try in the case of 
reassessment: ] 
Provided  further that no notification under clause ( f) of the first prov iso shall be issued unless in the 
opinion of the Central Government the incidence of  1[duty and interest , if any, paid on such duty] has not 
been passed on by the persons concerned to any other person.  
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment, decree, order or direction of 
the Appellate  Tribunal,  3[National Tax  Tribunal] or any Court or in any other provision of this Act or the 
regulations made  thereunder  or any other law for the time being in force, no refund shall be  made except 
as provided in sub -section ( 2). 
(4)   Every notification under clause ( f) of the first proviso to sub -section ( 2) shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament, if it is sitting, as soon as may be after the issue of the notification, and, if i t is not 
sitting, within seven days of its re -assembly, and the Central Government shall seek the approval of 
Parliament to the notification by a resolution moved within a period of fifteen days beginning with the 
day on which the notification is so laid b efore the House of the People and if Parliament makes any 
modification in the notification or directs that the notification should cease to have effect, the notification 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the cas e may be, but without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done  thereunder.  
 (5)  For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any notification issued under clause ( f) of 
the first proviso to sub -section ( 2), including any such notification approved or modified under             
sub-section ( 4), may be rescinded by the Central Government at any time by notification in the Official 
Gazette. ] 
 4[27A. Interest on delayed refunds. —If any duty ordered to be refun ded under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 27 to an applicant is not refunded within three months from the date of receipt of application 
under sub -section ( 1) of that section, there shall be paid to that applicant interest at such rate,  5[ not below 
five per  cent.] and not exceeding thirty per  cent. per annum as is for the time being fixed  6[by the Central 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 1991, s. 2, for ―duty‖ (w.e.f. 23 -12-1991).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 92 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 and the Schedule, Part VI (w.e.f. 28 -12-2005). This amendment has been struck down by the 
Supreme Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 in the Madras Bar Associ ation Vs Union of India.  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 55 (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 14 of 2001, s. 102, for ―not below ten per  cent.‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 2000, s. 78, for ―by the Board‖ (w.e.f. 12 -5-2000).  32 
 Government  by Notification in the Official Gazette], on such duty from the date immediately after the 
expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such application till the date of refund of such duty : 
Provided  that where any duty, ordered to be refunded under sub -section ( 2) of section 27 in respect of 
an application under sub -section ( 1) of that section made before the date on which the Finance Bill, 1995 
receives the assent of the President, is not refunded within three months from such date, there shall be 
paid to the applicant interest under this section from the date immediately after three months from such 
date, till the date of refund of such dut y. 
Explanation. —Where any order of refund is made by the Commissione r (Appeals), Appellate 
Tribunal  1[, National Tax Tribunal] or any court against an order of the  2[Assistant Commissioner of 
Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] under sub -section ( 2) of section 27, the order passed by 
the Commissione r (Appeals), Appellate Tribunal  1[, National Tax  Tribunal] Tribunal or as the case may 
be, by the court shall be deemed to be an order passed under that sub -section for the purposes of this 
section. ] 
3[28.   Recovery of  4[duties not levied or not  paid or short -levied or short -paid] or erroneously 
refunded. —(1) Where any  5[duty has not been levied or not paid or short -levied or short -paid] or 
erroneously refunded, or any interest payable has not been paid, part-paid or erroneously refunded, for 
any reason other than the reasons  of collusion or any wilful mis -statement or suppression of facts,  — 
(a) the proper officer shall, within  6[two years] from the relevant date, serve notice on the person 
chargeable wit h the duty or interest which has not been so levied  7[or paid] or which has been                   
short -levied or short -paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, requiring him to show 
cause why he should not pay the amount specified in the n otice: 
8[Provided that before issuing notice, the proper officer shall hold pre -notice consultation with the 
the person chargeable with duty or interest in such manner as may be prescribed;]  
(b) the person chargeable with the duty or interest, may pay before ser vice of notice under            
clause ( a) on the basis of,  — 
(i) his own ascertainment of such duty; or  
(ii)  the duty ascertained by the proper officer,  
the amount of duty along with the interest payable thereon under section 28AA or the  amount of                 
interest which has not been so paid or part -paid.  
9[Provided that the proper officer shall not serve such show cause notice, where the amount involved 
is less than rupees one hundred.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 and the Schedule, Part VI (w.e.f. 28 -12-2005). This amendment has been struck down by the 
Supreme Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 in the Madras Bar Association Vs Union of India.  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, fo r ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
3. Subs . by Act 8 of 2011, s. 42, for section  28 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).   
4. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 120, for ―duties not levied or short - levied‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 120, ibid., for ― duty has not been levied or has been short -levied‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).   
6. Subs. by s. 120, ibid., for ―one year‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
7. Ins. by s. 120, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
8. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 63 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
9. The proviso ins. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 66 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  33 
  (2) The  person who has paid the duty along with interest or amount of interest under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) shall inform the proper officer of such payment in writing, who, on receipt of such 
information, shall not serve any notice under clause ( a) of that  sub-section in respect of the duty or 
interest so paid or any penalty leviable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder in 
respect of such duty or interest:  
1[Provided that  where notice under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) has been ser ved and the proper 
officer is of the opinion that the amount of duty along with interest payable thereon under section 28AA 
or the amount of interest, as the case may be, as specified in the notice, has been paid in full within thirty 
days from the date of  receipt of the notice, no penalty shall be levied and the proceedings against such 
person or other persons to whom the said notice is served under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall be 
deemed to be concluded.]  
 (3) Where the proper officer is of the opin ion that the amount paid under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
falls short of the amount actually payable, then, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in 
clause ( a) of that sub -section in respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable 
in the manner specified under that sub -section and the period of  2[two years] shall be computed from the 
date of receipt of information under sub -section ( 2). 
 (4) Where any duty has not been  3[levied or not paid or has been short -levied o r short -paid] 
or erroneously  refunded, or interest payable has not been paid, part -paid or erroneously refunded, by 
reason of ,—                                                                                                                                         
(a)  collusion; or  
(b)  any wilful mis -statement; or  
(c)   suppression of facts,  
by the importer or the exporter or the  agent or employee of the importer or exporter, the proper officer 
shall, within five years from the relevant date, serve notice on the person chargeable with duty or interest 
which has not been  4[so levied or not paid] or which has been so short -levied or  short -paid or to whom the 
the refund has erroneously been made, requiring him to show cause why he should not pay the amount 
specified in the notice.  
 (5) Where any  5[duty has not been levied or not paid  or  has been short -levied or short paid] or the 
interes t has not been charged or has been part -paid or the duty or interest has been erroneously refunded 
by reason  of collusion or any wilful mis -statement or suppression of facts by the importer or the exporter 
or the agent or the employee of the importer or th e exporter, to whom a notice has been served under           
sub- section ( 4) by the proper officer, such person may pay the duty in full or in part, as may be accepted 
by him, and the interest payable thereon under section 28AA and the penalty equal to  6[fifteen per cent.] 
of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so accepted by that person, within thirty days of the receipt 
of the notice and inform the proper officer of such payment in writing.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 82 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015)  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 120, for ―one year‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 120, ibid., for ―levied or has been short levied‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 120,  ibid., for ―so levied‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
5. Subs by s. 120, ibid., for ―duty has not been levied or has been short levied‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
6. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 82, for ―twe nty-five per cent.‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  34 
  (6) Where  the importer or the exporter or the agent or  the employee of the importer or the exporter, 
as the case may be, has paid duty with interest and penalty under sub -section ( 5), the proper officer shall 
determine the amount of duty or interest and on determination, if the proper officer is of the opinio n —     
(i) that the duty with interest and penalty has been paid in full, then, the proceedings in respect of 
such person or other persons to whom the notice is served under sub -section ( 1) or sub - section ( 4), 
shall, without  prejudice to the provisions of sections 135, 135A and 140 be deemed to be conclusive 
as to the matters stated therein; or  
(ii) that the duty with interest and penalty that has been paid falls short of the amount actually 
payable, then, the proper officer shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in clause ( a) of             
sub-section ( 1) in respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable in the 
manner specified under that sub -section and the period of 1[two years]  shall be  computed from the 
date of receipt of information  under sub -section ( 5). 
 (7) In computing the period of  1[two years]  referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1)  or five years 
 referred to in sub -section ( 4), the period during which there was any stay by  an order of a court or 
tribunal in respect of payment of such duty or interest shall be excluded.  
2[(7A) Save as otherwise provided in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or in sub -section ( 4), the proper 
officer may issue a supplementary notice under such circ umstances and in such manner as may be 
prescribed, and the provisions of this section shall apply to such supplementary notice as if it was issued 
under the said sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 4).] 
 (8) The proper officer shall, after allowing the concern ed person an opportunity of being  heard and 
after considering the representation, if any, made by such person, determine the amount of duty or interest 
due from such person not being in excess of the amount specified in the notice.                          
 (9)   The proper officer shall determine the amount of duty or interest under sub -section ( 8),—   
 (a) within six months from the date of notice, 3*** in respect of cases falling under clause ( a) of 
sub- section ( 1); 
 (b) within one year from the date of notice, 3*** in respect of cases falling under sub -section ( 4). 
2[Provided that where the proper officer fails to so determine within the specified period, any officer 
senior in rank to the proper officer may, having rega rd to the circumstances under which the proper 
officer was prevented from determining the amount of duty or interest under sub -section ( 8), extend the 
period specified in clause ( a) to a further period of six months and the period specified in clause ( b) to a 
further period of one year:  
Provided further that where the proper officer fails to determine within such extended period, such 
proceeding shall be deemed to have concluded as if no notice had been issued; ] 
2[(9A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 9), where the proper officer is unable to 
determine the amount of duty or interest under sub -section ( 8) for the reason that — 
(a) an appeal in a similar matter of the same person or any other person is pending before the 
Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme Court; or   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Ac t 28 of 2016, s. 120 for ―one year‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 63 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. The words ―where it is possible to do so‖ omitted by s. 63, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  35 
 (b) an interim order of stay has been issued by the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the 
Supreme Court; or  
(c) the Board has, in a similar matter, issued specific direction or order to keep such matter 
pending; or  
(d) the Settlement Commission has admitted an application made by the person concerned,  
the proper officer shall inform the person concerned the reason for non -determination of the amount of 
duty or interest under sub -section ( 8) and in such ca se, the time specified in sub -section ( 9) shall apply 
not from the date of notice, but from the date when such reason ceases to exist. ] 
 (10) Where an order determining the duty is passed by the proper officer under this section, the 
person liable to pay the said duty shall pay the amount so determined along with the interest due on such 
amount whether or not the amount of interest is specified separately.  
1[(10A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where an order for refund under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 27 is modified in any appeal and the amount of refund so determined is less than the amount refunded 
under said sub -section, the excess amount so refunded shall be recovered along with interest thereon at the rate 
fixed by the Central Governm ent under section 28AA, from the date of refund up to the date of recovery, as a 
sum due to the Government.  
(10B) A notice issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be deemed to have been issued under sub -section ( 1), if 
such notice demanding duty is held not sustainable in any proceeding under this Act, including at any stage of 
appeal, for the reason that the charges of collusion or any wilful mis -statement or suppression of facts to evade 
duty has not been establi shed against the person to whom such notice was issued and the amount of duty and 
the interest thereon shall be computed accordingly.]  
2[(11) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment , decree or order of any 
court of law, tribunal or other authority, all persons appointed as officers of Customs under                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 before the 6th day of July, 2011 shall be deemed to have and always had the 
power of assessment under section 17 and shall be deemed to h ave been and always had been the proper 
officers for the purposes of this section.]  
 Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, ―relevant date ‖ means,  —   
(a) in a case where duty is  3[not levied or not paid or short -levied or short -paid], or interest is not 
charged, the date on which the proper officer makes an order for the clearance of goods;  
(b) in a case where duty is provisionally assessed under section 18, the date of adjustment of duty 
after the final assessment thereof or re -assessment , as the case may be;  
(c) in a case where duty or interest has been erroneously refunded, the date of refund;  
(d) in any other case, the date of payment of duty or interest.  
Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any non -levy,  short -levy or 
erroneous refund before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2011 receives the assent of the President, 
shall continue to be governed by the provisions of section 28 as it stood immediately before the date on 
which such assent is received.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 63 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 14 of 2011, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -9-2011).  
3. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 120, for ―not levied‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  36 
  1[Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the proceedings in respect of 
any case of non -levy, short -levy, non -payment, short -payment or erroneous refund where show cause 
notice has been issued under sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 4), as the case may be, but an order 
determining duty under sub -section ( 8) has not been passed before the date on which the Finance Bill, 
2015 receives the assent of the President, shall, without prejudice to the provisions of sections 135, 1 35A 
and 140, as may be applicable, be deemed to be concluded, if the payment of duty, interest and penalty 
under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) or under sub -section ( 5), as the case may be, is made in full within 
thirty days from the date on which such ass ent is received.]  
2[Explanation 4.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that in cases where notice has been 
issued for non -levy, not paid, short -levy or short -paid or erroneous refund after the 14th day of May, 
2015, but before the date on whic h the Finance Bill, 2018 receives the assent of the President, they shall 
continue to be governed by the provisions of section 28 as it stood immediately before the date on which 
such assent is received. ] 
 3[28A.    Power  not to recover duties not levied or  short -levied as a result of general  
practice. —4[(1)] Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if the Central Government is  
satisfied —   
(a) that a practice was, or is, generally prevalent regarding levy of duty (including non -levy 
thereof) on any  goods imported into, or exported from, India; and  
(b) that such goods were, or are, liable —  
(i)  to duty, in cases where according to the said practice the duty was not, or is not being, 
levied, or  
(ii) to a higher amount of duty than what was, or is being, levied, according to the said 
practice,  
then, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the whole of the 
duty payable on such goods, or, as the case may be, the duty in excess of that payable on such goods, but  
for the said practice, shall not be required to be paid in respect of the goods on which the duty was not, or 
is not being, levied, or was, or is being, short -levied, in accordance with the said practice.]  
5[(2)   Where any notification under sub -section (1) in respect of any goods has been issued, the 
whole of the duty paid on such goods, or, as the case may be, the duty paid in excess of that payable on 
such goods, which would not have been paid if the said notification had been in force, shall be dealt with 
in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 27:  
 Provided  that the person claiming the refund of such duty or, as the case may be, excess duty, makes 
an application in this behalf to the  6[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deput y Commissioner of 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 82 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 63 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 197 8 s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1978).  
4. Section 28A renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof , by Act 29 of 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1988).  
5. Subs. by Act 40 of 1991, s. 11, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1991).  
6. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  37 
 Customs],  in the form referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 27, before the expiry of six months from 
the date of issue of the said notification.]  
1[28AA.  Interest on delayed payment of duty —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
judgment, decree, order or direction of any court, Appellate Tribunal or any authority or in any other 
provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder, the person, who is liable to pay duty in accordance 
with the provisions of section 28, shall, in addition to such duty, be liable to pay interest, if any, at the rate 
fixed under sub -section ( 2), whether such payment is made voluntarily or after determination of the duty 
under that section.  
(2) Interest at such rate not below ten per cent. and not exc eeding thirty -six per cent. per annum, as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, shall be paid by the person liable 
to pay duty in terms of section 28 and such interest shall be calculated from the first day of the month 
succeeding the month in which the duty ought to have been paid or from the date of such erroneous 
refund, as the case may be, up to the date of payment of such duty.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no interest shall be payable wh ere,— 
(a) the duty becomes payable consequent to the issue of an order, instruction or direction by the 
Board under section 151A; and  
(b) such amount of duty is voluntarily paid in full, within forty -five days from the date of issue of 
such order, instruct ion or direction, without reserving any right to appeal against the said payment at 
any subsequent stage of such payment.]  
2[28AAA. Recovery of duties in certain cases. —(1) Where an instrument issued to a person has 
been obtained by him by means of — 
(a) collusion; or  
(b) wilful mis -statement; or  
(c) suppression of facts,  
for the purposes of this Act or the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992                     
(22 of 1992), by such person or his agent or employee and such instrument is ut ilised under the provisions 
of this Act or the rules made or notifications issued thereunder, by a person other than the person to 
whom the instrument was issued, the duty relatable to such utilisation of instrument shall be deemed 
never to have been exemp ted or debited and such duty shall be recovered from the person to whom  the 
said instrument was issued : 
Provided that the action relating to recovery of duty under this section against the person to whom the 
instrument was issued shall be without prejudice  to an action against the importer under section 28.  
Explanation 1. — For the purposes of this sub -section, ―instrument ‖ means any scrip or authorisation 
or licence or certificate or such other document, by whatever name called, issued under the Foreign Trade 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992), with respect to a reward or incentive scheme or 
duty exemption scheme or duty remission scheme or such other scheme bestowing financial or fiscal  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 43, for section  28AA and section 28AB (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 122 (w.e.f. 28 -5-2018).  38 
 benefits,  which may be utilised under the provisions of this Act or the rules made or notifications issued 
thereunder.  
Explanation 2. —The provisions of this sub -section shal l apply to any utilisation of instrument so 
obtained by the person referred to in this sub -section on or after the date on which the Finance Bill, 2012 
receives the assent of the President, whether or not such instrument is issued to him prior to the date of 
the assent.  
(2) Where the duty becomes recoverable in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
person from whom such duty is to be recovered, shall, in addition to such duty, be liable to pay interest at 
the rate fixed by the Central Gover nment under section 28AA and the amount of such interest shall be 
calculated for the period beginning from the date of utilisation of the instrument till the date of recovery 
of such duty.  
(3) For the purposes of recovery under sub -section ( 2), the proper officer shall serve notice on the 
person to whom the instrument was issued requiring him to show cause, within a period of thirty days 
from the date of receipt of the notice, as to why the amount specified in the notice (excluding the interest) 
should not be recovered from him, and after giving that person an opportunity of being heard, and after 
considering the representation, if any, made by such person, determine the amount of duty or interest or 
both to be recovered from such person, not being in excess  of the amount specified in the notice, and pass 
order to recover the amount of duty or interest or both and the person to whom the instrument was issued 
shall repay the amount so specified in the notice within a period of thirty days from the date of rece ipt of 
the said order, along with the interest due on such amount, whether or not the amount of interest is 
specified separately.  
(4) Where an order determining the duty has been passed under section 28, no order to recover that 
duty shall be passed under this section.  
(5) Where the person referred to in sub -section ( 3) fails to repay the amount within the period of 
thirty days specified therein, it shall be recovered in the manner laid down in sub -section ( 1) of         
section 142.]  
1[28B.  Duties collected from the buyer to be deposited with the Central Government. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary  contained in any order or direction of the Appellate Tribunal   
2[, National Tax Tribunal] or any Court or in any other provision of this Act or the regulations 
made  thereunder,  3[every person who is liable to pay duty under this Act and has collected any amount in 
excess of the duty assessed or determined or paid on any goods under this Act from the buyer of such 
goods] in any manner as represe nting duty of customs, shall forthwith pay the amount so collected to the 
credit of the Central Government.  
 4[(1A)   Every person who has collected any amount in excess of the duty assessed or determined or 
paid on any goods or has collected any amount as  representing duty of customs on any goods which are 
wholly exempt or are chargeable to  nil rate of duty from any person in any manner, shall forthwith pay 
the amount so collected to the credit of the Central Government. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1991, s. 12 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1991).  
2. Ins. by Act 49  of 2005, s. 30 and the Schedule, Part VI (w.e.f. 28 -12-2005). This amendment has been struck down by the 
Supreme Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 in the Madras Bar Association Vs Union of India.  
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2000, s. 82 for ―every person who has collected any amount from the buyer of any goods‖  
(w.e.f. 20 -9-1991).  
4. Ins. by Act 18 of 2008, s. 68 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  39 
 1[(2) Where  any amount is required to be paid to the credit of the Central Government under   
2[sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A), as the case may be,] and which has not been so paid, the proper 
officer may serve on the person liable to pay such amount, a notice req uiring him to show cause why he 
should not pay the amount, as specified in the notice to the cr edit of the Central Government.  
(3)  The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person on whom 
the notice is served unde r sub -section ( 2), determine the amount due from such person (not being in 
excess of the amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount so 
determined.  
(4) The amount paid to the credit of the Central Government under  3[sub-section ( 1) or                     
sub-section  (1A) or sub -section ( 3) as the case may be,] shall be adjusted against the duty payable by the 
person on  finalisation  of assessment or any other proceeding for determination of the duty relating to the 
goods ref erred to in  4[sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 1A).] 
(5) Where any surplus is left after the adjustment made under sub -section ( 4), the amount of such 
surplus shall either be credited to the Fund or, as the case may be, refunded to the person who has borne  
the incidence of such amount, in accordance with the provisions of section 27 and such person may make 
an application under that section in such cases within six months from the date of the public notice to be 
issued by the Assistant Commissioner of Custo ms for the refund of such surplus amount.]  
 5[28BA.  Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain cases. —(1) Where, during the 
pendency of any proceeding under section 28  6[or section 28AAA or section 28B], the proper officer is of 
of the opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interests of revenue, it is necessary so to do, he may, 
with the previous approval of the  7[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs], by 
by order in writing, attach provisionally any property belonging to  the person on whom notice is served 
under  8[sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 4) of section 28]  9[or sub -section ( 3) of section 28AAA or           
sub-section ( 2) of section 28B], as the case may be, in accordance with the rules made in this behalf under 
section 142.  
 (2)   Every such provisional attachment shall cease to have effect after the expiry of a period of six 
months from the date of the order made under sub -section ( 1): 
Provided  that the  10[Principal Chief Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner of Customs] 
may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the aforesaid period by such further period or periods 
as he thinks fit, so, however, that the total period of extension shall not in any case exceed tw o years : 
Provided  further th at where an application for settlement of case under section 127B is made to       
the Settlement Commission, the period commencing from the date on  which such application is made and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2000, s. 82, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1991).  
2. Subs. Act 18 of 2008, s. 68, for ―sub -section  (1)‖ ( w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  
3. Subs. by s. 68, ibid.,  for ―sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3)‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008)  
4. Subs. by s. 68, ibid., for ―sub -section ( 1)‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  
5. Ins. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 23 (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
6. Subs. by Act 23 o f 2012, s. 123, for ―or section 28B‖ (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  
7.  Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -08-2014).  
8.  Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 67, for ―sub -section ( 1) of section 28‖ ( w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
9. Subs. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 123, for ―or sub -section ( 2) of section 28B‖ (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  
10. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, section 78, for ―Chief Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  40 
 ending with the  date on which an order under sub -section ( 1) of section 127C is made shall be excluded 
from the period specified in the preceding proviso. ]  
1[CHAPTER VA  
INDICATING AMOUNT OF DUTY IN THE PRICE OF GOODS, ETC., FOR PURPOSE OF REFUND  
28C.  Price of goods to indicate the amount of duty paid thereon. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, every person who is liable to pay duty 
on any goods shall, at the time of clearance of the goods, prominently indicate in all the documents 
relating to assessment, sales invoice, and other like documents, the amount of such duty which will form 
part of the price at which such goods are to be sold.  
28D. Presumption that incidence of duty has been passed on to the buyer. —Every person who 
has paid the duty on any goods under this Act shall, unless the contrary is proved by him, be deemed to 
have passed on the full incidence of such duty to the buyer of such goods.]  
2[CHAPTER VB  
ADVANCE RULINGS  
28E. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
3*  *   *   *   * 
4[(b)  ―advance ruling ‖ means a written decision on any of the questions referred to in section 
28H raised by the applicant in his application in respect of any goods prior to its importation or 
exportation;]  
5[(ba) ―Appellate Authority‖ means the Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under section 
245-O of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961 ;] 
 6[(c) ―applicant ‖ means  any person, — 
(i) holding a valid Importer -exporter Code Number granted under section 7 of the Foreign 
Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992); or  
(ii) exporting any goods to India; or  
(iii) with a justifiable cause to the satisfaction of the Authority,  
who makes an application for advance ruling under section 28H; ] 
 7[Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, ―joint venture in India ‖ means a contractual 
arrangement whereby two or more persons undertake an economic activity which is subject to joint 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1991, s. 13 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1991).  
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 103 (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
3. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 64 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 64, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Ins. by s. 64, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Subs. by s. 64,  ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
7. Ins. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 97 (w.e.f. 11 -5-2007).  41 
 control and one or more of the participants or partners or equity holders is a non -resident having 
substantial interest in such arrangement.]  
(d) ‖application ‖ means an application made to the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 
28H;  
1[(e) ‖Authorit y‖ means the  Customs Authority for Advance Rulings appointed under section 
28EA ;] 
 (f) ‖Chairperson ‖ means the Chairperson of the 2[Appellate Authority] ; 
 (g) ―Member ‖ means a Member of the 2[Appellate Authority ] and includes the Chairperson; and  
3[(h) non-resident ‖, ―Indian company ‖ and ―foreign company ‖ have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in clauses ( 30), (26) and ( 23A) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 
1961).]  
4[28EA . Customs Authority for Advance Rulings .—(1) The Board may, for the purposes of giving 
advance rulings under this Act, by notification, appoint an officer of the rank of Principal Commissioner 
of Customs or Commissioner of Customs to function as a Customs Authority for Advance Rulings:  
Provided that till the date o f appointment of the Customs Authority for Advance Rulings, the existing 
Authority for Advance Rulings constituted under section 245 -O of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961)  
shall continue to be the Authority for giving advance rulings for the purposes o f this Act.  
(2) The offices of the Authority may be established in New Delhi and at such other places, as the 
Board may deem fit.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall exercise the powers and authority 
conferred on it by or under t his Act. ] 
5[28F. Authority for advance rulings. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority for 
Advance Rulings constituted under section 245 -O of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961)  shall be 6[the 
6[the Appellate Authority for deciding appeal under this Chapter and the said Appellate Authority ] shall 
exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act:  
Provided that the Member from the Indian Revenue Service (Customs and Central Excise), who is 
qualified to be a  Member of the Board, shall be the revenue Member of the 7[Appellate Authority ] for the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) On and from the date on which the Finance Bill, 2017 receives the assent of the President, every 
application and proceeding pending before the  erstwhile Authority for Advance Rulings (Central Excise, 
Customs and Service Tax) shall stand transferred to the Authority from the stage at which such 
application or proceeding stood as on the date of such assent.]  
8[(3) On and from the date of appointment of the Customs Authority for Advance Rulings, every 
application and proceeding pending before the erstwhile Authority for Advance Rulings shall stand 
transferred to the Authority from the stage at which such application or proceeding stood as o n the date of 
such appointment. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  13 of 2018, s. 64, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 64, ibid., for ―Authority‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 110, for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
4. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 65 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 94, for section 28F (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
6. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 66, for ― the Authority for giving advance rulings for the purposes of this Act and  the said 
Authority‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
7. Subs. by s. 66,  ibid., for ―Authority‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
8. Ins. by s. 66, ibid (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  42 
 28G. [Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings .]Omitted  by the Finance Act, (7 of 2017 ),  
s. 95 (w.e.f.  31-3-2017 ).  
28H. Application for advance ruling. —(1) An applicant desirous of obtaining an advance ruling 
under this Chapter may make an application in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, 
stating the question on which the advance ruling is sought.  
(2)  The question on which the advance ruling is sought shall be in respect of, — 
(a)  classification  of goods under the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975);  
(b)  applicability  of a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 25, having a bearing on 
the rate of duty;  
(c)  the principles to be adopted for the purposes of determination of value of th e goods under the 
provisions of this Act.  
1[(d)  applicability of notifications issued in respect of  tax or duties under this Act  or the Customs 
Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975) or any tax or duty chargeable under any other law for the time being in 
force in  the same manner as duty of customs leviable under this Act or the Customs Tariff Act; ] 
2[(e) determination  of origin of the goods in terms of the rules notified under the Customs Tariff 
Act, 1975 (51 of 1975)  and matters relating thereto.]  
3[(f) any other  matter as the Central Government may, by notification, specify.]  
(3) The application shall be made in quadruplicate  and be accompanied by a fee of  4[ten thousand 
rupees].  
(4) An applicant may  withdraw his application within thirty days from the date of th e application.  
5[(5) The applicant may be represented by any person resident in India who is authoris ed in this 
behalf.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section ―resident‖ shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it in clause ( 42) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) .] 
28-I. Procedure on receipt of application. —(1) On receipt of an application, the Authority shall 
cause a copy thereof to be forwarded to the  6[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of 
Customs] and, if necessary, call upon him to furnish the relevant records : 
Provided  that where any records have been called for by the Authority in any case, such records shall, 
as soon as possible, be returned to the  6[Princ ipal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of 
Customs].  
(2) The Authority may, after examining the application and the records called for, by order, either 
allow or reject the  application : 
Provided  that the Authority shall not allow the application  7*** where the question raised in the 
application is — 
(a) already pending in the applicant's case before any officer of customs, the Appellate Tribunal 
or any Court;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 67, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 18 of 2005, s. 67 (w.e.f.  13-5-2005).  
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 67 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 96 for ― two thousand five hundred rupees‖ (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
5. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 67 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78 for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
7. The w ords ―except in the case of a resident applicant‖ omitted by Act 20 of 2002, s. 122 (w.e.f. 11 -5-2002).  43 
 (b) the same as in a matter already decided by the Appellate Tribunal or any Court : 
Provided  further that no application shall be rejected under this sub -section unless an opportunity has 
been given to the applicant of being heard : 
Provided  also that where the application is rejected, reasons for such rejection shall be given in the 
order . 
(3)  A copy of every order made under sub -section ( 2) shall be sent to the applicant and to the   
1[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs].  
(4) Where an application  is allowed under sub -section ( 2), the Authority shall, after examining such 
further material as may be placed before it by the applicant or obtained by the Authority, pronounce its 
advance ruling on the question specified in the application.  
(5) On a request received from the applicant, the Authority shall, before p ronouncing its advance 
ruling, provide an opportunity to the applicant of being heard, either in person or through a 
duly authorised  representative.  
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, ―authorised  representative ‖ shall have the 
meaning assi gned to it in sub -section ( 2) of section 146A.  
(6)  The Authority shall pronounce its advance ruling in writing within  2[three months] of the receipt 
of application.  
 (7) A copy  of the advance ruling pronounced by the Authority, duly signed by the Members and 
certified in the prescribed manner shall be sent to the applicant and to the   1[Principal Commissioner  of 
Customs or Commissioner of Customs], as soon as may be, after such pronouncement.  
28J. Applicability of advance ruling .—(1) The advance ruling pronounced by the Authority under 
section 28 -I shall be binding only — 
(a) on the applicant who had sought it;  
(b) in respect of any matter referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 28H;  
(c) on the  1[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Cust oms], and the customs 
authorities subordinate to him, in  respect of the applicant.  
(2) The advance ruling referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be binding as aforesaid unless there is a 
change in law or facts on the basis of which the advance ruling has bee n pronounced.  
28K. Advance  ruling to be void in certain circumstances .—(1) Where the Authority finds, on a 
representation made to it by the  1[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] or 
otherwise, that an advance ruling pronounced by it under sub -section ( 6) of section 28 -I has been obtained 
by the applicant by fraud or misrepresentation of facts, it may, by order, declare such ruling to be 
void ab initio  and thereupon all the provisions of this Act shall apply 3*** to the applicant as if such 
advance ruling had never been made.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs ‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 68, for ―six months‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. The brackets and words ―(after excluding the period beginning with the date of such advance ruling and ending with the dat e 
of order under this sub -section)‖ om itted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 69 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  44 
 1[Provided  that in computing the period of two years referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 28, or five  years referred to in sub -section ( 4) thereof, for service of notice for recovery of any 
duty not levied, short -levied, not paid or short -paid on account of the advance ruling, the period beginning 
with the date of such advance ruling and ending with the d ate of the order under this sub -section shall be 
excluded. ] 
(2)  A copy of the order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be sent to the applicant and the  2[Principal 
Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs].  
3[28KA. Appeal .—(1) Any officer authorised by the Board, by notification, or the applicant may file an 
appeal to the Appellate Authority against any ruling or order passed by the Authority, within sixty days from 
the date of the communication of such ruling or order, in such form and man ner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where the Appellate Authority is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from presenting the appeal within the period so specified, it may allow a further period of thirty 
days for filing such appeal.  
(2) The provisions of sections 28 -I and 28J shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the appeal under this 
section.]  
28L.  Powers of 4[Authority  or Appellate  Authority] .—(1) The 4[Authority  or Appellate  Authority]  
shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers regarding discovery and inspection, enforcing the 
attendance of any person and examining him on oath, issuing commissions and compelling production of 
books of account and other records, have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(2) The 4[Authority  or Appellate Authority]  shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
section 195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedur e, 1973  
(2 of 1974), and every proceeding before the 4[Authority  or Appellate  Authority]  shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
5[28M. Procedure for Authority and Appellate Authority .—(1) The Authority shall follow such 
procedure as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Appellate Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to regulate its 
own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers and authority under this Act. ] 
CHAPTER VI  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CONVEYANCES CARRYING IMPORTED OR EXPORTED GOODS  
29.  Arrival of vessels and aircrafts in India. —(1) The person -in-charge of a vessel or an aircraft 
entering India from any place outside India shall not cause or permit the vessel or aircraft to call or land — 
(a) for the first time after arrival in India; or  
(b) at any time while it is carrying passengers or cargo brought in that vessel or aircraft;  
at any place other than a customs port or a customs airport, as the case may be  6[unless permitted by the 
Board].  
                                                           
1. The proviso i ns. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 69 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Section 28KA shall stand  inserted  (date to be notified)  by Act 13 of 2018, s. 70.  
4. Subs. by s. 71, ibid., for ―Authority‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).   
5. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for section 28M (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Ins. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 69 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  45 
 (2) The provisions  of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply in relation to any vessel or aircraft which is 
compelled by accident, stress of weather or other unavoidable cause to call or land at a place other than a 
customs port or customs airport but the person -in-charge  of any such vessel or aircraft — 
(a) shall immediately report the arrival of the vessel or the landing of the aircraft to the nearest 
customs officer or the officer -in-charge of a police station and shall on demand produce to him the 
log book belonging to the vessel or the aircraft;  
(b) shall not without the consent of any such officer permit any goods carried in the vessel or the 
aircra ft to be unloaded from, or any of the crew or passengers to depart from the vicinity of, the 
vessel or the aircraft; and  
(c)  shall comply with any directions given by any such officer with respect to any such goods,  
and no passenger or member of the crew shall, without the consent of any such officer, leave the 
immediate vicinit y of the vessel or the aircraft : 
Provided  that nothing in this section shall prohibit the departure of any crew or passengers from the 
vicinity of, or the removal of goods from, the  vessel or aircraft where the departure or removal is 
necessary for reasons of health, safety or the preservation of life or property.  
30. Delivery of 1[arrival manifest or import manifest ] or import report. —2[(1) The person -in-
charge  of — 
(i)    a vessel;  or 
(ii)   an aircraft; or  
(iii)  a vehicle,  
carrying imported goods  3[or export goods]  or any other person as may be specified by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in this behalf shall, in the case of a vessel or an 
aircraft, deliver to the proper officer  4[an 1[arrival manifest or import manifest]  by presenting 
electronically prior to the arrival] of the vessel or the aircraft, as the case may be, and in the case of a 
vehicle, an import report within twelve hours after its arrival in the customs station, in 5[such form and 
manner as may be prescribed ] and if the 1[arrival manifest or import manifest ] or the import report or any 
part thereof, is not delivered to the proper officer within the time specified in this sub -section and if the 
proper officer is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for such delay, the person -in-charge or any 
other person referred to in this sub -section, who caused such delay, shall be liable to a penalty not 
exceeding fifty thousand rupees:]  
6[Provided that the  7[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Custo ms] may, in cases 
cases where it is not feasible to deliver 1[arrival manifest or import manifest]  by presenting electronically, 
allow the same to be delivered in any other manner.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 56, for ―im port manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 112, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f 14 -5-2003).  
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 73 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 70, for ―an import manifest prior to the arrival‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 73, for ― the prescribed form‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Ins. by  Act 17 of 2013, s. 70 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
7. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  46 
 (2) The person  delivering the 1[arrival manifest or import manifest]  or import report shall at the foot 
thereof make and subscribe to a declaration as to the truth of its contents.  
(3) If the proper officer is satisfied that the  1[arrival manifest or import manifest ] or import report is in 
any way incorrect or incomplete,  and that there was no fraudulent intention, he may permit it to be 
amended or supplemented.  
2[30A. Passenger and crew arrival manifest and passenger name record information .—(1) The 
person -in-charge of a conveyance that enters India from any place outside India or any other person as 
may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, shall deliver to the 
proper officer — 
(i) the passenger and crew arrival manifest before arrival in the case of an aircraft or a vessel and 
upon  arrival in the case of a vehicle; and  
(ii) the passenger name record information of arriving passengers,  
in such form, containing such particulars, in such manner and within such time, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where the passenger and crew arrival manifes t or the passenger name record information or any 
part thereof is not delivered to the proper officer within the prescribed time and if the proper officer is 
satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for such delay, the person -in-charge or the other per son 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be liable to such penalty, not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, as may 
be prescribed.]  
31.  Imported goods not to be unloaded from vessel until entry inwards granted .— 
(1) The master of a vessel shall not permit the  unloading of any imported goods until an order has been 
given by the proper officer granting entry inwards to such vessel.  
(2)   No order under sub -section ( 1) shall be given until an 1[arrival manifest or import manifest ] has 
been delivered or the proper officer is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not delivering it.  
(3)   Nothing in this section shall apply to the unloading of baggage accompanying a passenger or a 
member of the crew, mail bags, animals, perish able goods and hazardous goods.  
32.   Imported goods not to be unloaded unless mentioned in 1[arrival manifest or import 
manifest ] or import report .—No imported goods required to be mentioned under the regulations in an 
1[arrival manifest or import manifest ] or import report shall, except with the permission of the proper 
officer, be unloaded at any customs station unless they are specified in such manifest or report for being 
unloaded at that customs station.  
33.  Unloading and loading of goods at a pproved places only .—Except with the permission of the 
proper officer, no imported goods shall be unloaded, and no export goods shall be loaded, at any place 
other than a place approved under clause ( a) of section 8 for the unloading or loading of such goo ds. 
34. Goods not to be unloaded or loaded except under supervision of customs officer .—Imported 
goods shall not be unloaded from, and export goods shall not be loaded on, any conveyance except under 
the supervision of the proper officer:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s.  56, for ―import manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 98 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  47 
  Provided  that th e Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, give general permission and the 
proper officer may in any particular case give special permission, for any goods or class of goods to be 
unloaded or loaded without the supervision of the proper officer.  
35.  Restrictions on goods being water -borne. —No imported goods shall be water -borne for being 
landed from any vessel, and no export goods which are not accompanied by a shipping bill, shall be 
water -borne for being shipped, unless the goods are accompani ed by a boat -note in the prescribed form:  
Provided  that the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, give general permission, and the 
proper officer may in any particular case give special permission, for any goods or any class of goods to 
be wa ter-borne without being accompanied by a boat -note.  
36.  Restrictions on unloading and loading of goods on holidays, etc. —No imported goods shall be 
unloaded from, and no export goods shall be loaded on, any conveyance on any Sunday or on any holiday 
obser ved by the Customs Department or on any other day after the working hours, except after giving the 
prescribed notice and on payment of the prescribed fees, if any:  
Provided  that no fees shall be levied for the unloading and loading of baggage accompanying a 
passenger or a member of the crew, and mail bags.  
37. Power to board conveyances. —The proper officer may, at any time, board any conveyance 
carrying imported goods or export goods and may remain on such conveyance for such period as he 
considers necessary.  
38.  Power to require production of documents and ask questions. —For the purposes of carrying 
out the provisions of this Act, the proper officer may require the person -in-charge of any conveyance or 
animal carrying imported goods or export goods  to produce any document and to answer any questions 
and thereupon such person shall produce such documents and answer such questions.  
39. Export goods not to be loaded on vessel until entry -outwards granted. —The master of a 
vessel shall not permit the loa ding of any export goods, other than baggage and mail bags, until an order 
has been given by the proper officer granting entry -outwards to such vessel.  
40. Export goods not to be loaded unless duly passed by proper officer. —The person -in-charge of 
a convey ance shall not permit the loading at a customs station — 
(a) of export goods, other than baggage and mail bags, unless a shipping bill or bill of export or a 
bill of  transhipment, as the case may be, duly passed by the proper officer, has been handed over t o 
him by the exporter;  
(b) of baggage  and mail bags, unless their export has been duly permitted by the proper officer.  
41. Delivery of 1[departure manifest  or export manifest ] or export report. —(1) The person -in-
charge of a conveyance carrying export goods  2[or imported goods]  shall, before departure of the 
conveyance from a customs station, deliver to the proper officer in the case of a vessel or aircraft, an   
3[1[ departure manifest or export manifest ] by presenting electronically], and in the case of a vehicle, an 
export report, in the 4[such form and manner as may be prescribed and in case, the person -in-charge fails 
to deliver the departure manifest or export manifest or the export report or any part  thereof within such 
time, and the proper officer is satisfied that there is no sufficient cause for such delay, such person -in-
charge shall be liable to pay penalty not exceeding fifty thousand rupees] : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 56, for ―export manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Ins. by s. 74, ibid (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 71 (w. e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 74, for ―the prescribed form‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  48 
 1*     *    *    * 
2[Provided  that the 3[Principal C ommissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may, in cases 
where it is not feasible to deliver the 4[departure manifest or export manifest ] by presenting electronically, 
allow the same to be delivered in any other manner.]  
(2)  The person delivering the 4[departure manifest or export manifest ] or export report shall at the 
foot thereof make and subscribe to a declaration as to the truth of its contents.  
(3) If the proper officer is satisfied that the 4[departure manifest or ex port manifest ] or export report is 
in any way incorrect or incomplete and that there was no fraudulent intention, he may permit such 
manifest or report to be amended or supplemented.  
5[41A. Passenger and crew departure manifest and passenger name record in formation. —(1) 
The person -in-charge of a conveyance that departs from India to a place outside India or any other person 
as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, shall deliver to the 
proper officer — 
(i) the passenger and crew departure manifest; and  
(ii) the passenger name record information of departing passengers,  
in such form, containing such particulars, in such manner and within such time, as may be prescribed.  
 (2) Where the passenger and crew departure  manifest or the passenger name record information or 
any part thereof is not delivered to the proper officer within the prescribed time and if the proper officer is 
satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for such delay, the person -in-charge or the o ther person 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be liable to such penalty, not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, as may 
be prescribed.]  
42. No conveyance to leave without written order .—(1) The person -in-charge of a conveyance 
which has brought any importe d goods or has loaded any export goods at a customs station shall not 
cause or permit the conveyance to depart from that customs station until a written order to that effect has 
been given by the proper officer.  
(2)  No such order shall be given until ,—   
(a)  the person -in-charge of the conveyance has answered the questions put to him under                
section 38;  
(b)  the provisions  of section 41 have been complied with;  
(c)  the shipping bills or bills of export, the bills of  transhipment, if any, and such other 
documents as the proper officer may require have been delivered to him;  
                                                           
1. Proviso omitted by Act of 23 of 2004, s. 66 (w.e.f. 10 -9-2004).  
2. Ins. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 71 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for  ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).   
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 56, for ―export manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 99 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  49 
 (d)  all duties  leviable  on any stores consumed in such conveyance, and all charges and penalties 
due in respect of such conveyance or from the person -in-charge thereof have  been paid or the 
payment secured by such guarantee or deposit of such amount as the proper officer may direct;  
(e)  the person -in-charge of the conveyance has satisfied the proper officer that no penalty 
is leviable  on him under section 116 or the payment  of any penalty that may be levied upon him 
under that section has been secured by such guarantee or deposit of such amount as the proper officer 
may direct;  
(f)   in any case where any export goods have been loaded without payment of export duty or in 
contravention of any provision of this Act or any other law for the time being in for ce relating to 
export of goods, —   
(i)   such goods have been unloaded, or  
(ii)   where the  1[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] is 
satisfie d that it is not practicable to unload such goods, the person -in-charge of the conveyance 
has given an undertaking, secured by such guarantee or deposit of such amount as the proper 
officer may direct, for bringing back the goods to India.  
43.  Exemption o f certain classes of conveyances from certain provisions of this Chapter .— 
(1) The provisions of sections 30, 41 and 42 shall not apply to a vehicle which carries no goods other than 
the luggage of its occupants.  
 (2)   The Central Government may, by notif ication in the Official Gazette, exempt the following 
classes of conveyances from all or any of  the provisions of this Chapter — 
(a) conveyances belonging to the Government or any foreign Government;  
(b) vessels and aircraft which temporarily enter India by  reason of any emergency.  
CHAPTER VII  
CLEARANCE OF IMPORTED GOODS AND EXPORT GOODS  
44.  Chapter not to apply to baggage and postal articles. —The provisions of this Chapter shall not 
apply to ( a) baggage, and ( b) goods imported or to be exported by post.   
Clearance of Imported goods  
45.  Restrictions on custody  and removal of imported goods .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in 
any law for the time being in force, all imported goods unloaded in a customs area shall remain in the 
custody of such person as may be approved by the  2[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs] until they are cleared for home consumption or are warehoused or are 
transhipped in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w. e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014,  s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  50 
 (2) The  person having custody of any impo rted goods in a customs area, whether under the provisions 
of sub -section ( 1) or under any l aw for the time being in force, — 
(a) shall  keep a record of such goods and send a copy thereof to the proper officer;  
(b) shall  not permit such goods to be removed from the customs area or otherwise dealt with, 
except under and in accordance with the permission in writing of the proper officer  1[or in such 
manner as may be prescribed] . 
 2[(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,  if any imported 
goods are  pilferred  after unloading thereof in a customs area while in the custody of a person referred to 
in sub -section ( 1), that person shall be liable to pay duty on such goods at the rate prevailing on the date 
of delivery of an 3[arrival manifest or import manifest ] or, as the case may be, an import  report  to the 
proper officer under section 30 for the arrival of the conveyance in which the said goods were carried.]  
46.  Entry of goods on importation. —(1) The importer of any goods, ot her than goods intended for 
transit or  transhipment, shall make entry thereof by presenting   4[electronically]  5[on the customs 
automated system]  to the proper officer a bill of entry for home consumption or  warehousing 6[in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed ]: 
7[Provided  that the  8[Principal Commissioner of  Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may, in cases 
cases where it is not feasible to make entry by  presenting electronically  5[on the customs automated 
system] , allow an entry to be presented in any other manner:  
Provided   further that]   if the importer makes and subscribes to a declaration before the proper officer, 
to the effect that he is unable for want of full information to furnish all the particulars of the goods 
required under this sub -section , the proper officer may, pending the production of such information, 
permit him, previous to the entry thereof ( a) to examine the goods in the presence of an officer of 
customs, or ( b) to deposit the goods in a public warehouse appointed under section 57 without 
warehousing the same.  
(2)  Save  as otherwise permitted by the proper officer, a bill of entry shall include all the goods 
mentioned in the bill of lading or other receipt given by the carrier to the consignor.  
9[(3) The importer shall present the b ill of entry under sub -section ( 1) before the end of the next d ay 
following the day (excluding holidays) on which the aircraft or vessel or vehicle carrying the goods 
arrives at a customs station at which such goods are to be cleared for home consumption o r warehousing:   
Provided that a  bill of entry may be presented 10[at any time not exceeding thirty days prior to ] the 
expected arrival of the aircraft or vessel or vehicle by which the goods have been shipped for importation 
into India:  
 Provided further that where the bill of entry is not presented within the time so specified and the 
proper officer is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for such delay, the importer shall pay such 
charges for late presentation of the bill of entry as may be presc ribed.]  
(4) The importer while presenting a bill of entry shall  11*** make and subscribe to a declaration as to 
the truth of the contents of such bill of entry and shall, in support of such declaration, produce to the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 75 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 58 (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 56, for ―import manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 44 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
5. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 76 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Subs. by s. 76, ibid., for ― in the prescribed form‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
7. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 44, for ―Provided that‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014,  s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
9. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 100 for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
10. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 76, for ―within thirty days of‖  (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
11. The words ―at the foot thereof‖ omitted by Act 8 of 2011, s. 44  (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011)  51 
 proper  officer the invoice, if any, 1[and such other documents relating to the imported goods as may be 
prescribed ]. 
2[(4A) The importer who presents a bill of entry shall ensure the following, namely: — 
(a) the accuracy and completeness of the information given therein;  
(b) the authenticity and  validity of any document supporting it; and  
(c) compliance with the restriction or prohibition, if any, relating to the goods under this Act or 
under any other law for the time being in force. ] 
(5) If the proper officer is satisfied that the interests of revenue are not prejudicially affected and that 
there was no fraudulent intention, he may permit substitution of a bill of entry for home consumption for 
a bill of entry for warehousing or vice versa . 
47. Clearance of goods for home consumption. —3[(1)] Where the proper officer is satisfied that 
any goods entered for home consumption are not prohibited goods and the importer has paid the import 
duty, if any, assessed thereon and any charges payable under this Act in respect of the same, the proper 
officer may make an order permitting clearance of the goods for home consumption:  
4[ 5[Provided  that such order may also be made electronically through the customs automated system 
system on the basis or risk eval uation through appropriate selection criteria:  
Provided further that ] the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, permit 
certain class of importers to make deferred payment of said duty or any charges in such manner as may be 
provided by rules.]  
6[(2) 7[The importer shall pay the import duty — 
(a) on the date of presentation of the bill of entry in the case of self assessment; or  
(b) within one day (excluding holidays) from the date on which the bill of entry is returned to him 
by the proper officer for payment of duty in the case of assessment, reassessment or provisional 
assessment; or  
(c) in the case of deferred payment under the proviso to sub -section ( 1), from such due date as 
may be specified by rules made in this behalf,  
and if he fails to pay the duty within the time so specified, he shall pay interest on the duty not paid or 
short -paid till the date of its payment, at such rate, not less than ten per cent. but not exceeding thirty -six 
per cent. per annum, as may be fixed by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette.]  
8[Provided  that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the class 
or classes of importers who shall pay such duty electronically:  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 76, for ― relating to the imported goods‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Ins. by s. 76 , ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Section 47 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 55 of 1991, s. 3, (w.e.f. 23 -12-1991).  
4. Ins. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 121 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 77, for ―Provided that‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Ins. by Act 55 of 1991, s. 3 (w.e.f.  23-12-1991).  
7. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 101, for certain words, brackets, letters and figure (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  Earlier certain words, 
brackets, letters and figure were substituted by Act 28 of 2016, s. 121 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
8. Subs. by Act 23 of 2 012, s. 124, for ―Provided that‖ (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  52 
 Provided  further that ] where the bill of entry is returned for payment of duty before the 
commencement of the Customs (Amendment) Act, 1991  (55 of 1991)  and the importer has not paid such 
duty before such commencement, the date of return of such bill of entry to him shall be d eemed to be the 
date of such commencement for the purpose of this section:]  
1[ 2[Provided  also that] if the Board is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, it 
may, by order for reasons to be recorded, waive the whole or part of any  interest payable under this 
section.]  
48.  Procedure in case of goods not cleared, warehoused, or transhipped within  3[thirty days] 
after unloading .—If any goods brought into India from a place outside India are not cleared for home 
consumption or warehou sed or transhipped  4[within  5[thirty days]] from the date of the unloading thereof 
thereof at a customs station or within such further time as the proper officer may allow or if the title to 
any imported goods is relinquished, such goods may, after notice to the importer and with the permission 
of the proper officer be sold by the pe rson having the custody thereof : 
 Provided  that — 
(a) animals, perishable goods and hazardous goods, may, with the permission of the proper 
officer, be sold at any time;  
(b) arms and ammunition may be sold at such time and place and in such manner as the Central 
Government may direct.  
Explanation. — In this section, ―arms ‖ and ―ammunition ‖ have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959).  
6[49. Storage of imported goods in warehouse pending clearance or removal. —Where ,––  
(a) in the case of any imported goods, whether dutiable or not, entered for home consumption, the 
Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs is satisfied on the  
application of the importer that the goods cannot be cleared within a reasonable time;  
(b) in the case of any imported dutiable goods, entered for warehousing, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs is satisfied on the app lication of the 
importer that the goods cannot be removed for deposit in a warehouse within a reasonable time,  
the goods may pending clearance or removal, as the case may be, be permitted to be stored in a public 
warehouse for a period not exceeding thirty  days:  
Provided that the provisions of Chapter IX shall not apply to goods permitted to be stored in a public 
warehouse under this section:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 59 (w.e.f. 26-5-1995 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 124, for ― Provided further that‖ (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  
3. Subs. by Act 55 of 1991, s. 4, for ―two months‖ (w.e.f. 21 -12-1991).  
4. Subs. by Act 80 of 1985 s. 4, for ―within two months‖ (w.e.f. 27 -12-1985).  
5. Subs. by Act 55 of 1991, s. 4, for ―forty -five days‖ (w.e.f. 21 -12-1991).  
6. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s . 102, for section 49 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  53 
 Provided further  that the Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs may 
extend the period of stor age for a further period not exceeding thirty days at a time.]  
Clearance of export goods  
50.  Entry of goods for exportation .—(1) The exporter of any goods shall make entry thereof by 
presenting  1[electronically]  2[on the  customs automated system]  to the proper officer in the case of goods 
to be exported in a vessel or aircraft, a shipping bill, and in the case of goods to be exported by land, a bill 
of export 3[in such form and manner as may be prescribed ]. 
1[Provided  that the 4[Principal Commissi oner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may, in cases 
cases where it is not feasible to make entry by presenting electronically  2[on the  customs automated 
system] , allow an entry to be presented in any other manner.]  
(2)  The exporter of any goods, while presenting a shipping bill or bill of export, shall  5*** make and 
subscribe to a declaration as to the truth of its contents.  
2[(3) The exporter who presents a shipping bill or bill of export under this section shall ensure the 
following, namely: — 
(a)  the  accuracy and completeness of the information given therein;  
(b) the authenticity and validity of any document supporting it; and  
(c) compliance with the restriction or prohibition, if any, relating to the goods under this Act or 
under any other law for the time  being in force.]  
 51. Clearance of goods for exportation. —6[(1)] Where the proper officer is satisfied that any goods 
goods entered for export are not prohibited goods and the exporter has paid the duty, if any, assessed 
thereon and any charges payable under this Act in respect of the same, the proper officer may make an 
order permitting clearance and loading of the goods for exportation:  
7[ 8[Provided  that such order may also be made electronically through the customs automated system 
system on the basis of ri sk evaluation through appropriate selection criteria:  
Provided further that]  the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, permit 
certain class of exporters to make deferred payment of said duty or any charges in such manner as may be 
provided by rules.]  
7[(2) Where the exporter fails to pay the export duty, eit her in full or in part, under the proviso to   
sub-section ( 1) by such due date as may be specified by rules, he shall pay interest on said duty not paid 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 45 (w.e.f 8 -4-2011).  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 78 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 78, ibid., for ―in the prescribed form‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
5. The words ―at the foot thereof‖ omitted by Act 8 of 2011, s. 45 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
6. Section 51 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 28 of 2016, s. 122, (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).   
7. Ins. by s. 122, ibid, (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
8. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 79, for ―Provided that‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  54 
 or short -paid till the date of its payment at such rate, not below five per cent and not exceeding thi rty-six 
per cent per annum, as may be fixed by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette.]  
1[CHAPTER VIIA  
PAYMENTS THROUGH ELECTRONIC CASH LEDGER  
51A.  Payment of duty, interest, penalty, etc .—(1) Every deposit made towards duty, interest, 
penalty, fee or any other sum payable by a person under the provisions of this Act or under the Customs 
Tariff Act, 1975  (51 of 1975) or under any other law for the time being in force or the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, using authorise d mode of payment shall, subject to such conditions and 
restrictions, be credited to the electronic cash ledger of such person, to be maintained in such manner, as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) The amount available in the electronic cash ledger may be used for ma king any payment towards 
duty, interest, penalty, fees or any other sum payable under the provisions of this Act or under the Customs 
Tariff Act, 1975  (51 of 1975)  or under any other law for the time being in force or the rules and regulations 
made thereun der in such manner and subject to such conditions and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(3) The balance in the electronic cash ledger, after payment of duty, interest, penalty, fee or any other 
amount payable, may be refunded in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the Board is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification, exempt the deposits made by such class of persons or with 
respect to such categories of goods , as may be specified in the notification, from all or any of t he provisions 
of this section.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
 GOODS IN TRANSIT  
52. Chapter not to apply to baggage, postal articles and stores. —The provisions of this Chapter 
shall not apply to ( a) baggage, ( b) goods imported by post, and ( c) stores.  
2[ 3[53. Transit of certain goods without payment of duty .—Subject to the provisions of section 
11, where any goods imported in a conveyance and mentioned in the 4[arrival manifest or import 
manifest ] or the import report, as the case may be, as for transit in the same conveyance to any place 
outside India or to any customs station, the proper officer may allow the goods and the conveyance to 
transit without payment of duty, subject to such conditions,  as may be prescribed.]  
 54. Transhipment  of certain  goods without payment of duty. —(1) Where  any goods imported 
into a customs station are intended for  transhipment, a bill of  transhipment  shall be presented to the 
proper  officer in 5[such form and manner  as may be prescribed ]: 
6[Provided  that where the goods are being transhipped under an international treaty or bilateral 
agreement between the Government of India and Government of a foreign country, a declaration 
for transhipment  instead of a bill of  transhipment  shall be presented to the  proper officer in 5[such form 
and manner as may be prescribed] .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 80 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1998, s. 101, for section 53 to 55 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1998).  
3. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 123, for section 53 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 56, for ―import manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Subs. by s. 81,  ibid., for ―the prescribed form‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Ins. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 106 (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  55 
 (2) Subject  to the provisions of section 11, where any goods imported into a customs station are 
mentioned in the 1[arrival manifest or import manifest ] or the import report, as the case may  be, as 
for transhipment  to any place outside India, such goods may be allowed to be so transhipped without 
payment of duty.  
(3) Where any goods imported into a customs station are mentioned in the 1[arrival manifest or 
import manifest ] or the import report, as the case  may be, as for transhipment — 
(a) to any major port as defined in the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908), or the customs airport 
at Mumbai, Calcutta, Delhi or Chennai or any other customs port or customs airport which the  Board 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, or  
(b) to any other customs station and the proper officer is satisfied that the goods are  bona 
fide intended for  transhipment  to such customs station,  
the proper officer may allo w the goods to be transhipped, without payment of duty, subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed for the due arrival of such goods at the customs station to  
which  transhipment  is allowed.  
55. Liability of duty on goods transited under section 53 or transhipped under section 54 .—
Where any goods are allowed to be transited under section 53 or transhipped under sub-section ( 3) of 
section 54 to any customs station, they shall, on their arrival at such station, be liable to duty and shall be 
entered in li ke manner as goods are entered on the first importation thereof and the provisions of this Act 
and any rules and regulations shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such goods.]  
56. Transport of certain classes of goods subject to prescribed conditio ns.—Imported goods may 
be transported without payment of duty from one land customs station to another, and any  goods may be 
transported from one part of India to another part through any foreign territory, subject to such conditions 
as may be prescribed f or the due arrival of such goods at the place of destination.  
  
CHAPTER IX  
WAREHOUSING  
 
       2[57. Licensing  of public warehouses. —The Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner 
of Customs may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, licence a public warehouse wherein 
dutiable goods may be deposited .] 
3[58. Licensing of private warehouses. —The Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner 
of Customs may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, licence a private warehouse wherein 
dutiable goods imported by or on behalf of the licensee may be deposited.  
58A.  Licensing of Special warehouses. —(1) The Principal Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, licence a spe cial 
warehouse wherein dutiable goods may be deposited and such warehouse shall be caused to be locked by 
the proper  officer and no person shall enter the warehouse or remove any goods therefrom without the 
permission of the proper officer.  
(2) The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the class of goods which shall be 
deposited in the special warehouse licensed under sub -section ( 1). 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 13 of 2018, s. 56, for ―import manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 124, for section 57 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 125, ibid., for section 58 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  56 
 58B. Cancellation  of licence .—(1) Where a licensee contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or  
the rules or regulations made thereunder or breaches any of the conditions of the licence, the Principal 
Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs may cancel the licence granted under section 57 
or section 58 or section 58A:  
Provided that before any licence is cancelled, the licensee shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
(2) The Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs may, without prejudice to 
any other action that may be taken against the licensee and the go ods under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force, suspend operation of the warehouse during the pendency of an enquiry under  
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Where the operation of a warehouse is suspended under sub -section ( 2), no goods shall be 
deposited in such warehouse during the period of suspension:  
Provided that the provisions of this Chapter shall continue to apply to the goods already deposited in 
the warehouse.  
(4) Where the licence issued under section 57 or section 58 or section 58A is  cancelled, the goods 
warehoused shall, within seven days from the date on which order of such cancellation is served on the 
licensee or within such extended period as the proper officer may allow, be removed from such 
warehouse to another warehouse or be cleared for home consumption or export:  
Provided that the provisions of this Chapter shall continue to apply to the goods already deposited in 
the warehouse till they are removed to another warehouse or cleared for home consumption or for export, 
during su ch period. ] 
1[59.  Warehousing bond .—The importer of any goods in respect of which a bill of entry for 
warehousing has been presented under section 46 and assessed to duty under section 17 or section 18 
shall execute a bond in a sum equal to thrice the amount of the duty assessed on such goods, binding 
himself –– 
(a) to comply with all the provisions of the Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder in 
respect of such goods;  
(b) to pay, on or before the date specified in the notice of demand, all d uties and interest payable 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 61; and  
(c) to pay all penalties and fines incurred for the contravention of the provisions of this Act or the 
rules or regulations, in respect of such goods.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy 
Commissioner of Customs may permit an importer to execute a general bond in such amount as the 
Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs may approve in respect of the 
warehousing  of goods to be imported by him within a specified period.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 126, for section 59 (w.e. f. 14-5-2016).  
 57 
 (3) The importer  shall, in addition to the execution of a bond under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), 
furnish such security as may be prescribed.  
(4) Any bond executed under this section by an importer in respect of any goods shall continue to be 
in force notwithstanding the transfer of the goods to another warehouse.  
(5) Where the whole of the goods or any part thereof are transferred to another person, the transferee 
shall execute a bond in the manner specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) and furnish security as 
specified under sub -section ( 3).] 
59A. [Conditions for warehousing of certain goods.]  Omitted by The Finance Act, 1994  (32 of 1994 ), 
s. 60 (w.e.f. 13-5-1994 ).  
1[60. Permission for removal of goods for deposit in warehouse. —(1) When the provisions of 
section 59 have been complied with in respect of any goods, the proper officer may make an order 
permitting removal of the goods from a customs station for the purpose of deposit in a warehouse.  
2[Provided that such order may also be made electronically through the customs automated system on 
the basis of risk evaluation through appropriate selection criteria.]  
(2) Where an order is made under sub -section (1), the goods shall be deposited in a warehouse in such 
manner as may be prescribed.]  
3[61.  Period for which goods may remain warehoused .—(1) Any warehoused goods may remain 
in the warehouse in which they are deposited or in any warehouse to which they may be removed, –– 
(a)  in the case of capital goods intended for use in any hundred per cent . export oriented 
undertaking, till the in the case of capital goods intended for use in any hundred per cent. export 
oriented undertaking or electronic hardware techno logy park unit or software technology park unit or 
any warehouse wherein manufacture or other operations have been permitted under section 65, till 
their clearance from the warehouse;  
(b) in the case of goods other than capital goods intended for use in an y hundred per cent. export 
oriented undertaking or electronic hardware technology park unit or software technology park unit or any 
warehouse wherein manufacture or other operations have been permitted under section 65, till their 
consumption or clearance from the warehouse; and  
(c) in the case of any other goods, till the expiry of one year from the date on which the proper 
officer has made an order under sub -section ( 1) of section 60:  
Provided that in the case of any goods referred to in this clause, the Principal Commissioner of 
Customs or Commissioner of Customs may, on sufficient cause being shown, extend the period for which 
the goods may remain in the warehouse, by not more than one year at a time:  
Provided further that where such goods are likely to deteriorate, the period referred to in the first 
proviso may be reduced by the Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs to such 
shorter period as he may deem fit.  
(2) Where any warehoused goods specified in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) remain in a warehouse 
beyond a period of ninety days from the date on which the proper officer has made an order under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 60, interest shall be payable at such rate as may be fixed by the Central 
Government under section 47, on the amount of duty payable at the time of clearance of the goods, for the 
period from the expiry of the said ninety days till the date of payment of duty on the warehoused goods:  
Provided that if the Board considers it necessary so to do, in the public int erest, it may, –– 
(a) by order, and under the circumstances of an exceptional nature, to be specified in such order, 
waive the whole or any part of the interest payable under this section in respect of any warehoused 
goods;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 127, for section 60 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
2. The proviso i ns. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 82 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 128, for section 61 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  58 
 (b) by notification  in the Offici al Gazette, specify the class of goods in respect of which no 
interest shall be charged under this section;  
(c) by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the class of goods in respect of which the 
interest shall be chargeable from the date on which the proper officer has made an order under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 60.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of this section, –– 
(i) ―electronic hardware technology park unit ‖ means a unit established under the Electronic 
Hardware Technology Park Scheme notified by the Government of India;  
(ii)  ―hundred per cent. export oriented undertaking ‖ has the same meaning as in clause ( ii) of 
Explanation 2 to sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the  Central Excise Act, 1944  (1 of 1944) ; and  
(iii) ―software technology park unit ‖ means a unit established under the Software Technology 
Park Scheme notified by the Government of India .] 
62.   [Control over warehoused goods. ] Omitted by The Finance Act, 2016  (28 of 2016 ), s. 129 (w.e.f. 
14-5-2016 ). 
63.  [Payment of rent and warehouse charges .] Omitted by s. 129, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-5-2016 ). 
1[64. Owner’s right to deal with warehoused goods. —The owner of any warehoused goods may, 
after warehousing the same, –– 
(a) inspect the goods;  
(b) deal with their containers in such manner as may be necessary to prevent loss or deterioration 
or damage to the goods;  
(c) sort the goods; or  
(d) show the goods for sale. ] 
65.  Manufacture and other operations in relation to goods in a warehouse. —(1) 2[With the 
permission of the Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs and subject to such 
conditions] as may be prescribed, the owner of any warehoused goods may carry on any manufactu ring 
process or other operations in the warehouse in relation to such goods.  
(2) Where in the course of any operations permissible in relation to any warehoused goods under  
sub-section ( 1), there is any waste or refuse, the f ollowing provisions shall apply :— 
(a) if the whole or any part of the goods resulting from such operations are exported, import duty 
shall be remitted on the quantity of the warehoused goods contained in so much of the waste or refuse 
as has arisen from the operations carried on in  relation to the goods exported : 
Provided  that such waste or refuse is either destroyed or duty is paid on such waste or refuse as if 
it had been imported into India in that form;  
(b) if the whole or any part of the goods resulting from such operations are  cleared from the 
warehouse for home consumption, import duty shall be charged on the quantity of the warehoused 
goods contained in so much of the waste or refuse as has arisen from the operations carried on in 
relation to the goods cleared for home consum ption.  
 66.   Power to exempt imported materials used in the manufacture of goods in warehouse. —If 
any imported materials are used in accordance with the provisions of section 65 for the manufacture of 
any goods and the rate of duty  leviable  on the importe d materials exceeds the rate of duty  leviable  on such 
goods, the  Central Government, if satisfied that in the interests of the establishment or development of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 13 0, for section 64 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 131, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  59 
 any domestic  industry it is necessary so to do, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt the 
imported materials from the whole or part of the excess rate of duty.  
67.  Removal of goods from one warehouse to another. —The owner of any warehoused goods 
may, w ith the permission of the proper officer, remove them from one warehouse to another,  1*** subject 
to such conditions as may be prescribed for the due arrival of the warehoused goods at the warehouse to 
which removal is permitted.  
 68.  Clearance of warehoused goods for home consumption. —2[Any warehoused goods may be 
cleared from the warehouse ] for home consumption,  if— 
(a)  a bill of entry for home consumption in respect of such goods has been presented in the 
prescribed form;  
3[(b) the import dut y, interest, fine and penalties payable in respect of such goods have been paid; 
and] 
(c) an order for clearance of such goods for home consumption has been made by the proper 
officer.  
 4[ 5[Provided  that the order referred to in clause ( c) may also be made electronically through the 
customs automated system on the basis of risk evaluation through appropriate selection criteria:  
Provided further that] the owner of any warehoused goods may, at any time before an order for 
clearance of goods for home consumption has been made in respect of such goods, relinquish his title to 
the goods upon payment of 6*** penalties that may be payable in respect of the go ods and upon such 
relinquishment, he shall no t be liable to pay duty thereon: ] 
7[8[Provided  also that] the owner of any such warehoused goods shall not be allowed to relinquish his 
title to such goods regarding which an offence appears to have been committed under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force. ] 
69.   Clearance of warehoused goods f or 9[export] .—(1) Any warehoused goods may be exported 
to a place outside India without payment of import duty if — 
10[(a) a shipping bill or a bill of export or the form as prescribed under section 84 has been 
prese nted in respect of such goods;]  
11[(b)   the export duty,  fine and penalties payable in respect of such goods have been paid; and]  
(c)   an order for clearance of such goods for  9[export]  has been made by the proper officer.  
12[Provided that the order referred to in clause ( c) may also be made  electronically through the 
customs automated system on the basis or risk evaluation through appropriate selection criteria. ] 
 (2)   Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if the Central Government is of opinion 
that warehoused goods of any  specified description are likely to be smuggled back into India, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such goods shall not be exported to any place outside India 
without payment of duty or may be allowed to be so exported subject t o such restrictions and conditions 
as may be specified in the notification.  
70.  Allowance in case of volatile goods. —(1) When any warehoused goods to which this section 
applies are at the time of delivery from a warehouse found to be deficient in quantity on account of 
natural loss, the 13[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs ] may remit 
the du ty on such deficiency.  
                                                           
1. The words ―without payment of duty‖ omitted by Act 55 of 1991, s. 5 (we.f. 23 -12-1991).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 132, for ― The importer of any warehoused goods may clear them‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 132, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
4. Ins. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 114 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 83, for ―Provided that‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. The words  ―rent, interest, other charges and‖ omitted by Act 28 of 2016, s. 132 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
7. Ins. by Act 21 of 2006, s. 59 (w.e.f. 18 -4-2006).  
8. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 83, for ―Provided further that‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
9. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s . 133, for ― exportation‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
10. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 103, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
11. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 133, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
12. The proviso i ns. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 84 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
13. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  60 
 (2) This section  applies to such warehoused goods as the Central Government, having regard to the 
volatility of the goods and the manner of their storage, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify.  
71.  Goods not to be taken out of warehouse except as provided by this Act. —No warehoused 
goods shall be taken out of a warehouse except on clearance for home consumption or 1[export] , or for 
removal to another warehouse, or as otherwise provided by this Act.  
72.  Goods improp erly removed from warehouse, etc. —(1) In any of the fo llowing cases, that is to 
say,— 
(a) where any warehoused goods are removed from a warehouse in contravention of section 71;  
(b) where any warehoused goods have not been removed from a warehouse at the expiration of 
the period during which such goods are permitted under section 61 to remain in a warehouse;  
2*  *  *   *    * 
(d) where any goods in respect of which a bond has been executed under 3[section 59  4*** ] and 
which have not been cleared for home consumption or 5[export or]  are not duly accounted for to the 
satisfaction of the proper officer,  
the proper officer may demand, and the owner of such goods shall forthwith pay, the full amount of duty 
chargeable on account of such goods together with 6[interest, fine and penalties]  payable in respect of 
such goods  
(2)   If any owner fails to pay any amount demanded under sub -section ( 1), the proper officer may, 
without prejudice to any  other  remedy, cause to be detained and sold, after notice to the owner (any 
transfer of the goods notwithstanding) such sufficient portion of his goods, if any, in the warehouse, as 
the said officer may 7[deem fit] . 
73. Cancellation and return of warehousing bond. —When the whole of the goods covered by any 
bond executed under  3[section 59  4***] have been cleared for home consumption or exported or  
8[transferred or]  are otherwise duly accounted for, and when all amounts due on account of such goods 
have been paid, the proper officer shall cancel the bond as discharged in full, and shall on demand deliver 
it, so cancelled, to the person who has executed or is entitled  to receive it.  
9[73A.  Custody and removal of warehoused goods .—(1) All warehoused goods shall remain in the 
custody of the person who has been granted a licence under section 57 or section 58 or section 58A until they 
are cleared for home consumption or are transferred to another warehouse or are exported or removed as 
otherwise provided under this Act.  
(2) The responsibilities of the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) who has custody of the 
warehoused goods shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Wher e any warehoused goods are removed in contravention of section 71, the licensee shall be 
liable to pay duty, interest, fine and penalties without prejudice to any other action that may be taken 
against him under this Act or any other law for the time being  in force. ] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 134, for ― re-exportation‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
2. Clause ( c) omitted by s. 135, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
3. Subs. by Act 55 of 19 91, s. 9, for ―section 59‖ (w.e.f. 23 -12-1991).  
4. The words, figures and letter ―or section 59A‖ omitted by Act 32 of 1994, s. 60 (w.e.f. 13 -5-1994).  
5.  Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 135, for ― exportation‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
6. Subs. by s. 135, ibid.,  for ―all penalties, rent, interest and other charges‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
7. Subs. by s. 135, ibid., for ―select‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
8. Ins. by s. 136, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
9. Ins. by s. 137, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  61 
 CHAPTER X  
DRAWBACK  
74. Drawback allowable on re -export of duty -paid goods .—(1) When any goods capable of being 
easily identified which have been imported into India and upon which  1[any duty h as been paid on 
importation, — 
(i) are entered for export and the proper officer makes an order permitting clearance and loading 
of the goods for exportation under section 51; or  
(ii) are to be exported as baggage and the owner of such baggage, for the purpose of clearing it, 
makes a declaration of its con tents to the proper officer under section 77 (which declaration shall be 
deemed to be an entry for export for the purposes of this section) and such officer makes an order 
permitting clearance of the goods for exportation; or  
(iii) are entered for export b y post under 2[clause ( a) of section 84 ] and the proper officer makes 
an order permitting clearance of the goods for exportation,  
ninety -eight per cent . of such duty shall, except as otherwise hereinafter provid ed, be re -paid as 
drawback, if —] 
(a) the goods are identified to the satisfaction of the  3[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or 
Deputy Commissioner of Customs] as the goods which were imported; and  
(b) the goods are entered for export within two years from the date of payment of duty on the 
impor tation thereof : 
Provided  that in any particular case the aforesaid period of two years may, on sufficient cause 
being shown, be extended by the Board by such further period as it may deem fit.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the rate of drawback in the case of goods 
which have been used after the importation thereof shall be such as the Central Government, having 
regard to the duration of use, depreciation in value and other relevant circumstances, may, by notification 
in the Offi cial Gazette, fix.  
 4[(3) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this 
section and,  in particular, such rules may — 
(a) provide for the manner in which the identity of goods imported in different consignments 
which are ordinarily stored together in bulk, may be established;  
(b) specify the goods which shall be deemed to be not capable of being easily identified; and  
(c) provide for the manner and the time within which a claim for payment of drawback is to be 
filed.] 
(4) For the purposes of t his section — 
(a) goods shall be deemed to have been entered for export on the date with reference to which the 
rate of duty is calculated under section 16;  
(b) in the case of goods assessed to duty provisionally under section  18, the date of payment of 
the provisional duty shall be deemed to be the date of payment of duty.  
75. Drawback on imported materials used in the manufacture of goods which are  
exported .—(1) Where it appears to the Central Government that in respect of goods of any class or 
description  5[manufactured, processed or on which any operation has been carried out in India]  6[, being 
goods which have been entered for export and in respect of which an order permitting the clearance and   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 80 of 1985, s. 6, f or certain words (w.e.f. 27 -12-1985).  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 85, for ― section 82‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 60, for sub -section  (3) (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
5. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for ―manufactured in India‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 11 of 1983, s. 52, for ―and exported to any place outside India,‖ (w.e.f. 13 -5-1983).  62 
 loading  thereof for exportation has been made under section 51 by the proper officer],  1[or being goods 
entered for export by post under 2[clause ( a) of section 84 ] and in respect of which an order permitting 
clearance for exportation has been made by the proper officer], a d rawback should be allowed of duties of 
customs chargeable under this Act on any imported materials of a class or description used in the  
3[manufacture  or processing of such goods or carrying out any operation on such goods], the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that drawback shall be allowed in respect 
of such goods in accordance with, and subject to, the rules made under sub -section ( 2): 
4[Provided  that no drawback shall be allowed under this sub -section in respect of  any of the aforesaid 
goods which the Central Government may, by rules made under sub -section ( 2), specify, if the export 
value of such goods or class of goods is less than the value of the imported materials used in 
the 3[manufacture  or processing of such  goods or carrying out any operation on  such goods] or class of 
goods, or is not more than such percentage of the value of the imported materials used in 
the 3[manufacture  or processing of such goods or carrying out any operation o n such goods] or class of  
goods as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:  
Provided  further that where any drawback has been allowed on any goods under this sub -section and 
the sale proceeds in respect of such goods are not rece ived by or on behalf of the exporter in India within 
the time allowed under the  5[Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)], such drawback 
shall  6[except under such circumstances or such conditions as the Central Government may, by rule, 
specify, ] be deemed never to have been allowed and the Central Government may, by rules made under 
sub-section ( 2), specify the procedure for the recovery or adjustment of the amount of such drawback.]  
7[(1A) Where it appears to the Central Government that the qua ntity of a particular material imported 
into India is more than the total quantity of like material that has been used in the goods  8[manufactured, 
processed or on which any operation has been carried out in India] and exported outside India, then, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that so much of the material as is 
contained in the goods exported shall, for the purpose of sub -section ( 1), be deemed to be imported 
material.]  
 (2)  The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1) and, in part icular, such rules may provide — 
9[(a) for the payment of drawback equal to the amount of duty actually paid on the imported 
materials us ed in the manufacture or processing of the goods or carrying out any operation on the 
goods or as is specified in the rules as the average amount of duty paid on the materials of that class 
or description used in the manufacture or processing of export goo ds or carrying out any operation on 
export goods of that class or description either by manufacturers generally or by persons processing 
or carrying on any operation generally or by any particular manufacturer or particular person carrying 
on any process o r other operation, and interest if any payable thereon;]  
 4[(aa) for specifying the goods in respect of whic h no drawback shall be allowed;  
(ab) for specifying the procedure for recovery or adjustment of the amount of any drawback 
which had been allowed under sub -section ( 1) 10[or interest chargeable thereon];]  
(b) for the production of such certificates, documents and other evidence in support of each claim 
of drawback as may be necessary;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 80 of 1985, s. 7 (w.e.f. 13 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 8 6, for ― section 82‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 61, for ―manufacture of such goods‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
4. Ins. by Act 49 of 1991, s. 120 (w.e.f. 27 -9-1991).  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 2002, s. 125, for ―Forei gn Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973)‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2002).  
6. Ins. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 46 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
7. Ins. by Act 25 of 1978, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1978).  
8. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 61, for ―manufactured in India‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
9. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
10. Ins. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 61 (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  63 
 (c) for requiring  the 1[manufacturer or the person carrying out any process or other operation] to 
give access to every part of his manufactory to any officer of customs specially authorised in this 
behalf by the  2[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] to enable 
such authorised officer to  inspect the processes of  3[manufacture, process or any other operation 
carried out] and to verify by actual check or otherwise the statements made in support of the claim for 
drawback.  
4[(d) for the manner and the time within which the claim for payment o f drawback may be filed;]  
4[(3) The power to make rules conferred by sub -section ( 2) shall include the power to give drawback 
with retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of changes in the rates of duty on inputs 
used in the export goods .] 
5[75A.  Interest on drawback .—(1) Where any drawback payable to a claimant under section 74 or 
section 75 is not paid within a  6[period of  7[one month]] from the date of filing a claim for payment of 
such drawback, there shall be paid to that claimant in addition to the amount of drawback, interest at the 
rate fixed under section 27A from the date after the expiry of the said  6[period of  7[one month]] till the 
date of payment of such drawback:  
8*   *   *   *   * 
9[(2) Where any drawback has been paid to the claimant erroneously or it becomes otherwise 
recoverable under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the claimant shall, within a period of two months 
from the date of demand, pay in addition to the said amount of drawback, interest at the rate fixed 
under  10[section 28AA] and the amount of interest shall be calculated for the period beginning from the 
date of payment of such drawback to the cl aimant till the date of recovery of such drawback.]  
76. Prohibition and regulation of drawback in certain cases. —(1) Notwithstanding                             
anything  hereinbefore contained, no drawback shall be allowed — 
11*   *   *   *  * 
(b)  in respect  of any goods the market -price of which is less than the amount of drawback due 
thereon;  
(c)  where the drawback due in respect of any goods is less than  12[fifty rupees].  
(2)  Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), if the Central Government is of opinion 
that goods of any specified description in respect of which drawback may be claimed under this Chapter 
are likely to be smuggled back into India, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
drawback shall not be al lowed in respect of such goods or may be allowed subject to such restrictions and 
conditions as may be specified in the notification.  
13*****  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 61, for ―manufacturer‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Cus toms‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 61, for ―manufacture‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
4. Ins. by s. 61 , ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
5. Ins. by s. 62, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 8 of 1999, s. 2, for ―period of three months‖ (w.e.f.  8-1-1999).  
7. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 115, for ―two months‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
8. The proviso omitted by s. 115, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
9. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 98, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 11 -5-2007).  
10. Subs. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 125,  for ―section 28AB‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
11. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 11 of 1983, s. 53 (w.e.f. 13 -5-1983).  
12. Subs. by s. 53, ibid., for ―five rupees‖ (w.e.f. 13 -5-1983).  
13. Chapter XA (containing sections 76A to 76N) omitted by Act 22 of 2007, s. 99 (w. e.f. 11 -5-2007). Earlier Chapter XA 
inserted by vide Notification No. 43/2003 -Cus. (N.T.) (w.e.f. 11 -5-2004) dated 22 -7-2003 read with notification No. 62/2003 -
Cus (N.T.), dated 14 -8-2003; No. 84/2003 -Cus. (N.T.), dated 14 -10-2003; No. 105/2003 -Cus. (N.T.) , dated 29 -11-2003 and No. 
116/2003 -Cus. (N.T.), dated 31 -12-2003; No. 25/2004 -Cus. (N.T.), dated 28 -2-2004; No. 46/2004 -Cus. (N.T.), dated 31 -3-2004 
and No. 57/2004 -Cus. (N.T.), dated 30 -4-2004) by s. 126 of the Finance Act, 2002 (20 of 2002).    64 
 76A.  [Notification  of special economic zone. ] Omitted by the Finance Act,  2007 (22 of 2007), s. 99 
(w.e.f.  11-5-2007).  
76B.  [Application of provisions. ] Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76C.  [Establishment and control.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76D.  [Admission of goods.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76E.  [Exemption  from duties of customs.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76F. [Levy of duties of customs.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76G.  [Authorised operations.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76H.  [Goods utilised with a special economic zone.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76-I. [Drawback on goods admitted to a special economic zone.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-
2007 ). 
76J. [Duration of stay.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76K.  [Security.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76L.  [Transfer of ownership.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76M.  [Removal of goods.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
76N.  [Closure of a special economic zone.]  Omitted by  s. 99, ibid. (w.e.f. 11-5-2007 ). 
CHAPTER XI  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS REGARDING BAGGAGE, GOODS IMPORTED OR EXPORTED  
BY 1[POST , COURIER]  AND STORES  
Baggage  
77. Declaration by owner of baggage .—The owner of any baggage shall, for the purpose of clearing 
it, make a declaration of its contents to the proper officer.  
78.  Determination of rate of duty and tariff valuation in respect of baggage .—The rate of duty 
and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to baggage shall be the rate and valuation in force on the date on  
which a declaration is made in respect of such baggage under section 77.  
79. Bona fide  baggage exempted from duty. —(1) The proper officer may, subject to any rules made 
under sub -section ( 2), pass free of duty — 
(a) any article in the baggage of a passenger or a member of the crew in respect of which  the said 
officer is satisfied that it has been in his use for such minimum period as may be specified in the 
rules;  
(b) any article in the baggage of a passenger in respect of which  the said officer is satisfied that it 
is for the use of the passenger or his family or is a bona fide  gift or souvenir; provided that the value 
of each such article and the total value of all such articles does not exceed such limits as may be 
specified in the rules.  
(2)  the Central Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this 
section and, in particular, such rules may specify — 
(a) the minimum period for which any article has been used by a passenger or a member of the 
crew for the purpose of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1); 
(b) the maximum value of any individual article and the maximum total value of all the articles 
which may be passed free of duty under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1); 
(c)   the conditions (to be fulfilled before or after clearance) subject to which any baggage may be 
passed free of duty.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 13 of 2018, s. 87, for ―POST‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).   65 
 (3) Different  rules may be made under sub -section ( 2) for different classes of persons.  
80. Temporary detention of baggage .—Where the baggage of a passenger contains any article 
which is  dutiable or the import of which is prohibited and in respect of which a true declaration has been 
made under section 77, the proper officer may, at the request of the passenger, detain such article for the 
purpose of being returned to him on his leaving I ndia 1[and if for any reason, the passenger is not able to 
collect the article at the time of his leaving India, the article may be returned to him through any other 
passenger  authorised  by him and leaving India or as cargo consigned in his name].  
81.  Regulations in respect of baggage .—The Board may make regulations, — 
(a) providing for the manner of declaring the contents of any baggage;  
(b) providing for the custody, examination, assessment to duty and clearance of baggage;  
(c) providing for the transit or  transhipment  of baggage from one customs station to another or to 
a place outside India.  
Goods imported or exported by post  
82. [Label or declaration accompanying goods to be treated as entry .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 
2017 (7 of 2017), s. 104 ( w.e.f.  31-3-2017) . 
83.  Rate of duty and tariff valuation in respect of goods imported or exported by 2[post or 
courier ].—(1) The rate of duty and tariff value, if any, applicable to any goods imported by 2[post or 
courier ] shall be the rate and valuation in force on the date on which the 3[postal authorities  or the 
authorised courier ] present to the proper officer a list containing the particulars of such goods for the 
purpose of assessing the duty th ereon : 
Provided  that if  such goods are imported by a vessel and the list of the goods containing the 
particulars was presented before the date of the arrival of the vessel, it shall be deemed to have been 
presented on the date of such arrival.  
(2)   The rate of duty and tariff v alue, if any, applicable to any goods exported by 2[post or courier ] 
shall be the rate and valuation in force on the date on which the exporter delivers such goods to the 
3[postal authorities  or the authorised courier ] for exportation.  
84.  Regulations regarding goods imported or to be exported by 4[post or courier ].—The Board 
may make regulations providing for — 
5[(a) the form and manner in which an entry may be made in respect of goods imported or to be 
exported by 4[post or courier ];] 
(b) the examination, assessment to duty, and clearance of goods imported or to be exported by 
4[post or courier ]; 
(c) the transit or  transhipment  of goods imported by 4[post or courier ], from one customs station 
to another or to a place outside India.  
Stores 
85.  Stores may be allowed to be warehoused without assessment to duty .—Where any imported 
goods are entered for warehousing and the importer makes and subscribes to a declaration that the goods 
are to be supplied as stores to vessels or aircrafts without payment of import duty under this Chapter, the 
proper officer may permit the goods to be warehoused without the goods being assessed to duty.  
86. Transit and  transhipment  of stores .—(1) Any stores imported in a vessel or aircraft may, 
without payme nt of duty, remain on board such vessel or aircraft while it is in India.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 63 (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 88, for ―post‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 88, ibid., for ―postal authorities‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 89,  ibid., for ―post‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 105, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  66 
 (2)  Any stores imported in a vessel or aircraft may, with the permission of the proper officer, be 
transferred to any vessel or aircraft as stores for consumption therein as provide d in section 87 or  
section 90.  
87. Imported stores may be consumed on board a foreign -going vessel or aircraft .—Any 
imported stores on board a vessel or aircraft (other than stores to which section 90 applies) may, without 
payment of duty, be consumed the reon as stores during the period such vessel or aircraft is a foreign -
going vessel or aircraft.  
88. Application of section 69 and Chapter X to stores .—The provisions of section 69 and Chapter 
X shall apply to stores (other than those to which section 90 applies) as they apply to other goods, subject 
to the modifications that — 
(a) for the words ―exported to any place outside India ‖ or the word ―exported ‖, wherever they 
occur, the words ―taken on board any foreign -going vessel or aircraft as stores ‖ shall b e substituted;  
(b) in the case of drawback on fuel and lubricating oil taken on board any foreign -going aircraft 
as stores, sub -section ( 1) of section 74 shall have effect as if for the words ―ninety -eight per cent ‖, the 
words ―the whole ‖ were substituted.  
89.  Stores to be free of export duty .—Goods produced or manufactured in India and required as 
stores on any foreign -going vessel or aircraft may be exported free of duty in such quantities as the proper 
officer may determine, having regard to the size of  the vessel or aircraft, the number of passengers and 
crew and the length of the voyage or journey on which the vessel or aircraft is about to depart.  
90. Concessions in respect of imported stores for the Navy .—(1) Imported stores specified in  
sub-section  (3) may without payment of duty be consumed on board a ship of the Indian Navy.  
(2)   The provisions of section 69 and Chapter X sha ll apply to stores specified in sub-section ( 3) as 
they apply to other goods, subject to the modifications that — 
(a) for the words ―exported to any place outside India ‖ or the word ―exported ‖ wherever they 
occur, the words ―taken on board a ship of the Indian Navy ‖ shall be substituted;  
(b) for the words ―ninety -eight per cent .‖ in sub -section ( 1) of section 74, the word s ―the whole ‖ 
shall be substituted.  
(3)   The stores referred to in sub -section s (1) and ( 2) are the following: — 
(a) stores for the use of a ship of the Indian Navy;  
(b) stores supplied free by the Government for the use of the crew of a ship of the Indian  Navy in 
accordance with their conditions of service.  
CHAPTER XII  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO COASTAL GOODS AND VESSELS CARRYING COASTAL GOODS  
91. Chapter not to apply to baggage and stores. —The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to 
baggage and stores.  
92. Entry of coastal goods .—(1) The consignor of any coastal goods shall make an entry thereof by 
presenting to the proper officer a bill of coastal goods in the prescribed form.  
(2)  Every such consignor while presenting a bill of coastal goods shall, at the foot thereof, make and 
subscribe to a declaration as to the truth of the contents of such bill.  
93.  Coastal goods not to be loaded until bill relating thereto is passed, etc. —The master of a 
vessel shall not permit the loading of any coastal goods on the vessel until a bill relating to such goods 
presented under section 92 has been passed by the proper officer and has been delivered to the master by 
the consignor.   67 
 94.  Clearance  of coastal goods at destination. —(1) The master of a vessel carrying any coastal 
goods shall carry on board the vessel all bills relating to such goods delivered to him under section 93 and 
shall, immediately on arrival of the vessel at any customs or coastal port, deliver to the proper officer of 
that port all bills relating t o the goods which are to be unloaded at that port.  
(2) Where any coastal goods are unloaded at any port, the proper officer shall permit clearance 
thereof if he is satisfied that they are entered in a bill of coastal goods delivered to him under  
sub-section (1). 
95.  Master of a coasting vessel to carry an advice book. —(1) The master of every vessel carrying 
coastal goods shall be supplied by the Customs authorities with a book to be called the ―advice book ‖. 
 (2) The proper officer at each port of call by  such vessel shall make such entries in the advice book 
as he deems fit, relating to the goods loaded on the vessel at that port.  
(3) The master of every such vessel shall carry the advice book on board the vessel and shall on 
arrival at each port of call deliver it to the proper officer at that port for his inspection.  
96.  Loading and unloading of coastal goods at customs port or coastal port only. —No coastal 
goods shall be loaded  on, or unloaded from, any vessel at any port other than a customs port or a  coastal 
port appointed under section 7 for the loading or unloading of such goods.  
97. No coasting vessel to leave without written order .—(1) The master of a vessel which has 
brought or loaded any coastal goods at a customs or coastal port shall not cause  or permit the vessel to 
depart from such port until a written order to that effect has been given by the proper officer.  
(2) No s uch order shall be given until — 
(a) the master of the vessel has answered the questions put to him under section 38;  
(b) all charges and penalties due in respect of that vessel or from the master thereof have been 
paid or the payment secured by such guarantee or deposit of such amount as the proper officer may 
direct;  
(c) the master of the vessel has satisfied the proper officer that no penalty is leviable on him 
under section 116 or the payment of any penalty that may be levied  upon him under that section has 
been secured by such guarantee or deposit of such amount as the proper officer may direct;  
(d) the provisions of this Chap ter and any rules and regulations relating to coastal goods and 
vessels carrying coastal goods have been complied with.  
98.  Application of certain provisions of this Act to coastal goods, etc. —(1) Sections 33, 34 and 36 
shall, so far as may be, apply to c oastal goods as they apply to imported goods or export goods.  
(2) Sections 37 and 38 shall, so far as may be, apply to vessels carrying coastal goods as they apply to 
vessels carrying imported goods or export goods.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the 
other provisions of Chapter VI and the provisions of section 45 shall apply to coastal goods or vessels 
carrying coastal goods subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specif ied in the 
notification.  
1[98A.  Power to relax .—If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public 
interest so to do it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt generally, either absolutely or 
subject to such conditions a s may be specified in the notification, coastal goods or vessels carrying coastal 
goods from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 64 (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  68 
 99.  Power  to make rules in respect of coastal goods and coasting vessels .—The Central  
Government may make rules f or— 
(a)  preventing the taking out of India of any coastal goods the export of which is dutiable or 
prohibited under this Act or any other law for the time being in force;  
(b)  preventing, in the case of a vessel carrying coastal goods as well as imported or export goods, 
the substitution of imported or export goods by coastal goods.  
1[CHAPTER XIIA  
AUDIT  
99A. Audit .—The proper officer may carry out the audit of assessment of imported goods or export 
goods or of an auditee under this Act either in his office  or in the premises of the auditee in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of  this section, ―auditee‖ means a person who is subject to an audit 
under this section and includes an importer or exporter or custodian approved under section 45 or licensee 
of a warehouse and any other person concerned directly or indirectly in clearing, forwarding, stocking, 
carrying, selling or purchasing of imported goods or export goods or dutiable goods. ] 
CHAPTER XIII  
SEARCHES, SEIZURE AND ARREST  
100.  Power to search suspected persons entering or leaving India, etc .—(1) If the proper officer 
has reas on to believe that any person to whom this section applies has secreted about his person, any 
goods liable to confiscation or any documents relating thereto, he may search that person.  
(2) This section applies to the following persons, namely: — 
(a) any person who has landed from or is about to board, or is on board any vessel within the 
Indian customs waters;  
(b) any person who has landed from or is about to board, or is on board a foreign -going aircraft;  
(c) any person who has got out of, or is about to  get into, or is in, a vehicle, which has arrived 
from, or is to proceed to any place outside India;  
(d) any person not included in clauses ( a), (b) or ( c) who has entered or is about to leave India;  
(e) any person in a customs area.  
101.  Power to search suspected persons in certain other cases. —(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of section 100, if an officer of customs empowered in this behalf by general or special order of 
the 2[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs], has reas on to believe that any 
person has secreted about his person any goods of the description specified in sub -section ( 2) which are 
liable to confiscation, or documents relating thereto, he may search that person.  
(2)  The goods referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the following: — 
(a)  gold;  
(b)  diamonds;  
(c)  manufactures of gold or diamonds;  
(d)  watches;  
(e)  any other class of goods which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify.  
102. Persons to be searched may require to be taken before gazetted officer of customs or 
magistrate. —(1) When any officer of customs is about to search any person under the provisions of 
section 100 or section 101, the officer of customs shall, if such person so requires, take him without 
unnecess ary delay to the nearest gazetted officer of customs or magistrate.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 90 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2 014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  69 
 (2) If such  requisition is made, the officer of customs may detain the person making it until he can 
bring him before the gazetted officer of customs or the magistrate.  
(3) The gazetted of ficer of customs or the magistrate before whom any such person is brought shall, if 
he sees no reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge the person but otherwise shall direct that 
search be made.  
(4) Before  making a search under the provisions of section 100 or section 101, the officer of customs 
shall call upon two or more persons to attend and witness the search and may issue an order in writing to 
them or any of them so to do; and the search shall be made  in the presence of such persons and a list of all 
things seized in the course of such search shall be prepared by such officer or other person and signed by 
such witness.  
(5) No female shall be searched by any one excepting a female.  
103. Power to screen or X -ray bodies of suspected persons for detecting secreted goods. —(1) 
Where the proper officer has reason to believe that any person referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 100 
has any goods liable to confiscation secreted inside his body, he may detain  such person and produce him 
without unnecessary delay before the nearest magistrate.  
(2) A magistrate before whom any person is brought under sub -section ( 1) shall, if he sees no 
reasonable ground for believing that such person has any such goods secreted  inside his body, forthwith 
discharge such person.  
(3) Where any such magistrate has reasonable ground for believing that such person has any such 
goods secreted inside his body and the magistrate is satisfied that for the purpose of discovering such 
goods  it is necessary to have the body of such person screened or X -rayed, he may make an order to that 
effect.  
(4) Where a magistrate has made any order under sub -section ( 3), in relation to any person, the proper 
officer shall, as soon as practicable, take su ch person before a radiologist possessing qualifications 
recognized by the Central Government for the purpose of this section, and such person shall allow the 
radiologist to screen or X -ray his body.  
(5) A radiologist before whom any person is brought unde r sub -section ( 4) shall, after screening or  
X-raying the body of such person, forward his report, together with any X -ray pictures taken by him, to 
the magistrate without unnecessary delay.  
(6)   Where on receipt of a report from a radiologist under sub -section ( 5) or otherwise, the magistrate 
is satisfied that any person has any goods liable to confiscation secreted inside his body, he may direct 
that suitable action for bringing out such goods be taken on the advice and under the supervision of a 
registe red medical practitioner and such person shall be bound to comply with such direction:  
Provided  that in the case of a female no such action shall be taken except on the advice and under the 
supervision of a female registered medical practitioner.  
(7) Where  any person is brought before a magistrate under this section, such magistrate may for the 
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this section order such person to be kept in such custody and for 
such period as he may direct.  
(8) Nothing in this section sh all apply to any person referred to in sub -section ( 1), who admits that 
goods liable to confiscation are secreted inside his body, and who voluntarily submits himself for suitable 
action being taken for bringing out such goods.  
Explanation .—For the purpose s of this section, the expression ―registered medical practitioner ‖ 
means any person who holds a qualification granted by an authority specified in the Schedule to the 
Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 (7 of 1916), or notified under section 3 of that Act, o r by an authority 
specified in any of the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956).  
104.  Power to arrest .—1[(1) If an officer of customs empowered in this behalf by general or special 
order of the  2[Principal Commissioner of Customs  or Commissioner of Customs] has reason to believe 
that any person in India or within the Indian customs waters has committed an offence punishable under 
section 132 or section 133 or section 135 or section 135A or section 136, he may arrest such person an d 
shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 24, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  70 
 (2) Every  person arrested under sub -section ( 1) shall, without unnecessary delay, be taken to a 
magistrate.  
(3) Where an officer of customs has arrested any person under sub -section ( 1), he shall, for the 
purpose of releasing such person on bail or otherwise, have the same powers and be subject to the same 
provisions as the officer -in-charge of a police -station has and is subject to under the  Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) . 
1[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any 
offence relating to — 
(a) prohibited goods; or  
(b) evasion or attempted evasion of duty exceeding fifty lakh rupees,  
shall be cognizable.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 4), all other offences under the Act shall be  
non-cognizable.   
2[(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) an 
offence punishable under section 135 relating to — 
(a) evasio n or attempted evasion of duty exceeding fifty lakh rupees; or  
(b) prohibited goods notified under section 11 which are a lso notified under sub -clause ( c) of 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 135; or  
(c) import or export of any goods which have not been declared in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act and the market price of which exceeds one crore rupees; or  
(d) fraudulently availing of or attempt to avail of drawback or any exemption from duty provided 
under this Act, if the amount of drawbac k or exemption from duty exceeds fifty lakh rupees,  
shall be non -bailable.  
(7) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 6), all other offences un der this Act shall be bailable.]  
 105.  Power to search premises .—(1) If the  3[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy 
Commissioner of Customs], or in any area adjoining the land frontier or the coast of India an officer of 
customs specially empowered by name in this behalf by the Board, has reason to believe that any goods 
liable to confiscation, or any documents or things which in his opinion will be useful for or relevant to 
any proceeding under this Act, are secreted in any place, he may authorise any officer of customs to 
search or may himself search for such goods, documents or things.  
(2) The provis ions of the  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), relating to searches shall, so 
far as may be, apply to searches under this section subject to the modification that sub -section ( 5) of 
section 165 of the said Code shall have effect as if for the wo rd ―Magistrate ‖, wherever it occurs, the 
words  4[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] were substituted.  
106.  Power to stop and search conveyances. —(1) Where the proper officer has reason to believe 
that any aircraft, vehicle or an imal in India or any vessel in India or within the Indian customs waters has 
been, is being, or is about to be, used in the smuggling of any goods or in the carriage of any goods which 
have been smuggled, he may at any time stop any such vehicle, animal or  vessel or, in the case of an 
aircraft, compel it to land, and — 
(a) rummage and search any part of the aircraft, vehicle or vessel;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 126, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 75, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commi ssioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  71 
 (b) examine  and search any goods in the aircraft, vehicle or vessel or on the animal;  
(c) break open the lock of any door or  package for exercising the powers conferred by clauses ( a) 
and ( b), if the keys are withheld.  
(2)   Where for th e purposes of sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) it becomes necessary to stop any vessel or compel any aircraft to land, it shall be lawful for 
any vessel or  aircraft in the service of the Government while flying her proper flag and any authority 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government to summon such vessel to stop or the aircraft to 
land, by means of an international signal, code or other recogniz ed means, and thereupon, such vessel 
shall forthwith stop or such aircraft shall forthwith land; and if it fails to do so, chase may be given 
thereto by any vessel or aircraft as aforesaid and if after a gun is fired as a signal the vessel fails to 
stop or  the aircraft fails to land, it may be fired upon;  
(b)  it becomes necessary to stop any vehicle or animal, the proper officer may use all lawful 
means for stopping it, and where such means fail, the vehicle or animal may be fired upon.  
1[106A . Power to inspect. —Any proper officer authorised in this behalf by the  2[Principal 
Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or 
not the requirements of this Act have been complied with, at any reasonable time, e nter any place 
intimated under Chapter IVA or Chapter IVB, as the case may be, and inspect the goods kept or stored 
therein and require any person found therein, who is for the time being in charge thereof, to produce to 
him for his inspection the accounts  maintained under the said Chapter IVA or Chapter IVB, as the case 
may be, and to furnish to him such other information as he may reasonably require for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether or not such goods have been illegally imported, exported or are lik ely to be illegally 
exported.]  
107. Power to examine persons. —Any officer of customs empowered in this behalf by general or 
special order of the  2[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may, during the 
course of any enquiry in connec tion wi th the smuggling of any goods, — 
(a) require any person to produce or deliver any document or thing relevant to the enquiry;  
(b) examine any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.  
108. Power to summon persons to give evidence  and produce documents. —3[(1) Any Gazetted 
Officer of customs  4*** shall have power to summon any person whose attendance he considers 
necessary either to give evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in any inquiry which such 
officer is making  under this Act.]  
(2) A summons to produce documents or other things may be for the production of certain specified 
documents or things or for the production of all documents or things of a certain description in the 
possession or under the control of the person summoned.  
(3) All persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either in person or by an authorised agent, as 
such officer may direct; and all persons so summoned shall be bound to state the truth upon any subject 
respecting which they are examined or make statements and produce such documents and other things as 
may be required:  
Provided  that the exemption under section 132 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), shall 
be applicable to any requisition for attendance under this section.  
(4) Every such inquiry as aforesaid shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1969, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3 -1-1969).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 25, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
4. The words ―duly empowered by the Central Government in this behalf,‖ omitted by Act 18 of 2008, s. 69 (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  72 
 1[108A . Obligation  to furnish information .—(1) Any person, being — 
(a) a local authority or other public body or association; or  
(b) any authority of the State Government responsible for the collection of value added tax or 
sales tax or any other tax relating to the goods or services; or  
(c) an income -tax authority appointed under the provisions of the Income tax Act, 1961  (43 of 
1961) ; or 
(d) a Banking company within the meaning of clause ( a) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; or 
(e) a co -operative bank within the meaning of clause ( dd) of section 2 of the Deposit Insurance 
and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act,1961  (45 of 1961) ; or 
(f) a financial institution within the meaning of clause ( c), or a non -banking financial company 
within the meaning of clause ( f), of section 45 -I of the Reserve Bank of In dia Act,1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
or 
(g) a State Electricity Board; or an electricity distribution or transmission licensee under the 
Electricity Act, 2003  (36 of 2003) , or any other entity entrusted, as the case may be, with such 
functions by the Central Governme nt or the State Government; or  
(h) the Registrar or Sub -Registrar appointed under section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 
1908) ; or 
(i) a Registrar within the meaning of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) ; or 
(j) the registering authority empowere d to register motor vehicles under Chapter IV of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988  (59 of 1988) ; or 
(k) the Collector referred to in clause ( c) of section 3 of the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013  (30 of 2013) ; or 
(l) the recognised stock exchange referred to in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956  (42 of 1956) ; or 
(m) a depository referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Deposi tories  
Act, 1996  (22 of 1996) ; or 
(n) the Post Master General  within the meaning of clause ( j) of section 2 of the Indian Post Office 
Act, 1898  (6 of 1898) ; or 
(o) the Director General of Foreign Trade within the meaning of clause ( d) of section 2 of the 
Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act,1992  (22 of 1992) ; or 
(p) the General Manager of a Zonal Railway within the meaning of clause ( 18) of section 2 of the 
Railways Act,1989  (24 of 1989) ; or 
(q) an officer of the Reserve Bank of India constituted  under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) , 
who is responsible for maintaining record of registration or statement of accounts or holding any other 
information under any of the Acts specified above or under any other law for the ti me being in force, 
which is considered relevant for the purposes of this Act, shall furnish such information to the proper 
officer in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
(2) Where the proper officer considers that the information  furnished under sub -section ( 1) is 
defective, he may intimate the defect to the person who has furnished such information and give him an 
opportunity of rectifying the defect within a period of seven days from the date of such intimation or 
within such fu rther period which, on an application made in this behalf, the proper officer may allow and 
if the defect is not rectified within the said period of seven days or, further period, as the case may be, so 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2017, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4 -5-2017).  73 
 allowed,  then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, such information 
shall be deemed as not furnished and the provisions of this Act shall apply.  
(3) Where a person who is required to furnish information has not furnished the same within the time 
specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the proper officer may serve upon him a notice requiring 
him to furnish such information within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of service of the 
notice and such person shall furnish such information.  
108B.  Penalty for  failure to furnish information return. —Where the person who is required to 
furnish information under section 108A fails to do so within the period specified in the notice issued 
under sub -section ( 3) thereof, the proper officer may direct such person to p ay, by way of penalty, a sum 
of one hundred rupees for each day of the period during which the failure to furnish such information 
continue.]  
109.  Power to require production of order permitting clearance of goods imported by land. —
Any officer of customs appointed for any area adjoining the land frontier of India and empowered in this 
behalf by general or special order of the Board, may require any person in possession of any goods which 
such officer has reason to believe to have been imported into India b y land, to produce the order made 
under section 47 permitting clearance of the goods:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall apply to any imported goods passing from a land frontier to 
a land customs station by a route appointed under clause ( c) of se ction 7.  
1[109A. Power to undertake controlled delivery .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
the proper officer or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf , may undertake controlled delivery 
of any consignment of such goods and in such manner as may be prescribed, to — 
(a) any destination in India; or  
(b) a foreign country, in consultation with the competent authority of such country to which such 
consignment is destined.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section ―controlled deli very‖ means the procedure of allowing 
consignment of such goods to pass out of, or into, the territory of India with the knowledge and under the 
supervision of proper officer for identifying the persons involved in the commission of an offence or 
contraven tion under this Act .] 
110.  Seizure of goods, documents and things .—(1) If the proper officer has reason to believe that 
any goods are liable to confiscation under this Act, he may seize such goods:  
Provided  that where it is not practicable to seize any such goods, the proper officer may serve on the 
owner of the goods an order that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with the goods except 
with the previous permission of such officer.  
2[(1A) The Central Government may, having regard to the p erishable or hazardous nature of any 
goods, depreciation in the value of the goods with the passage of time, constraints of storage space for the 
goods or any other relevant considerations, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the goods or 
class of goods which shall, as soon as may be after its seizure under sub -section ( 1), be disposed of by the 
proper officer in such manner as the Central Government may, from time to time, determine after 
following the p rocedure hereinafter specified.  
(1B) Whe re any goods, being goods specified under sub -section ( 1A), have been seized by a proper 
officer under sub -section ( 1), he shall prepare an inventory of such goods containing such details relating 
to their description, quality, quantity, mark, numbers, country of origin and other particulars as the proper 
officer may consider relevant to the identity of the goods in any proceedings under this Act and shall 
make an application to a  Magistrate for the purpose of — 
(a) certifying the correctness of the inven tory so prepared; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 91 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 80 of 1985, s. 8 (w .e.f. 27 -12-1985).  74 
 (b) taking,  in the presence of the Magistrate, photographs of such goods, and certifying such 
photographs as true; or  
(c) allowing to draw representative samples of such goods, in the presence of the Magistrate, and 
certifying the corr ectness o f any list of samples so drawn.  
(1C) Where an application is made under sub -section ( 1B), the Magistrate shall, as soon as may be, 
allow the application.]  
(2) Where any goods are seized under sub -section ( 1) and no notice in respect thereof is given under 
clause ( a) of section 124 within six months of the seizure of the goods, the goods shall be returned to the 
person from whose possession they were seized:  
1[Provided that the Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs may, for  
reasons to be recorded in writing, extend such period to a further period not exceeding six months and 
inform the person from whom such goods were seized before the expiry of the period so specified:  
Provided further that where any order for provisional r elease of the seized goods has been passed 
under section 110A, the specified period of six months shall not apply. ] 
(3) The proper officer may seize any documents or things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or 
relevant to, any proceeding under thi s Act.  
(4) The person from whose custody any documents are seized under sub -section ( 3) shall be entitled 
to make copies thereof or take extracts therefrom in the presence of an officer of customs.  
2[110A.  Provisional release of goods, documents and things  seized pending adjudication. —Any 
goods, documents or things seized under section 110, may, pending the order of the  3[adjudicating   
authority], be released to the owner on taking a bond from him in the proper form with such security and 
conditions as the  4[adjudicating   authority] may require.]  
CHAPTER XIV  
CONFISCATION OF GOODS AND CONVEYANCES AND IMPOSITION OF PENALTIES  
111.  Confiscation of improperly imported goods, etc. —The following goods brought from a place 
outside India sh all be liable to confiscat ion:— 
(a) any goods imported by sea or air which are unloaded or attempted to be unloaded at any place 
other than a customs port or customs airport appointed under clause ( a) of section 7 for the unloading 
of such goods;  
(b) any goods imported by land or inland water through any route other than a route specified in a 
notification issued under clause ( c) of section 7 for the import of such goods;  
(c) any dutiable or prohibited goods brought into any bay, gulf, creek or tidal river for the purpose 
of being landed at a place other than a customs port;  
(d) any goods which are imported or attempted to be imported or are brought within the Indian 
customs waters for the purpose of being imported, contrary to any prohibition imposed by or under 
this Act or any oth er law for the time being in force;  
(e) any dutiable or prohibited goods found concealed in any manner in any conveyance;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 92, for the proviso (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 26 (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 47, for ―adjudicating officer‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
4. Subs. by s. 47, ibid., for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  75 
 (f) any  dutiable or prohibited goods required to be mentioned under the regulations in an 1[arrival 
manifest or import manifest ] or import report which are not so mentioned;  
(g) any dutiable or prohibited goods which are unloaded from a conveyance in contravention of 
the provisions of section 32, other than goods inadvertently unloaded but included in the record kept 
under sub -section (2) of section 45;  
(h) any dutiable or prohibited goods unloaded or attempted to be unloaded in contravention of the 
provisions of section 33 or section 34;  
(i) any dutiable or prohibited goods found concealed in any manner in any package either before  
or after the unloading thereof;  
(j) any dutiable or prohibited goods removed or attempted to be removed from a customs area or 
a warehouse without the permission of the proper officer or contrary to the terms of such permission;  
(k) any dutiable or prohib ited goods imported by land in respect of which the order permitting 
clearance of the goods required to be produced under section 109 is not produced or which do not 
correspond in any material particular with the specification contained therein;  
(l) any du tiable  or prohibited goods which are not included or are in excess of those included in 
the entry made under this Act, or in the case of baggage in the declaration made under section 77;  
(m) 2[any goods which do not correspond in respect of value or in any  other particular] with the 
entry made under this Act or in the case of baggage with the declaration made under section 77  3[in 
respect thereof, or in the case of goods under transhipment, with the declaration 
for transhipment  referred to in the proviso to  sub-section ( 1) of section 54];  
(n) any dutiable or prohibited goods  transited  with or without  transhipment  or attempted to be 
so transited  in contravention of the provisions of Chapter VIII;  
(o) any goods exempted, subject to any condition, from duty or any prohibition in respect of the 
import thereof under this Act or any other law for the time being in force, in respect of which the 
condition is not observed unless the non -observance of the condition was sanctioned by the proper 
officer;  
4[(p) any notif ied goods in relation to which any provisions of Chapter IVA or of any rule made 
under this Act for carrying out the purposes of that Chapter have been contravened.]  
112. Penalty for improper importation of goods, etc .—Any person, — 
(a) who, in relation to any goods, does or omits to do any act which act or omission would render 
such goods liable to confiscation under section 111, or abets the doing or omission of such an act, or  
(b) who acquires possession of or is in any way concerned in carrying, removing , 
depositing,  harbouring, keeping, concealing, selling or purchasing, or in any other manner dealing 
with any goods which he knows or has reason to believe are liable to confiscation under section 111,  
shall be liable, — 
(i) in the case of goods in respect of which any prohibition is in force under this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force, to a penalty  5[not exceeding the value of the goods or five thousand 
rupees], whichever is the greater;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 56, for ― import manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1973, s. 2, for ―any dutiable or prohibited goods which do not correspond in any material particular‖  
(w.e.f. 1-9-1973).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 108, for ―in respect thereof,‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
4. Ins. by Act 12 of 1969, s. 4 (w.e.f. 3 -1-1969).  
5. Subs. by Act 14 of 2001, s. 107, for ―not exceeding five times the value of the goods or one thousand rupees‖   
(w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  76 
 1[(ii) in the case of dutiable goods, other than prohibited goods, subject to the provisions of 
section 114A, to a penalty not exceeding ten per cent. of the duty sought to be evaded or five 
thousand rupees , whichever is higher : 
Provided  that where such duty as det ermined under sub -section ( 8) of section 28 and the interest 
payable thereon under section 28AA is paid within thirty days from the date of communication of the 
order of the proper officer determining such duty, the amount of penalty liable to be paid by s uch 
person under this section shall be twenty -five per cent. of the penalty so determined;]  
2[(iii) in the case of goods in respect of which the value stated in the entry made under this Act or 
in the case of baggage, in the declaration made under section 77 (in either case hereafter in this 
section referred to as the declared value) is higher than the value thereof, to a penalty  3[not exceeding 
the difference between the declared value and the value thereof or five thousand rupees], whichever is 
the greate r; 
(iv) in the  case of goods falling both under clauses ( i) and ( iii), to a penalty  4[not exceeding the 
value of the goods or the difference between the declared value and the value thereof or five thousand 
rupees], whichever is the highest;  
(v) in the case of goods falling both under clauses ( ii) and ( iii), to a penalty  5[not exceeding the 
duty sought to be evaded on such goods or the difference between the declared value and the value 
thereof or five thousand rupees], whichever is the highest.]  
113. Co nfiscation of goods attempted to be improperly exported, etc. —The following export 
goods s hall be liable to confiscation: — 
(a) any goods attempted to be exported by sea or air from any place other than a customs port or a 
customs airport appointed for the loading of such goods;  
(b) any goods attempted to be exported by land or inland water through any route other than a 
route specified in a notification issued under clause ( c) of section 7 for the export of such goods;  
(c) any 6*** goods brought near the land frontier or the coast of India or near any bay, gulf, creek 
creek or tidal river for the purpose of being exported from a place other than a land customs station or 
a customs port appointed for the loading of such goods;  
(d) any goods attempted to be export ed or brought within the limits of any customs area for the 
purpose of being exported, contrary to any prohibition imposed by or under this Act or any other law 
for the time being in force;  
(e) any 6*** goods found concealed in a package which is brought w ithin the limits of a customs 
area for the purpose of exportation;  
(f) any 6*** goods which are loaded or attempted to be loaded in contravention of the provisions 
of section 33 or section 34;  
(g) any 6*** goods loaded or attempted to be loaded on any conv eyance, or water -borne, or 
attempted to be water -borne for being loaded on any vessel, the eventual destination of which is a 
place outside India, without the permission of the proper officer;  
(h) any 6*** goods which are not included or are in excess of t hose included in the entry made 
under this Act, or in the case of baggage in the declaration made under section 77;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 83, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
3. Subs. by Act 14 of 2001, s. 107, for ―not exceeding five  times the difference between the declared value and the value thereof 
or one thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  
4. Subs. by s. 107,  ibid., for ―not exceeding five times the value of the goods or five times the difference between the declared 
value and the value thereof or one thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f.  11-5-2001).  
5. Subs. by s. 107, ibid., for ―not exceeding five times the duty sought to be evaded on such goods or five times the difference 
between the declared value and the value thereof or one thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  
6. The words ―dutiabl e or prohibited‖ omitted by Act 32 of 2003, s. 116 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  77 
 1[(i) any  goods entered for exportation which do not correspond in respect of value or in any 
material particular with the  entry made under this Act or in the case of baggage with the declaration 
made under section 77;]  
2[(ii) any goods entered for exportation under claim for drawback which do not correspond in any 
material particular with any information furnished by the exporter or manufactu rer under this Act in 
relation to the fixation of rate of drawback under section 75;]  
(j) any goods on which import duty has not been paid and which are entered for exportation under 
a claim for drawback under section 74;  
(k) any goods cleared for exportat ion 3*** which are not loaded for exportation on account of any 
wilful act, negligence or default of the exporter, his agent or employee, or which after having been 
loaded for exportation are unloaded without the permission of the proper officer;  
4[(l) any  specified goods in relation to which any provisions of Chapter IVB or of any rule made 
under this Act for carrying out the purposes of that Chapter have been contravened.]  
114. Penalty for attempt to export goods improperly, etc .—Any person who, in relation to any 
goods, does or omits to do any act which act or omission would render such goods liable to confiscation 
under section 113, or abets the doing or omission of  such an act, shall be liable, — 
(i) in the case of goods in respect of which any pro hibition is in force under this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force, to a penalty  5[not exceeding three times the value of the goods as 
declared by the exporter or the valu e as determined under this Act] , whichever is the greater;  
6[(ii) in the case of dutiable goods, other than prohibited goods, subject to the provisions of  
section 114A, to a penalty not exceeding ten per cent. of the duty sought to be evaded or five 
thousand rupees, whichever is higher:  
Provided  that where such duty as determined under sub -section ( 8) of section 28 and the interest 
payable thereon under section 28AA is paid within thirty days from the date of communication of the 
order of the proper officer determining such duty, the amount of penalty liable to be paid b y such 
person under this section shall be twenty -five per cent . of the penalty so determined;]  
7[(iii) in the case of any other goods, to a penalty not exceeding the value of the goods, as 
declared by the exporter or the value as determined under this Act,  whichever is the greater.]  
8[114A.   Penalty for short -levy or non -levy of duty in certain cases .—Where the duty has not been 
been levied or has been short -levied or the interest has  not been charged or paid or has been part paid or 
the duty or interest has bee n erroneously refunded by reason  of collusion or any  wilful  mis-statement or 
suppression of facts, the person who is liable to pay the duty or interest, as the case may be, as determined 
under  9[sub-section  (8) of section 28] shall , also be liable to pay a penalty equal to the duty or interest so 
determined:]  
10[Provided  that where such duty or interest, as the case may be, as determined under  9[sub-section  (8) 
of section 28], and the interest payable thereon under section  11[28AA], is  paid within thirty days from the 
date of the communication of the order of the proper officer determining such duty, the amount of penalty 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 32 of 2003, s. 116, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 49 of 1991, s. 120 (w.e.f. 27 -9-1991).  
3. The words ―under a claim for drawback‖ omitted by Act 32 of 2003, s. 116 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
4. Ins. by Act 12 of 1969, s. 5 (w.e.f. 3 -1-1969).  
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 117, for ―not exceeding the value of the goods or five thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 84, for clause (ii) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
7. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 117, for clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
8. Ins. by Act 33 of 1996, s. 64 (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
9. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 48, for ―sub -section ( 2) of section 28‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
10. Subs. by Act  10 of 2000, s. 85, for the first and second provisos (w.e.f. 12 -5-2000).  
11. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 48, for ―28AB‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  78 
 liable  to be paid by such person under this section shall be twenty -five per cent . of the duty or interest, as  
the c ase may be, so determined:  
Provided  further that the benefit of reduced penalty under the first proviso shall be available subject 
to the condition that the amount of penalty so determined has also been paid within the period of thirty 
days referred to in that proviso : 
Provided  also that where the duty or interest determined to be payable is reduced or increased by the 
Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, the court, then, for the purposes 
of this section, the duty or intere st as reduced or increased, as the case may be, shall be taken into 
account:  
Provided  also that in a case where the duty or interest determined to be payable is increased by the 
Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, the court, then, the benefit of 
reduced penalty under the first proviso shall be available if the amount of the duty or the interest so 
increased, along with the interest payable thereon under section  1[28AA], and twenty -five per  cent. of the 
consequential  increase in penalty have also been paid within thirty days of the communication of the 
order by which such increase in th e duty or interest takes effect : 
Provided  also that where any penalty has been levied under this section, no penalty shall be levied 
under  section 112 or section 114. ] 
Explanation .—For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared that — 
(i) the provisions of this section shall also apply to cases in which the order determining the duty 
or interest under 2[sub-section ( 8) of section 28 ] relates to no tices issued prior to the date on which 
the Finance Act, 2000  (10 of 2000)  receives the assent of the President;  
(ii) any amount paid to the credit of the Central Government prior to the date of communication 
of the order referred to in the f irst proviso or the fourth proviso shall be adjusted against the total 
amount due from such person.]  
3[114AA. Penalty for use of false and incorrect material .—If a person knowingly or intentionally 
makes, signs or uses, or causes to be made, signed or used , any declaration, statement or document which 
is false or incorrect in any material particular, in the transaction of any business for the purposes of this 
Act, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five times the value of goods.]  
115.  Confiscation of conveyances .—(1) The following conveyances shall be liable to   
confiscation: — 
(a) any vessel which is or has been within the Indian customs waters, any aircraft which is or has 
been in India, or any vehicle which is or has been in a customs area, while constructed, adapted, 
altered or fitted in any manner for the purpose of concealing goods;  
(b) any conveyance from which the whole or any part of the goods is thrown overboard, staved or 
destroyed so as to prevent seizure by an officer of customs;  
(c) any conveyance which having been required to stop or land under section 106 fails to do so, 
except for good and sufficient cause;  
(d) any conveyance from which any warehoused goods cleared for exportation, or any other 
goods cleared for exportation under a cla im for drawback, are unloaded, without the permission of the 
proper officer;  
(e) any conveyance carrying imported goods which has entered India and is afterwards found 
with the whole or substantial portion of such goods missing, unless the master of the ve ssel or aircraft 
is able to account for the loss of, or deficiency in, the goods.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 48, for ―28AB‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
2. Subs. by s. 48,  ibid.,  for ―sub -section ( 2) of section 28‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 27 (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  79 
 (2)  Any conveyance or animal used as a means of transport in the smuggling of any goods or in the 
carriage of any smuggled goods shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the conveyance or 
animal proves that it was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if 
any, and the person in charge of the conveyance or animal  1***: 
Provided  that where any such conveyance is used for the carriage of goods or passengers for hire, the 
owner of any conveyance shall be given an option to pay in lieu of the confiscation of the conveyance a 
fine not exceeding the market price of the goods which are sought to be smuggled or the smuggled goods, 
as the case may be.  
Explanation .—In this section, ―market price ‖ means market price at the date when the goods are 
seized.  
116.  Penalty  for not accounting for goods .—If any goods loaded in a conveyance for importation 
into India, or any goods transhipped under the provisions of this Act or coastal goods carried in a 
conveyance, are not unloaded at their place of destination in India, or if the quantity unloaded is short of 
the quantity to be unloaded at that destination, and if the failure to unload or the  deficiency is not 
accounted for to the satisfaction of the  2[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of 
Customs], the person -in-charge of t he conveyance shall be liable, — 
(a) in the case of goods loaded in a conveyance for importation int o India or goods transhipped 
under the provisions of this Act, to a penalty not exceeding twice the amount of duty that would have 
been chargeable on the goods not unloaded or the deficient goods, as the case may be, had such goods 
been imported;  
(b) in the case of coastal goods, to a penalty not exceeding twice the amount of export duty that 
would have been chargeable on the goods not unloaded or the deficient goods, as the case may be, 
had such goods been exported.  
117. Penalties for contravention, etc., not expressly mentioned .—Any person who contravenes 
any provision of this Act or abets any such contravention or who fails to comply with any provision of 
this Act with which it was his duty to comply, where no express penalty is elsewhere provided for suc h 
contravention or failure, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding  3[one lakh rupees].  
118. Confiscation of packages and their contents .—(a) Where  any goods imported in a package are 
liable to confiscation, the package and any other goods imported in t hat package shall also be liable to 
confiscation.  
(b) Where any goods are brought in a package within the limits of a customs area for the purpose of 
exportation and are liable to confiscation, the package and any other goods contained therein shall also b e 
liable to confiscation.  
119. Confiscation of goods used for concealing smuggled goods .—Any goods used for concealing 
smuggled goods shall also be liable to confiscation.  
Explanation. —In this section, ―goods ‖ does not include a conveyance used as a means of transport.  
120. Confiscation of smuggled goods notwithstanding any change in form, etc .—(1)   Smuggled 
goods may be confiscated notwithstanding any change in their form.  
(2) Where smuggled goods are mixed w ith other goods in such manner that the smuggled goods 
cannot be separated from such other goods, the whole of the goods shall be liable to  confiscation : 
Provided  that where the owner of such goods proves that he had no knowledge or reason to believe 
that they included any smuggled goods, only such part of the goods the value of which is equal to the 
value of the smuggled goods shall be liable to confiscation.  
                                                           
1. The words ―and that each of them had taken all such precautions against such use as are for the time being specified in the  
rules‖ omitted by Act 26 of 1988, s. 79 (w.e .f. 13 -5-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 2008, s. 70, for ―ten thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  80 
 121.  Confiscation of sale -proceeds of smuggled goods .—Where any smuggled goods are sold by a 
person having knowledge or reason to believe that the goods are smuggled goods, the sale -proceeds 
thereof shall be liable to confiscation.  
122.  Adjudication of confiscations and penalties .—In every case under this Chapter in which 
anything is liable to confiscation or any person is liable to a penalty, such confiscati on or penalty may be 
adjudged, — 
(a) without limit, by a  1[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] or 
a 2[Joint Commissioner of Customs];  
3[(b) up to such limit, by such  officers, as the Board may, by notification, specify;]  
4[122A.   Adjudication Procedure .—(1) The adjudicating authority shall, in any proceeding under 
this Chapter or any other provision of this Act, give an opportunity of being heard to a party in a 
proceeding, if the party so desires.  
(2) The adjudicating authority may, if sufficient cause is shown at any stage of proceeding referred to 
in sub -section ( 1), grant time, from time to time, to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing for 
reason s to be recorded in  writing:  
Provided  that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during the 
proceeding.]  
123. Burden of proof in certain cases .—5[(1) Where  any goods to which this section applies are 
seized under this Act in  the reasonable belief that they are smuggled goods, the burden of proving that 
they a re not smuggled goods shall be — 
(a) in a case where such seizure is made from the posses sion of any person, — 
(i) on the person from whose possession the goods were seized; and  
(ii) if any person, other than the person from whose possession the goods were seized, claims 
to be the owner thereof, also on such other person;  
(b) in any other case, on the person, if any, who claims to be the owner of the goods so seized.]  
(2) This section shall apply to gold,  6[and manufactures thereof], watches, and any other class of 
goods which the Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette specify.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs ‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Deputy Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 93 , for clauses ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018 ).  
4. Ins. by Act 23 of 2004, s. 67 (w.e.f. 10 -9-2004).  
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1973, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
6. Subs. by Act 40 of 1989, s. 2, for ―, diamonds, manufactures of gold or diamonds‖ (w.e.f. 26 -10-1989).  81 
 124. Issue of show cause notice before confiscation of goods, etc .—No order confiscating any 
goods or imposing any penalty on any person shall be made under this Chapter unless the own er of the 
goods or such person — 
(a) is given a notice in  1[writing with the prior approval of the officer of Customs not below the 
rank of  2[an Assistant Commissioner of Customs], informing] him of the grounds on which it is 
proposed to confiscate the goods or to impose a penalty;  
(b) is given an opportunity of making a representation in writing within such reasonable time as 
may be specified  in the notice against the grounds of confiscation or imposition of penalty mentioned 
therein; and  
(c) is given a reasonable opportunity of being hea rd in the matter : 
Provided  that the notice referred to in clause ( a) and the representation referred to in clause ( b) 
may, at the request of the person concerned be oral.  
3[Provided further that notwithstanding issue of notice under this section, the proper officer may 
issue a supplementary notice under such circumstances and in such manner as may be prescribed. ] 
125. Option  to pay fine in lieu of confiscation .—(1) Whenever confiscation of any goods 
is authorised  by this Act, the officer adjudging it may, in the case of any goods, the importation or 
exportation whereof is prohibited under this Act or u nder any other law for the time being in force, and 
shall, in the case of any other goods, give to the owner of the goods  4[or, where such owner is not known, 
the person from whose possession or custody such goods have been seized,] an option to pay in lie u of 
confiscation such fine as the said officer thinks fit:  
5[Provided that where the proceedings are deemed to be concluded under the proviso to  
sub-section ( 2) of section 28 or under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 6) of that section in respect of the goods 
which are not prohibited or restricted, the provisions of this section shall not apply:  
Provided further that ], without prejudice to the provisions of the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 
115, such fine shall not exceed the market price of the goods c onfiscated, less in the case of imported 
goods the duty chargeable thereon.  
6[(2)  Where any fine in lieu of confiscation of goods is imposed under sub -section ( 1), the owner of 
such goods or the person referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall, in addition, b e liable to any duty and charges 
payable in respect of such goods.]  
7[(3) Where the fine imposed under sub -section ( 1) is not paid within a  period of one hundred and 
twenty days from the date of option given thereunder, such option shall become void, unless an appeal 
against such order is pending.  
Explanation .—For removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that in cases where an order under  
sub-section ( 1) has been passed before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2018 receives the assent of the 
Preside nt and no appeal is pending against such order as on that date, the option under said sub -section 
may be exercised within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date on which such assent is 
received. ] 
126. On confiscation, property to vest in Cen tral Government .—(1) When  any goods are 
confiscated under this Act, such goods shall thereupon vest in the Central Government.  
(2) The officer adjudging confiscation shall take and hold possession of the confiscated goods.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 28, for ―writing informing‖ (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
2. Subs . by Act 8 of 2011, s. 49, for ―a Deputy Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
3. The proviso i ns. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 94 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
4. Ins. by Act 80 of 1985, s. 9 (w.e.f. 27 -12-1985).  
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 95, for ―Provided that ‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
6. Subs. by Act 80 of 1985, s. 9, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 27 -12-1985).  
7. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 95 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  82 
 127. Award of confiscation or penalty by customs officers not to interfere with other 
punishments .—The award of any confiscation or penalty under this Act by an officer of customs shall 
not prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under th e 
provisions of Chapter XVI of this Act or under any other law.  
1[CHAPTER XIVA  
SETTLEMENT OF CASES  
127A.  Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―Bench ‖ means a Bench of the Settlement Commissioner;  
2[(b) ―case‖  means any proceeding under this Act or any other Act for the levy, assessment and 
collection of customs duty, pending before an adjudicating authority on the date on which an 
application under sub -section ( 1) of section 127B is made:  
Provided  that when an y proceeding is referred back  3*** by any court, Appellate Tribunal or any 
other authority, to the adjudicating authority for a fresh adjudication or decision, as the case may be, 
then such proceeding shall not be deemed to be a proceeding pending within t he meaning of this 
clause;]  
(c) ―Chairman‖ means the Chairman of the Settlement Commission;  
(d) ―Commissioner (Investigation)‖ means an officer of the customs or a Central Excise Officer 
appointed as such Commissioner to conduct inquiry or investigation fo r the purposes of this Chap ter; 
(e) ―Membe r‖ means a Member of the Settlement Commission and includes the Chairman and 
the Vice Chairman;  
 (f) ―Settlement Commission‖ means the  4[Customs, Central Excise and Service Tax Settlement 
Commission] constituted under section 32 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944); and   
(g)  ―Vice-Chairman‖ means a Vice -Chairman of the Settlement Commission.  
127B.  Application  for settlement of cases .—5[(1) Any importer, exporter or any other person 
(hereinafter referred to  as the applicant in this Chapter) may, in respect of a case, relating to him make an 
application, before adjudication to the Settlement Commission to have the case settled, in such form and 
in such manner as may be specified by rules, and containing a ful l and true disclosure of his duty liability 
which has not been disclosed before the proper officer, the manner in which such liability has been 
incurred, the additional amount of customs duty accepted to be payable by him and such other particulars 
as may be specified by rules including the particulars of such dutiable goods in respect of which he 
admits short levy on account of misclassification, under -valuation or inapplicability of exemption 
notification  6[or otherwise] and such application shall be disp osed of in the manner hereinafter provided:  
Provided  that no such app lication shall be made unless, — 
7[(a) the applicant has filed a bill of entry, or a shipping bill, or a bill of export, or made a 
baggage declaration, or a label or declaration accompanying the goods imported or exported through 
post or courier, as the case may be, and in relation to such document or documents, a show cause 
notice has been issued to him by the proper officer;]  
(b) the additional amount of duty accepted by the app licant in his application exceeds three lakh 
rupees; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1998, s. 102 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1998).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 100, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  
3. The words ―in any appeal or revision, as the case may be,‖ omitted by Act 20 of 2015, s. 85 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 83, for ―Customs and Central Excise Settlement Commission‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 101, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  
6. Subs. by Act 14 of 2010, s. 57, for ―but excluding the goods not included in the entry made under this Act‖ (w.e.f. 8 -5-2010).  
7. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 84, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  83 
 (c) the applicant  has paid the additional amount of customs duty accepted by him along with 
interest due under  1[section 28AA] : 
Provided  further that no application shall be entertained by the Settle ment Commission under this 
sub-section in cases which are pending in the Appellate Tribunal or any court:  
Provided  also that no application under this sub -section shall be made in relation to goods to which 
section 123 applies or to goods in relation to wh ich any offence under the Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) has been committed : 
Provided  also that no application under this sub -section shall be made for the interpretation of the 
classification of the goods under the Custo ms Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975).  
 2*    *   *   *  *] 
3*    *   *   *  * 
(3)  Every application made under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by such fees as may be 
specified by rules.  
(4)  An application made under sub -section ( 1) shall not be allowed to be withdrawn by the applicant.  
4[(5) Any person, other than an applicant referred to in sub -section ( 1), may also make an application 
to the Settlement Commission in respect of a show cause notice issued to him in a case relating to the 
applicant which has been settled or is pending before the Settlement Commission and such notice is 
pending before an adjudicating authority, in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be 
specified by rules.]  
5[127C.  Procedure on receipt of an application under section 127B .—(1) On receipt of an 
application under section 127B, the Settlement Commission shall, within seven days from the date of 
receipt of the application, issue a notice to the applicant to explain in writing as to why the application 
made by him s hould be allowed to be proceeded with and after taking into consideration the explanation 
provided  by the applicant, the Settlement Commission, shall, within a period of fourteen days from the 
date of the notice, by an order, allow the application to be pr oceeded with or reject the application, as the 
case may be, and the proceedings before the Settlement Commission shall  abate on the date of rejection : 
Provided  that where no notice has been issued or no order has been passed within the aforesaid period 
by the Settlement Commission, the application shall be deemed to have been allowed to be proceeded 
with.  
 (2) A copy of every order under sub -section ( 1) shall be sent to the applicant and to the  6[Principal  
Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] having jurisdiction.  
(3) Where an application is allowed or deemed to have been allowed to be proceeded with under  
sub-section ( 1), the Settlement Commission shall, within seven days from the date of or der under  
sub-section ( 1), call for a report along with the relevant records from the  6[Principal  Commissioner of 
Customs or Commissioner of Customs] having jurisdiction and the Commissioner shall furnish the report 
within a period of thirty days of the r eceipt of communication from the Settlement Commissio n: 
       Provided  that where the  Commissioner does not furnish the report within the aforesaid period of 
thirty days, the Settlement Commission shall proceed further in the matter without the report of the 
Commissioner . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 25 of 2014, s. 84, for ―section 28AB‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. Sub -section ( 1A) omitted by Act 20 of 2015, s. 86 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
3. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 25 of 2014, s. 84 (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
4. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 106 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 102, for section 127C (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  84 
 (4) Where  a report of the Commissioner called for under sub -section ( 3) has been furnished within the 
period specified in that sub -section, the Settlement Commission may, after examination of such report, if 
it is of the opinion that any further enquiry or investigation in the matter is necessary, direct, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, the Commissioner (Investigation) within fifteen days of the receipt of the 
report, to make or cause to be made such further enquiry or investigation  and furnish a report within a 
period of ninety days of the receipt of the communication from the Settlement Commission, on the 
matters covered by the application and any ot her matter relating to the case : 
Provided  that where the Commissioner (Investigation) does not furnish the report within the aforesaid 
period, the Settlement Commission shall proceed to pass an order under sub -section ( 5) without such 
report.  
(5) After examination of the records and the report of the  1[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs] received under sub -section ( 3), and the report, if any, of the Commissioner 
(Investigation) of the Settlement Commission under sub -section ( 4), and after giving an opportunity to the 
applicant and to the  1[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] having 
jurisdiction to be heard, either in person or through a representative duly authorised  in this behalf, and 
after examining such further evidence as may be placed before it or obtained by it, the Se ttlement 
Commission may, in   accordance with the provisions of this Act, pass such order   as it thinks fit on   the 
matters   covered by the   application and any other matter relating to the case not covered by the 
application, but referred to in the report of the  1[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of 
Customs] and Commissioner (Investigation) under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4). 
2[(5A) The Settlement Commission may, at any time within three months from the date of passing of 
the order under sub -section ( 5), amend such order to rectify any error apparent on the face of record, 
either  suo motu  or when such error is brought to its notice by the jurisdictional Principal Commissioner of 
Customs or Commissioner of Customs or the applicant:  
Provided that no amendment which has the effect of enhancing the liability of the applicant shall be 
made under this sub -section, unless the Settlement Commission has given notice of such intention to the 
applicant and the jurisdictional Principal Commission er of Customs or Commissioner of Customs as the 
case may be, and has given them a reasonable opportunity of being heard.]  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(7)  Subject  to the provisions of section 32A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), the 
materials brought on record before the Settlement Commission shall be considered by the Members of the 
concerned Bench before passing any order under sub -section ( 5) and, in relation to the passing of such 
order, the provisions of section 32D of the Centr al Excise Act, 1944 shall apply.  
(8) The order passed under sub -section ( 5) shall provide for the terms of settlement including any 
demand by way of duty, penalty or interest, the manner in which any sums due under the settlement shall 
be paid and all other matters to make the settlement effective and in case of rejection contain the reasons 
therefore and it shall also provide that the settlement shall be void if it is subsequently found by the 
Settlement Commission that it has been obtained by frau d or misrepresentation of fact s: 
Provided  that the amount of settlement ordered by the Settlement Commission, shall not be less than 
the duty liability admitted by the applicant under section 127B.  
(9) Where any duty, interest, fine and penalty payable in pursuance of an order under su b-section ( 5) 
is not paid by the applicant within thirty days of receipt of a copy of the order by him, the amount which 
remains unpaid, shall be recovered along with interest due thereon, as the sums due to the Central 
Government by the proper officer hav ing jurisdiction over the applicant in accordance with the provisions 
of section 142.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014). 
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 107 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
3. Sub -section ( 6) omitted by Act 20 of 2015, s. 87 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  85 
 (10) Where  a settlement becomes void as provided under sub -section ( 8), the proceedings with 
respect to the matters covered by the settlement shall be deemed to have been  revived from the stage at 
which the application was allowed to be proceeded with by the Settlement Commission and the proper 
officer having jurisdiction may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, 
complete such proceedings at any time before the expiry of two years from the date of the receipt of 
communication that the settlement became void. ] 
127D.  Power of Settlement Commission to order provisional attachment to protect  
revenue .—(1) Where, during the pendency of any proce eding before it, the Settlement Commission is of 
the opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interests of the revenue it is necessary so to do, it may, 
by order, attach provisionally any property belonging to the applicant in such manner as may be s pecified 
by rules.  
(2) Every provisional attachment made by the Settlement Commission under sub -section ( 1) shall 
cease to have effect from the date the sums due to the Central Government for which such attachment is 
made are discharged by the applicant and evidence to that effect is submitted to the Settlement 
Commission.  
127E.  [Power of Settlement Commission to reopen completed proceedings.]  Omitted by the Finance 
Act, 2015  (20 of 2015 ), s. 88 (w.e.f. 14-5-2015 ). 
127F.  Power and procedure of Settlement Commission. —(1) In addition to the powers conferred 
on the Settlement Commission under Chapter V of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), it shall have 
all the powers which are vested in an officer of the customs under this Act or the rules made  thereu nder. 
(2) Where an application made under section 127B has been allowed to be proceeded with under 
section 127C, the Settlement Commission shall, until an order is passed under sub -section  1[(5)] of 
section 127C, have, subject to the provisions of sub-section  2[(4)] of that section, exclusive jurisdiction to 
exercise the powers and perform the functions of any officer of customs or Central Excise Officer as the 
case may be, under this Act or in the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), as the case m ay be, in relation 
to the case.  
(3)  In the absence of any express direction by the Settlement Commission to the contrary, nothing in 
this Chapter shall affect the operation of the provisions of this Act in so far as they relate to any matter 
other than th ose before the Settlement Commission.  
(4) The  Settlement Commission shall, subject to the provisions of Chapter V of the Central Excise 
Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) and this Chapter, have power to regulate its own procedure and the procedure of 
Benches thereof in  all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers, or of the discharge of its functions, 
including the places at which the Benches shall hold their sittings.  
127G. Inspection, etc. , of reports .—No person shall be entitled to inspect, or obtain copies of, any 
report made by any officer of the Customs to the Settlement Commission; but the Settlement Commission 
may, in its discretion, furnish copies thereof to any such person on an application made to it in this behalf 
and on payment of such fee as may be  specified by rules:  
Provided that, for the purpose of enabling any person whose case is under consideration to rebut any 
evidence brought on record against him in any such report, the Settlement Commission shall, on an 
application made in this behalf, and  on payment by such person of such fee as may be specified by rules, 
furnish him with a certified copy of any such report or part thereof relevant for the purpose.  
127 H.  Power of Settlement Commission to grant immunity from prosecution and penalty. —(1) 
The Settlement Commission may, if it is satisfied that any person who made the application for settlement 
under section 127B has co -operated with the Settlement Commission in the proceedings before it and has 
made a full and true disclosure of his duty liabi lity, grant to such person, subject to such conditions as it 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 104, for ―( 7)‖ (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 104, ibid., for ―( 6)‖ (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  86 
 may think  fit to impose, immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Act  1[and also either 
wholly or in part from the imposition of any penalty and fine] under this Act, with respect to the case 
covered by the settlement : 
Provided  that no such immunity shall be granted by the Settlement Commission in cases where the 
proceedings for the prosecution for any such offence have been instituted before the date of receipt of the 
application unde r section 127B.  
2*   *  *   *   * 
(2) An immunity granted to a person under sub -section ( 1) shall stand withdrawn if such person fails 
to pay any sum specified in the order of the settlement passed under  3[sub-section ( 5) of section 127C 
within the time sp ecified in such order] or fails to comply with any other condition subject to which the 
immunity was granted and thereupon the provisions of this Act shall apply as if such immunity had not 
been granted.  
(3) An immunity granted to a person under sub -sectio n (1) may, at any time, be withdrawn by the 
Settlement Commission, if it is satisfied that such person had, in the course of the settlement proceedings, 
concealed any particulars, material to the settlement or had given false evidence, and thereupon such 
person may be tried for the offence with respect to which the immunity was granted or for any other 
offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection with the settlement and shall also become 
liable to the imposition of any penalty under this Ac t to which such person would have been liable, had 
no such immunity been granted.  
 127-I. Power of Settlement Commission to send a case back to the proper officer .—(1) 
The Settlement Commission may, if it is of opinion that any person who made an applicati on for 
settlement under section 127B has not co -operated with the Settlement Commission in the proceedings 
before it, send the case back to the proper officer who shall thereupon dispose of the case in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act as if no ap plication under section 127B had been made.  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), the proper officer shall be entitled to use all the materials and 
other information produced by the assessee before the Settlement Commission or the results of the inquiry 
held or evidence recorded by the Settlement Commission in the course of the proceedings before it as if 
such materials , information, inquiry and evidence had been produced before such proper officer or held or 
recorded by him in the course of the proceedings before him.  
(3) For the purposes of the time limit under section 28 and for the purposes of interest under  
section 28AA, in a case referred to in sub -section ( 1), the period commencing on and from the date of the 
application to the Settlement Commission under section 127B and ending with the date of receipt by the 
officer of customs of the order of the Settlement Commission sending the case back to the officer of 
customs shall be excluded.  
127J. Order of settlement to be conclusive .—Every order  of settlement passed under  
sub-section  4[(5)] of section 127C shall be conclusive as to the matters stated therein and no matter 
covered by such order shall, save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, be reopened in any proceeding 
under this Act or unde r any other law for the time being in force.  
                                                           
1. Sub s. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 105, for ―or under the Indian Penal Code or under any other Central Act for the time being in force 
and also either wholly or in part from the imposition of any penalty, fine and interest‖ (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  
2. The Explanation  omitted by Act 20 of 2015, s. 89 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 105, for ―sub -section ( 7) of section 127C within the time specified in such order or within such 
further time as may be allowed by the Settlement Commission‖ (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  
4. Subs. by s. 106, ibid., for ―( 7)‖ (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  87 
 127K.  Recovery  of sums due under order of settlement .—Any sum specified in an order of 
settlement passed under sub -section  1[(5)] of section 127C may, subject to such conditions, if any, as may 
be specified ther ein, be recovered, and any penalty for default in making payment of such sum may be 
imposed and recovered as sums due to the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of 
section 142, by the proper officer having jurisdiction over the applicant.  
127L.  Bar on subsequent application for settlement in certain cases .—2[(1)] 3[Where  4***] 
(i) an order of settlement  5*** provides for the imposition of a penalty on the applicant under 
section 127B for settlement, on the ground of concealment of particula rs of his duty liability; or  
6[Explanation .—In this clause, the concealment of particulars of duty liability relates to any such 
concealment made from the officer of customs.]  
(ii) after the passing of an order of settlement  5*** in relation to a case, such person is convicted 
of any offence under this Act in relation to that case; or  
(iii) the case of such person is sent back to the proper officer by the Settlement Commission 
under section 127 -I, 
then such person shall not be entitled to apply for settlement under section 127B in relation to any other 
matter.  
7*   *   *   *   * 
127M.  Proceedings before Settlement Commission to be judicial proceedings .—Any proceedings 
under this Chapter before the Settlement Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860).  
127MA . [Certain persons who have filed appeals to the Appellate Tribunal entitled to make 
applications to the Settle ment Commission.]Omitted by the Finance Act, 2007  (22 of 2007 ), s. 109 (w.e.f. 
1-6-2007 ). 
127N.  Applications of certain provisions of Central Excise Act .—The provisions of Chapter V of 
the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) in so far as it is not inconsi stent with the provisions of this 
Chapter shall apply in relation to proceedings before the Settlement Commission under this Chapter. ] 
8[CHAPTER XV  
APPEALS  
128.  Appeals to  9[Commissioner  (Appeals)] .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order 
passed  under this Act by an officer of customs lower in rank than a  10[Principal Commissioner of 
Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may appeal to the  9[Commissioner  (Appeals)]  11[within sixty 
days] from the date of the communication to him of such decision or order:  
12[Provided  that the Commissioner (Appeals) may, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented 
by sufficient cause from presenting the appeal within the aforesaid period of sixty days, allow it to be 
presented within a further  period of thirty days.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 22 of 2007, s. 107, for ―( 7)‖ (w.e.f. 1 -6-2007).  
2. Section 127L renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 108, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -5-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 108, ibid., for ―where‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2007).  
4. The words, figures and letters ―before the 1st day of June, 2007‖ omitted by Act 14 of 2010, s. 59 (w.e.f. 8 -5-2010).  
5. The certain words, brackets, figures and letters omitted by Act 20 of 2015, s. 90 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
6. Ins. by  Act 25 of 2014, s. 85 (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
7. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by 14 of 2010, s. 59 (w.e.f. 8 -5-2010).  
8. Subs. by Act 44 of 1980, s. 50 and The Fifth Schedule , for Chapter XV (w.e.f. 11 -10-1982).  
9. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 50, for ―Collector (Appeals)‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
10. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
11. Subs. by Act 14 of 2001, s. 109, for ―within three months‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  
12. Subs. by s. 109, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  88 
 1[(1A) The  Commissioner (Appeals) may, if sufficient cause is shown at any stage of hearing of an 
appeal, grant time, from time to time, to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal 
for reasons to be recorded in writing:  
Provi ded that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during hearing of 
the appeal.]  
(2) Every appeal under this  section  shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner as may 
be specified by rules made in this behalf.  
128A. Procedure in appeal .—(1) The  2[Commissioner  (Appeals)] shall give an opportunity to the 
appellant to be heard if he so desires.  
(2) The 2[Commissioner  (Appeals)] may, at the hearing of an appeal, allow the appellant to go into 
any ground of appeal no t specified in the grounds of appeal, if the  2[Commissioner  (Appeals)] is satisfied 
that the omission of that ground from the grounds of appeal was not  wilful  or unreasonable.  
(3) 3[The  Commissioner (Appeals)] shall, after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass 
pass such order, as he thinks 4[just and proper, — 
(a) confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed against; or  
(b) referring the matter back to the adjudicating authority with directions for fresh adjudication or 
decision, as the case may be, in the following cases, namely: — 
(i) where an order or decision has been passed without following the principles of natural 
justice; or  
(ii) where no order or decision has been passed after re -assessment under section 17; or  
(iii) where an order of refund under section 27 has been issued by crediting the amount to 
Fund without recording any finding on the evidence produced by the applicant ]:] 
      Provided  that an order enhancing any penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or confiscating goods of 
greater value or reducing the amount of refund shall not be passed unless the appellant has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing c ause against the propose d order : 
      Provided  further that where the  2[Commissioner  (Appeals)] is of opinion that any duty has not been 
levied or has been short -levied or erroneously refunded, no order requiring the appellant to pay any duty 
not levied, short -levied or erroneously refunded shall be passed unless the appellant is given no tice within 
the time -limit specified in section 28 to show cause against the proposed order.  
(4) The order of the  2[Commissioner  (Appeals)] disposing of the appeal shall be in writing and shall 
state the points for determination, the decision thereon and t he reasons for the decision.  
5[(4A) The Commissioner (Appeals) shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide every appeal 
within a period of six months from the date on which it is filed.]  
(5) On the disposal of the appeal, the  2[Commissioner  (Appe als)] shall communicate the order passed 
by him to the appellant, the adjudicating  authority  6[, the 7[Principal Chief Commissioner of Customs or 
Chief Commissioner of Customs] and the  8[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of 
Customs]].  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2004, s. 68 (w.e.f. 10 -9-2004).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 50, for ―Collector (Appeals)‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 14 of 2001, s. 110, for certain words and brackets (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 96, for ―just and proper, confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed 
against‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Ins. by Act 14 of 2001, s. 110 (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  
6. Subs. by Act 18 of 2005, s. 69, for ―and the Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e. f. 13-5-2005).  
7. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Chief Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
8. Subs. by s. 78,  ibid., for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  89 
 129.  Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute an Appellate Tribunal to be 
called the Customs, Excise and  1[Service Tax] Appellate Tribunal consisting of as many judicial and 
technical members as it thinks fit to exercise the powers and discharge the functions conferred on the 
Appellate Tribunal by this Act.  
2[(2) A judicial member shall be a person who has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the 
territory of India or who has been a member of the  3[Indian Legal Service] and h as held a post in Grade I 
of that service or any equivalent or higher post for at least three years, or who has been an advocate for at 
least ten years.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, — 
(i) in computing the period during which a person h as held judicial office in the territory of India, 
there shall be included any period, after he has held any judicial office, during which the person has 
been an advocate or has held the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a 
State, requiring special knowledge of law;  
(ii) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate, there shall be included 
any period during which the person has held a judicial office, or the office of a member of a tribunal 
or any post, un der the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law after he became an 
advocate.]  
(2A) A technical member shall be a person who has been a member of the Indian Customs and 
Central Excise Service, Group A, and has held the post of  4[Principal Commi ssioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs] or Central Excise or any equivalent or higher post for at least three years.]  
5[(3) The Ce ntral Government shall appoint — 
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) one of the members of the Appellate Tribunal,   
to be the President thereof.]  
(4) The Central Government may appoint one or more members of the Appellate Tribunal to be the 
Vice -President, or, as the case may be, Vice -Presidents, thereof.  
6*   *   *   *   * 
 (5) 7[A Vice -Preside nt] shall exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the 
President as may be delegated to him by the President by a general or special order in writing.  
8[(6) On ceasing to hold office, the President, Vice -President or other Member shall not be entitled to 
appear, act or plead before the Appellate Tribunal.]  
 9[(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and cond itions of service of the 
President, Vice -President or other Members of the Appellate Tribunal appointed after the commencement 
of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of 
section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the President. Vice -President and Member appointed before the commencement of Part 
XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall continue to be governed by the provisions 
of this Act, and the  rules made thereunder as if the pro visions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had 
not come into force.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 119, for ―Gold (Control)‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1984, s. 39, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 11 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 119, for ―Central Legal Service‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
5. Subs. by Act 33 of 1996, s. 65, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
6. Sub -section ( 4A) omitted by Act 32 of 2003, s. 119 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
7. Subs. by s. 119, ibid., for ―The Senior Vice -President or a Vice -President‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5--2003).  
8. Ins. by Act 22 o f 2007, s. 110 (w.e.f. 11 -5-2007).  
9. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 175 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) vide Notification S. O. No. 1696(E), dated (26 -5-2017).  90 
 129A. Appeals to the Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any of the following 
orders may appeal to the Appella te Tribunal against such order — 
(a) a decision or order passed by the  1[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of 
Customs] as an adjudicating authority;  
(b) an order passed by the  2[Commissioner (Appeals)] under section 128A;  
(c) an order passed by the Board or the Appellate 3[Commissioner of Customs ] under Section 
128, as it stood immediately before the appointed day;  
(d) an order passed by the Board or the  1[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner 
of Customs], either before or after the appointed day, under section 130, as it stood immedia tely 
before that day : 
4[Provided   that no appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall not have 
have jurisdiction to decide any appeal in respect of any order referred to in claus e (b) if such order relates  
to,— 
(a)  any goods imported or exported as baggage;  
(b)  any goods loaded in a conveyance for importation into India, but which are not unloaded at 
their place of destination in India, or so much of the quantity of such goods as has not been unloaded 
at any such destination if goods unloaded at such destination are short of the quantity required to be 
unloaded at that destination;  
(c)  payment of drawback as provided in Chapter X , and the rules made  thereunder : 
Provided  further that] the Appellate Tribunal may, in its discretion, refuse to admit an appeal in 
respect of an order referred to in clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) where — 
(i) the value of the goods confiscated without option having been given to the owner of the goods 
to pay a fine in lieu of confiscatio n under section 125; or  
(ii) in any disputed case, other than a case where the determination of any question having a 
relation to the rate of duty of customs or to the value of goods for purposes of assessment is in issue 
or is one of the points in issue, the difference in duty involved or the duty involved; or  
(iii) the amount of fine or penalty determined by such order,  
does not exceed  5[two lakh rupees].  
6[(1A) Every appeal against any order of the nature referred to in the first proviso to sub -section ( 1), 
which is pending immediately before the commencement of section 40 of the Finance Act, 1984   
(21 of 1984) , before the Appellate Tribunal and any matter arising out of or connected with such appeal 
and which is so pending shall stand transferred on such  commencement to the Central Government and 
the Central Government shall deal with such appeal or matter under section 129DD as if such appeal or 
matter were an application or a matter arising out of an application made to it under that section.]  
7[(1B) (i) The Board may,  8[by order], constitute such Committees as may be necessary for the 
purposes of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s . 50, for ―Collector (Appeals)‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by s. 50, ibid., for ―Collector of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 1984, s. 40, for ―Provided that‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 86, for ―fifty thousand rupees‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
6. Ins. by Act 21 of 1984, s. 40 (w.e.f. 11 -5-1984).  
7. Ins. by Act 18 of 2005, s. 70 (w.e.f. 13 -5-2005).  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 86, for ―by notification in the Official Gazette‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  91 
 (ii) Every  Committee constituted under clause ( i) shall consist of two Chief Commissioners of 
Customs or two Commissioners of Customs, as the case may be.]  
 (2) 1[The Committee of Commissioners of Customs may, if it is] of opinion that an order passed by 
the Appellate  2[Principal  Commissioner of Customs  or Commissioner of Customs] under section 128, as 
it stood immediately before the appointed day, or by the  3[Commissioner (Appeals)] under section 128A, 
is not legal or proper, direct the proper officer to appeal  4[on its behalf] to the Appellate Tribunal against 
such order:  
 5[Provided  that where the Committee of  2[Principal  Commissioners of Customs or Commissioners of 
Customs] differs in its opinion regarding the appeal against the order of the Commissioner (Appeals), it 
shall state the point or points on which it differs and make a reference to the jurisdictional  6[Principa l 
Chief Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner of Customs] who shall, after considering the 
facts of the order, if is of the opinion that the order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) is not legal or 
proper, direct the proper officer to appeal to t he Appellate Tribunal against such order.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, ―jurisdictional Chief Commissioner‖  means 
the 6[Principal Chief Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner of Customs] having jurisdiction 
over the adjudicating  authority in the matter.]  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within three months from the date on which the 
order sought to be appealed against is communicated to the  2[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs], or as t he case may be, the other party preferring the appeal.  
(4) On receipt of notice that an appeal has been preferred under this section, the party against whom 
the appeal has been preferred may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed against such order  or 
any part thereof, file, within forty -five days of the receipt of the notice, a memorandum of cross -
objections verified in such manner as may be specified by rules made in this behalf against any part of the 
order appealed against and such memorandum sh all be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were 
an appeal presented within the time specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit the filing of a memorandum of cross -
objections after the expiry of the relevant period referred to in sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within that period.  
7[(6) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner 
as may be specified by rules made in this behalf and shall, irrespective of the date of demand of duty and 
interest or of levy of penalty in relation to which the appeal is mad e, be accompanied by a fee of, — 
(a) where the amount of duty and interest  demanded and penalty levied by any officer of customs 
in the case to which the appeal relates is five lakh rupees or less, one thousand rupees;  
(b) where the amount of duty and interest demanded and penalty levied by any officer of customs 
in the case to which the appeal relates is more than five lakh rupees but not exceeding fifty lakh 
rupees, five thousand rupees;  
(c) where the amount of duty and interest demanded and penalty levied by any officer of customs 
in the case to which the appeal relates is mor e than fifty l akh rupees, ten thousand rupees : 
Provided  that no such fee shall be payable in the case of an appeal referred to in sub -section ( 2) or a 
memorandum of cross -objections referred to in sub -section ( 4). 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2 005, s. 70, for ―The Commissioner of Customs may, if he is‖ (w.e.f. 13 -5-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 50, for ―Collector (Appeals)‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
4. Subs. b y Act 18 of 2005, s. 70, for ―on his behalf‖ (w.e.f. 13 -5-2005).  
5. The proviso i ns. by Act 18 of 2008, s. 71 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Chief Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
7. Subs. by Act 23 of 2004, s. 69 fo r sub section (6) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2004) vide Notification No. 120/2004 -Cus. (N. T.), dated 25 -10-
2004.  92 
 (7) Every application made before the Appellate Tribunal, — 
(a) in an appeal  1*** for rectification of mistake or for any other purpose; or  
(b) for restoration of an appeal or an application,  
shall be accompanied by a fee of five hundred rupees : 
Provided  that no such fee shall be payable in the  case of an application filed by or on behalf of 
the 2[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] under this sub -section. ] 
129B.   Orders of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to 
the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying 
or annulling the decision or order appealed against or may refer the case back to the authority which 
passed such decision or order with such directions as the App ellate Tribunal may think fit, for a fresh 
adjudication or decision, as the case may be, after taking additional evidence, if necessary.  
3[(1A) The Appellate Tribunal may, if sufficient cause is shown, at any stage of hearing of an appeal, 
grant time to th e parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the appeal for re asons to be recorded 
in writing : 
         Provided  that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party during hearing 
of the appeal.]  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may , at any time within  4[six months] from the date of the order, with a 
view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, amend any order passed by it under  
sub-section ( 1) and shall make such amendments if the mistake is brought to its notice by the  2[Principal 
Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] or the other party to the appeal:  
Provided  that an amendment which has the effect of enhancing the assessment or reducing a refund or 
otherwise increasing the liability of the other party shall not be made under this sub -section, unless the 
Appellate Tribunal has given notice to him of its intention to do so and has allowed him a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.  
5[(2A) The Appellate Tribunal shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide every appeal within 
within a period of three years from the dat e on which such appeal is filed : 
6*    *   *  *   *] 
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this section to 
the 2[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Comm issioner of Customs] and the other party to the appeal.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in section 130 or section 130E, orders passed by the Appellate 
Tribunal on appeal shall be final.  
129C.   Procedure of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The powers and functions of  the Appellate Tribunal 
may be exercised and discharged by Benches constituted by the President from amongst the members 
thereof.  
(2)  Subject to the provisions contained in  7[sub-section ( 4)], a Bench shall consist of one judicial 
member and one technical  member.  
8*   *  *   *    * 
                                                           
1. The words ―for grant of stay or‖ omitted by Act 25 of 2014, s. 86 (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 78, ibid., for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Ins. by Act 23 of 2004, s. 70 (w.e.f. 10 -9-2004).  
4. Subs. by Act 20 of 2002, s, 127, for ―four years‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2002).  
5. Ins. by s. 127, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -5-2002).  
6. The first, second and third proviso s omitted by Act 25 of 2014, s. 87 (w.e. f. 6-8-2014).  
7. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 65, for ―sub -section s (3) and ( 4)‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
8. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 65, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  93 
 (4) The  President or any other member of the Appellate Tribunal  authorised  in this behalf by the 
President may, sitting singly, dispose of any case which has been allotted to the Bench  of which he is a 
member where — 
(a) the value of the goods confiscated without option having been given to the owner of the goods 
to pay a fine in lieu of confiscation under section 125; or  
(b) in any disputed case, other than a case where the determination of any question having a 
relation to t he rate of duty of customs or to the value of goods for purposes of assessment is in issue 
or is one of the points in issue, the difference in duty involved or the duty involved; or  
(c) the amount of fine or penalty involved,   
does not exceed  1[fifty lakh  rupees].  
2[(5) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point shall be decided according to 
to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority; but if the members are equally divided, they shall 
state the point or points on which they  differ and make a reference to the President who shall either hear 
the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other 
members of the Appellate Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided ac cording to the opinion of 
the majority of these members of the Appellate Tribunal who have heard the case, including those who 
first heard it.]  
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own 
procedure  and the procedure of the Benches thereof in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers 
or of the discharge of its functions, including the places at which the Benches shall hold their sittings.  
(7) The Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes  of discharging its functions, have the same powers 
as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit in respect 
of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) discovery and inspection;  
(b) enforcing the attendance of  any person and examining him on oath;  
(c) compelling the production of books of account and other documents; and  
(d) issuing commissions.  
(8) Any proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of se ctions 193 and 228 and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860), and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1 974).  
129D.  Powers of  3[Committee of  4[Principal  Chief Commissioner of Customs or Chief 
Commissioner of Customs]] or  5[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] 
Customs] to pass certain orders .—(1) The  3[Committee of  4[Principal  Chief Commissioner of Customs 
or Chief Commissioner of Customs]]   may, of its own motion, call for and examine the record of any 
proceeding in which a  5[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] as an 
adjudicating authority has passed any decision or order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying itself 
as to the legality or propriety of any such decision or order and may, by order, direct 
such 6[Commissioner]  7[or any other Commissioner] to apply to the Appellate Tribunal for the 
determination of such points arising out of the decision or order as may be specified by the  3[Committee 
of 4[Principal  Chief Commissioners of Customs or Chief Commissio ners of Customs]] in its order:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 77, for ―ten lakh rupees‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 12 of 1990, s. 62, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1990).  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 2005, s. 71, for ―Board‖ (w.e.f. 13 -5-2005).  
4. Subs. by 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Chief Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
5. Subs. by s. 78, ibid., for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
6. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 50, for ―Collector‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
7. Ins. by Act 14 of 2001, s. 111 (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).  94 
 1[Provided  that where the Committee of  2[Principal Chie f Commissioners of Customs or Chief 
Commissioner of Customs] differs in its opinion as to the legality or propriety of the decision or order of 
the 3[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs], it shall state the point or points 
on which it differs and make a reference to the Board which, after considering the facts of the decision or 
order passed by the  3[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs], if is of the 
opinion that the decision or order passed by the  3[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner 
of Customs] is not legal or proper, may, by order, direct such Commissioner or any other Commissioner 
to apply to th e Appellate Tribunal for the determination of such points arising out of the decision or order, 
as may be specified in its order.]  
(2) The 3[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may, of his own motion, 
call for and examine the reco rd of any proceeding in which an adjudicating authority subordinate to him 
has passed any decision or order under this Act for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or 
propriety of any such decision or order and may, by order, direct  4[such authority or any officer of 
Customs subordinate to him] to apply to the  5[Commissioner  (Appeals)] for the determination of such 
points arising out of the decision or order as may be specified by the  3[Principal  Commissioner of 
Customs or Commissioner of Customs] in his order.  
6[(3) Every order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be, shall be made within a 
period of three months from the date of communication of the decision or order of the adjudicating 
authority.]  
7[Provided that the Board may, on sufficient cause being shown, extend the said period by another 
thirty days.]  
(4) Where in pursuance of an order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the adjudicating authority 
or any officer of customs  authorised  in this behalf by the  3[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs], makes an application to the Appellate Tribunal or the  5[Commissioner  
(Appeals)] within a period of  8[one month] from the date of communication of the order under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) to the adjudicating authority, such application shall be heard by the 
Appellate Tribunal or the  5[Commissioner (Appeals)], as the case may be, as if such appl ication were an 
appeal made against the decision or order of the adjudicating authority and the provisions of this Act 
regarding appeals, including the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 129A shall, so far as may  be, 
apply to such application.  
9[(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any decision or order in which the determination 
determination of any question having a relation to the rate of duty or to the value of goods for the 
purposes of assessment of any duty is in issue or is one of the points  in issue.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the determination of a rate or duty in relation to 
any goods or valuation of any goods for the purposes of assessment of duty includes the determination of 
a question — 
(a) relating to the rate of duty for the time being in force, whether under the Customs Tariff Act, 
1975 (51 of 1975) or under any other Central Act providing for the levy and collection of any duty of 
customs in relation to any goods on or after the 28th day of February, 1986 ; or 
(b) relating to the value of goods for the purposes of assessment of any duty in cases where the 
assessment is made on or after the 2 8th day of February, 1986; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2008, s. 72 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Chief Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 78, ibid., for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 29, for ―such authority‖ (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 50, for ―Collector (Appeals)‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 18 of 2008, s. 72, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  
7. Ins. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 88 (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
8. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 111, for ―three month‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-2007).  
9. Ins. by Act 29 of 1988, s. 4 (w. e.f. 18 -5-1988).  95 
 (c) whether  any goods fall under a particular heading or sub -heading of the First Schedule o r the 
Second Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975), or that any goods are or not covered 
by a particular notification or order issued by the Central Government granting total or partial 
exemption from duty; or  
(d) whether the value of any g oods for the purposes of assessment of duty shall be enhanced or 
reduced by the addition or reduction of the amounts in respect of such matters as are specifically 
provided in this Act.]  
1[129DA.  Powers of revision of Board or Collector of Customs in certain cases .—(1) The Board 
may, of its own motion or on the application of any aggrieved person or otherwise, call for and examine 
the record of any proceeding in which a Collector of Customs has pa ssed any decision or order  [not being 
a decision or order passed under sub -section ( 2) of this section] of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 5) 
of section 129D for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such 
decision or order and may pass such order thereon as it thinks fit.  
(2) The Collector of Customs may, of his own motion or on the application of any aggrieved person 
or otherwise, call for and examine the record of any proceeding in which an adjudicating au thority 
subordinate to him has passed any decision or order of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 
129D for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such decision or 
order and may pass  such order thereon as he thinks fit.  
(3) (a) No decision or order under this section shall be made so as to prejudicially affect any person 
unless such person is given a reasonable opportunity of making representation and if, he so desires, of 
being heard  in his defence.  
(b) Where the Board or, as the case may be, the Collector of Customs is of the opinion that any duty 
has not been levied or has been short -levied or short -paid or erroneously refunded, no order requiring the 
affected person to pay any duty  not levied or paid, short -levied or short -paid or erroneously refunded shall 
be passed under this section unless such person is given notice within the time limit specified in section 
28 to show cause against the proposed order.  
(4) No proceeding shall be  initiated under sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) in respect of any decision 
or order after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of communication of such decision or 
order:  
Provided that in respect of any decision or order passed before the  commencement of the Customs 
and Central Excises Laws  (Amendment) Act, 1988  (29 of 1988) , the provisions of this sub -section shall 
have effect as if for the words ―six months‖, the words ―one year‖ were substituted.  
(5) Any person aggrieved by any decision  or order passed under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) 
may appeal to the Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal established under section 3 of the 
Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986 (62 of 1986), against such decision or 
order.] 
2[129DD.  Revision by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, on the application 
of any person aggrieved by any order passed under section 128A, where the order is of the nature referred 
to in the first proviso to sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 129A, annul or modify such order.  
3[Provided  that the Central Government may in its discretion, refuse to admit an application in respect 
respect of an order where the amount of duty or fine or penalty, determined by such order does not exceed 
five thousand rupees.]  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, ―order passed under section 128A ‖ includes an 
order passed under that section before the commencement of section 40 of the Finance Act, 1984   
(21 of 1984) , against which an appeal has not been pre ferred before such commencement and could have 
been, if the said section had not come into force, preferred after such commencement, to the Appellate 
Tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1988, s. 5 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1988).  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 1984, s. 43 (w.e.f. 11 -5-1984).  
3. The proviso i ns. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 110 (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  96 
 1[(1A) The  2[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may, if he is of the 
opinion that an order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) under section 128A is not legal or proper, 
direct the proper officer to make an application on his behalf to the Central Government for revision of 
such order.]  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made within three months from the date of the 
communication to the applicant of the order against whic h the application is being  made : 
Provided  that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from presenting the application within the aforesaid period of three months, allow it to be 
presented within a further period of three months.  
3[(3) An application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner 
as may be specified by rules made in this behalf and shall be accom panied by a fee of, — 
(a) two hundred rupees, where the amount of duty and interest demanded, fine or penalty levied 
by an officer o f customs in the case to which the application relates is one lakh rupees or less;  
(b) one thousand rupees, where the amount of duty and interest demanded, fine or penalty levied 
by an officer of customs in the case to which the application relat es is more  than one lakh rupees : 
Provided  that no such fee shall be payable in the case of an application referred to in  
sub-section ( 1A).] 
(4) The Central Government may, of its own motion, annul or modify any order referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
(5) No order enhancing any penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or confiscating goods of greater 
value shall be passed under this section, — 
(a)  in any case in which an order passed under section 128A has enhanced any penalty or fine in 
lieu of confiscation  or has confiscated goods of greater value, and  
(b)  in any other case, unless the person affected by the proposed order has been given notice to 
show cause against it within one year from the date of the order sought to be annulled or modified.  
 (6) Where  the Central Government is of opinion that any duty of customs has not been levied or has 
been short -levied, no order levying or enhancing the duty shall be made under this section unless the 
person affected by the proposed order is given notice to show ca use against it within the time limit 
specified in section 28.]  
4[129E. Deposit of certain percentage of duty demanded or penalty imposed before filing 
appeal .—The Tribunal or the Commissioner (Appeals), as the case may be, shall not entertain any 
appeal ,— 
(i) under sub -section ( 1) of section 128, unless the appellant has deposited seven and a half per 
cent. of the duty, in case where duty or duty and penalty are in dispute, or penalty, where such penalty 
is in dispute, in pursuance of a decision or an order  passed by an officer of customs lower in rank than 
the 2[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs];  
(ii) against the decision or order referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 129A, 
unless the appellant has deposited sev en and a half per cent. of the duty, in case where duty or duty 
and penalty are in dispute, or penalty, where such penalty is in dispute, in pursuance of the decision 
or order appealed against;  
(iii) against the decision or order referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 129A, 
unless the appellant has deposited ten per cent. of the duty, in case where duty or duty and penalty are 
in dispute , or penalty, where such penalty is in dispute, in pursuance of the dec ision or order appealed 
against : 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 110 (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
2. Subs. by A ct 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 110, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 89, for section 129E (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  97 
 Provided  that the amount required to be deposited under this section shall not exceed rupees ten 
rores : 
Provided further that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the stay applications and appeals 
pending before any appellate authority prior to  the commencement of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2014   
(25 of 2014) .] 
 1[129EE. Interest on delayed refund of amount deposited under section 129E .—Where an 
amount deposited by the appellant under section 129E is required to be refunded consequent upon the 
order of the appellate authority, there shall be paid to the appellant interest at such rate, not below five per 
cent. and not exceeding thirty -six per cent. per annum as is for the time being fixed by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official G azette, on such amount from the date of payment of the 
amount till, th e date of refund of such amount : 
Provided  that the amount deposited under section 129E, prior to the commencement of the Finance 
(No. 2) Act, 2014  (25 of 2014) , shall continue to be gove rned by the provisions of section 129EE as it 
stood before the commencement of the said Act.]  
2[130. Appeal to High Court .—(1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from every order passed in 
appeal by the Appellate Tribunal on or after the 1st day of July, 2003 (not being an order relating, among 
other things, to the determination of any question having a relation to the rate of duty of customs or to the 
value of goods for the purposes of assessment), if the High Court is satisfied that the case involv es a 
substantial question of law.  
(2) The 3[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] or the other party 
aggrieved by any order passed by the Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court and such 
appeal u nder this sub -section  shall be — 
(a) filed within one hundred and eighty days from the date on which the order appealed against is 
received by the  3[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] or the other 
party;  
(b) accompanied by a fee of two hundred rupees where such appeal is filed by the other party;  
(c) in the form of a memorandum of appeal precisely stating therein the substantial question of 
law involved.  
 4[(2A) The High Court may admit an appeal after the expiry of the period of one hundred and eighty  
days referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not 
filing the same within that period.]  
(3) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall 
formulate that question.  
(4) The appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the respondents shall, at the 
hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such question:  
Provided  that nothing in this sub -section s hall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the 
Court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law not 
formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.  
(5) The High Court shall d ecide the question of law so formulated and deliver such judgment thereon 
containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and may award such cost as it deems fit.  
(6)  The High Court  may determine any issue which — 
(a) has not been determined by the Appellate Tribunal; or  
(b) has  been wrongly determined by the Appellate Tribunal, by reason of a decision on such 
question of law as is referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 90, for  section 129EE (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 120, for section 130 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
4. Ins. by Act 33 of 2009, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2003).  98 
 (7) When  an appeal has been filed before the High Court, it shall be heard by a benc h of not less than 
two Judges of the High Court, and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or of 
the majority, if any, of such Judges.  
(8) Where there is no such majority, the Judges shall state the point of law upon which they dif fer and 
the case shall, then, be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other Judges of the High Court 
and such point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Judges who have heard the 
case including those who first heard it. 
(9) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  
(5 of 1908) relating to appeals to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under 
this section.]  
1[130A.   Application to High C ourt.—(1) The 2[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs] or the other party may, within one hundred and eighty days of the date upon 
which he is served with notice of an order under section 129B passed  3[before the 1st day of July, 2003] 
(not being an order relating, among other things, to the determination of any question having a relation to 
the rate of duty of customs or to the value of goods for purposes of assessment), by application in the 
prescribed form, accompanied, where th e application is made by the other party, by a fee of two hundred 
rupees, apply to the High Court to direct the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of 
law arising from such order of the Tribunal.  
(2) The 2[Principal Commissioner  of C ustoms or Commissioner of Customs] or the other party 
applying to the High Court under sub -section ( 1) shall clearly state the question of law which he seeks to 
be referred to the High Court and shall also specify the paragraph in the order of the Appellat e Tribunal 
relevant to the question sought to be referred.  
(3) On receipt of notice that an application has been made under sub -section ( 1), the person against 
whom such application has been made, may, notwithstanding that he may not have filed such application, 
file, within forty -five days of the receipt of the notice, a memorandum of cross -objections verified in the 
prescribed manner against any part of the order in relation to which an application for reference has been 
made and such memorandum sha ll be disposed of by the High Court as if it were an application presented 
within the time specified in sub -section ( 1). 
4[(3A) The High Court may admit an application or permit the filing of a memorandum of cross -
objections after the expiry of the relevan t period referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3), if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing the same within that period.]  
(4) If, on an application made under sub -section ( 1), the High Court directs the Appellate Tribunal to 
refer the question of law raised in the application, the Appellate Tribunal shall, within one hundred and 
twenty days of the receipt of such direction, draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the High 
Court.]  
 5130B. Power of High Court or Supre me Court to require statement to be amended .—If the 
High Court or the Supreme Court is not satisfied that the statements in a case referred to it are sufficient 
to enable it to determine the questions raised thereby, the Court may refer the case back to th e Appellate 
Tribunal for the purpose of making such additions thereto or alterations therein a s it may direct in that 
behalf.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Ac t 27 of 1999, s. 112, for section 130A (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 121, for ―on or after the 1st day of July, 1999‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
4. Ins. by Ac t 33 of 2009, s. 88 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1999).  
5. Section 130B to be omitted by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 (28 -12-2005 ). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 in the Madras Bar Association Vs Union of India.  99 
  
1130C.  Case  before High Court to be heard by not less than two judges .—(1) When any case has 
been referred to the High Court  2[under section 130 or section 130A] it shall be heard by a Bench of not 
less than two judges of the High Court and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such judges 
or of the majority, if any, of such judges.  
(2) Where there is no such majorit y, the judges shall state the point of law upon which they differ and 
the case shall then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other judges of the High Court, 
and such point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the ju dges who have heard the 
case incl uding those who first heard it.  
3130D.  Decision of High Court or Supreme Court on the case stated .—(1) The High Court or the 
Supreme Court hearing any such case shall decide the questions of law raised therein, and shall deliver its 
judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and a copy of the judgment 
shall be sent under the seal of the Court and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal which 
shall pass such orders as are nece ssary to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment.  
4[(1A) Where the High Court delivers a judgment in an appea l filed before it under section 130, effect 
shall be given to the order passed on the appeal by the proper officer on the basis of a c ertified copy of the 
judgment. ] 
(2) The costs of any 5[reference to the High Court or an appeal to the High Court or the Supreme 
Court as the case may be ] which shall not include the fee for making the reference shall be in the 
discretion of the Court.  
 130E. Appeal to Supreme Court .—An appeal shall  lie to the Supreme Court from — 
6[(a) any judgme nt of the High Court delivered — 
(i)  in an appeal made under section 130; or  
(ii) on a reference made under section 130 by the Appellate Tribunal before the 1st d ay of 
July, 2003;  
(iii) on a reference made under section 130A,  
in any case which, on its own motion or on an oral application made by or on behalf of the party 
aggrieved, immediately after passing of the judgment, the High Court certifies to be a fit one for appeal to 
the Supreme Court; or]  
(b) any order passed  7[before the establishment of the National Tax Tribunal] by the Appellate 
Tribunal relating, among other things, to the determination of any question having a relation to the 
rate of duty of customs  or to the value of goods for purposes of assessment.  
130F.    Hearing before Supreme Court .—(1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908), relating to appeals to the Supreme Court shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of appeals 
under section 130E as they apply in the case of appeals from decrees of a High  Court:  
Provided  that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 130D or section 131.  
(2) The costs of the appeal shall be  in the discretion of the Supreme Court.  
                                                           
1. Section 130C to be omitted by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 and t he Schedule (28 -12-2005 ). This amendment has been struck down by 
the Supreme Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 in the Madras Bar Association Vs Union of India.  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 1 13, for ―under section 130‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
3. Section 130D to be omitted by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 and the Schedule (28 -12-2005 ). This amendment has been struck down by 
the Supreme Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 the Madras Bar in Association Vs Union of India.  
4. Ins. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 122 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2003).  
5. Subs. by s. 122,  ibid., for ―reference to the High Court or the Supreme Court‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by s. 123, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  
7. Ins. by Act 49 of  2005, s. 30 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 28 -12-2005). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 in the Ma dras Bar Association Vs Union of  India.  100 
 (3) Where  the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed in the appeal, effect shall be given to 
the order of the Supreme Court in the manner provided in section 130D in the case of a judgment of the 
High Cour t. 
131. Sums due to be paid notwithstanding reference, etc .—Notwithstanding that a reference has 
been made to the High Court or the Supreme Court or an appeal has been preferred to the Supreme 
Court,  1[under this Act before the commencement of the National  Tax Tribunal Act, 2005] sums due to 
the Government as a result of an order passed under sub -section ( 1) of section 129B shall be payable in 
accordance with the order so passed.  
131A. Exclusion of time taken for copy .—In computing the period of limitation specified for an 
appeal or application under this Chapter, the day on which the order complained of was served, and if the 
party preferring the appeal or making the application was not furnished with a copy of the order when the 
notice of the order was ser ved upon him, the time requisite for obtaining a copy of such order shall be 
excluded.  
131B. Transfer of certain pending proceedings and transitional provisions .—(1) Every appeal 
which is pending immediately before the appointed day before the Board under section 128, as it stood 
immediately before that day, and any matter arising out of or connected with such appeal and which is so 
pending shall stand transferred on that day to the Appellate Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal may 
proceed with such appeal or matter from the stage at which it was on that day:  
Provided  that the appellant may demand that before proceeding further with that appeal or matter, he 
may be re -heard.  
(2) Every proceeding which is pending immediately before the appointed day before th e Central 
Government under section 131, as it stood immediately before that day, and any matter arising out of or 
connected with such proceeding and which is so pending shall stand transferred on that day to the 
Appellate Tribunal and the Appellate Tribuna l may proceed with such proceeding or matter from the 
stage at which it was on that day as if such proceeding or matter  were an appeal filed before it : 
Provided  that if any such proceeding or matter rela tes to an order where — 
(a) the value of the goods con fiscated without option having been given to the owner of the goods 
to pay a fine in lieu of confiscation under section 125; or  
(b) in any disputed case, other than a case where the determination of any question having a 
relation to the rate of duty of cus toms or to the value of goods for purposes of assessment is in issue 
or is one of the points in issue, the difference in duty involved or the duty involved; or  
(c) the amount of fine or penalty determined by such order,  
does not exceed ten thousand rupees,  such proceeding or matter shall continue to be dealt with by the 
Central Government as if the said secti on 131 had not been substituted : 
      Provided  further that the applicant or the other party may make a demand to the Appellate Tribunal 
that before proceeding further with that proceeding or matter, he may be re -heard.  
(3) Every proceeding which is pending immediately before the appointed day before the Board or 
the 2[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] under section 130, as it stood 
immediately before that day, and any matter arising out of or connected with such proceeding and which 
is so pending shall continue to be dealt with by the Board or the  2[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs], as the case m ay be, as if the said section had not been substituted.  
(4) Any person who immediately before the appointed day was  authorised  to appear in any appeal or 
proceeding transferred under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall, notwithstanding anything contai ned 
in section 146A, have the right to appear before the Appellate Tribunal in relation to such appeal or 
proceeding.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 28 -12-2005). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 in the Ma dras Bar Association Vs Union of  India.  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  101 
 1[131BA.  Appeal not to be filed in certain cases .—(1) The Board may, from time to time, issue 
orders or ins tructions or directions fixing such monetary limits, as it may deem fit, for the purposes of 
regulating the filing of appeal, application, revision or reference by the  2[Principal Commissioner of 
Customs or Commissioner of Customs] under the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Where, in pur suance of the orders or instructions or directions, issued under sub -section ( 1), 
the 2[Principal Commissioner of Custo ms or Commissioner of Customs] has not filed an appeal, 
application, revision or reference against any decision or order passed under the  provisions of this Act, it 
shall not preclude such  2[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] from filing 
any appeal, application, revision or reference in any other case involving the same or similar issues or 
questions of law.  
(3) Notwithstanding the fact that no appeal, application, revision or reference has been filed by 
the 2[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] pursuant to the orders or 
instructions or directions issued under sub - section ( 1), no person,  being a party in appeal, application, 
revision or reference shall contend that   the 2[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of 
Customs]  has acquiesced in the decision on the disputed issue by not filing appeal, application, revision 
or refer ence.  
(4) 3[The Commissioner (Appeal s) or the Appellate Tribunal or the court] hearing an appeal, 
application, revision or reference shall have regard to the circumstances under which the appeal, 
application, revision or reference was not filed by the  2[Principal  Commissioner of Customs or 
Commissioner of Customs] in pursuance of orders or instructions or directions issued   under  
sub-section ( 1). 
(5) Every order or instruction or direction issued by the Board on or after the 20th   day of October, 
2010 , but before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2011 receives the assent of the President, fixing 
monetary limits for filing appeal, application, revision or reference shall be deemed to have been issued 
under sub -section ( 1), and the provi sions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) shall apply accordingly.]  
131C. Definitions .—In this Chapter — 
(a) ―appointed day‖  means the date of coming into force of the amendments to this Act specified 
in Part I of the Fifth Schedule to the Finance  (No. 2) Act, 1980 (44 of 1980) ; 
4[(b) High Court ” means, — 
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State;  
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High Court of a State has 
been extended by law, that High Court;  
(iii) in relation to the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 5[Daman and Diu ], the 
High Court at Bombay;  
(iv) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest court of civil appeal for that territory 
other than the Supreme Court of India;]  
 (c) ―President‖ means the President of the Appellate Tribunal.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2011 , s. 50 (w.e.f. 20 -10-2008).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 91, ibid., for ―The Appellate Tribunal or court‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
4. Clause ( b) shall be omitted by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 and the Schedule (28 -12-2005). This amendment has been struck down by 
the Supreme Court’s order dated 25th September, 2014 in the Madras Bar Association Vs Union of India.  
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 5, for ―G oa, Daman and Diu‖ (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  102 
 CHAPTER XVI  
OFFENCES AND PROSECUT IONS  
 132. False declaration, false documents, etc .—Whoever makes, signs or uses, or causes to be 
made, signed or used, any declaration, statement or document in the transaction of any business relating 
to the customs, knowing or having reason to believe that such declaration, statement or document is false 
in any material particular, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  1[two 
years], or with fine, or with both.  
133. Obstruction of officer of customs .—If any person intentionally obstructs any officer of 
customs in the exercise of any powers conferred under this Act, such person shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a t erm which may extend to  2[two years], or with fine, or with both.  
134. Refusal to be X -rayed .—If any person — 
(a) resists or refuses to allow a radiologist to screen or to take X -ray picture of his body in 
accordance with an order made by a Magistrate under  section 103, or  
(b) resists or refuses to allow suitable action being taken on the advice and under the supervision 
of a registered medical practitioner for bringing out goods liable to confiscation secreted inside his 
body, as provided in section 103,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or 
with both.  
135. Evasion of duty or prohibitions .—3[(1) Without  prejudice to any action that may be taken  
under this Act, if any person — 
(a) is in relation to  any goods in any way knowingly concerned in  misdeclaration  of value or in 
any fraudulent evasion or attempt at evasion of any duty chargeable thereon or of any prohibition for 
the time being imposed under this Act or any other law for the time being in fo rce with respect to 
such goods; or  
(b) acquires possession of or is in any way concerned in carrying, removing, 
depositing,  harbouring, keeping, concealing, selling or purchasing or in any other manner dealing 
with any goods which he knows or has reason to  believe are liable to confiscation under Section 111 
or Sect ion 113, as the case may be; or  
(c) attempts to export any goods which he knows or has reason to believe are liable to 
confiscation under Section 113; or  
(d) fraudulently avails of or attempts to  avail of drawback or any exemption from duty provided 
under this Act in connection with export of goods,  
he shall be punishable, — 
(i) in the c ase of an offence relating to, — 
(A) any goods the market price of which exceeds one  crore  of rupees; or  
(B) the e vasion or attempted evasion of duty exceeding  4[fifty lakh] of rupees; or  
(C) such categories of prohibited goods as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 30, for ―six months‖ (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for ―six months‖ (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 112, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 11 -5-2007).  
4. Sub s. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 78, for ―thirty lakh‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  103 
 (D) fraudulently  availing of or attempting to avail of drawback or any exemption from duty 
referred to in clause ( d), if the amount of drawback or exemption from duty exceeds  1[fifty lakh] of 
rupees,  with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded in the 
judgment of the court, such imprisonment shall not be for less than one year;  
(ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  three years, or with fine, 
or with both.]  
2[(2) If any person convicted of an offence under this section or under sub -section ( 1) of section 136 
is again convicted of an offence under this section, then, he shall be punishable for the second and for 
every  subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and with fine:  
Provided  that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded in the 
judgment of the court such imprisonment shall not be for less  than 3[one year].  
  (3) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the following shall not be considered as special and 
adequate reasons for awarding a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than  3[one year], namely: — 
(i) the fact that the accused  has been convicted for the first time for an offence under this Act;  
(ii) the fact that in any proceeding under this Act, other than a prosecution, the accused has been 
ordered to pay a penalty or the goods which are the subject matter of such proceedings  have been 
ordered to be confiscated or any other action has been taken against him for the same act which 
constitutes the offence;  
(iii) the fact that the accused was not the principal offender and was acting merely as a carrier of 
goods or otherwise was a secondary party to the commission of the offence;  
(iv) the age of the accused.]  
4[135A.  Preparation .—If a person makes preparation to export any goods in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act, and from the circumstances of the case it may be reasonably inferred that if not 
prevented by circumstances independent of his will, he is determined to carry out his intention to commit 
the offence, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine, or wit h both.  
135B.  Power of court to publish name, place of business, etc., of persons convicted under the 
Act.—(1) Where any person is convicted under this Act for contravention of any of the provisions 
thereof, it shall be competent for the court convicting t he person to cause the name and place of business 
or residence of such person, nature of the contravention, the fact that the person has been so convicted 
and such other particulars as the court may consider to be appropriate in the circumstances of the ca se, to 
be published at the expense of such person in such newspapers or in such manner as the court may direct.  
(2) No publication under sub -section ( 1) shall be made until the period for preferring an appeal 
against the orders of the court has expired wit hout any appeal having been preferred, or such an appeal, 
having been preferred, has been disposed of.  
(3) The expenses of any publication under sub -section ( 1) shall be recoverable from the convicted 
person as if it were a fine imposed by the court.]  
136. Offences by officers of customs .—(1) If any officer of customs enters into or acquiesces in any 
agreement to do, abstains from doing, permits, conceals or  5[connives at any act or thing, whereby any 
fraudulent export  is effected or] any  duty of cust oms  leviable  on  any goods, or any prohibition  for the   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 78, for ―thirty lakh‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1973, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1978, s. 16, for ―six months‖ (w.e.f. 1 -7-1978).  
4. Ins. by  Act 36 of 1973, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 125, for ―connives at any act or thing whereby‖ (w.e.f. 14 -5-2003).  104 
 time being  in force under this Act or any other law for the time being in force with respect to any goods is 
or may be evaded, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend t o 1[three 
years], or with fine, or with both.  
(2) If any officer of customs, — 
(a) requires any person to be searched for goods liable to confiscation or any document relating 
thereto, without having reason to believe that he has such goods or document secreted about his 
person; or  
(b)  arrests any person without having reason to believe that he has been guilty of an offence 
punishable under section 135; or  
(c)  searches or  authorises  any other officer of customs to search any place without having reason  
to believe that any goods, documents or things of the nature referred to in section 105 are secreted in 
that place,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, o r with both.  
(3) If any officer of customs, except in the discharge in good faith of his duty as such officer or in 
compliance with any requisition made under any law for the time being in force, discloses any particulars 
learnt by him in his official capa city in respect of any goods, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
137.  Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 132, 
section 133, section 134 or  2[section 135 or section 135A], except with the previous sanction of 
the 3[Principal  Commissioner of Custom or Commissioner of Customs].  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 136,— 
(a) where the offence is alleged to have been committed by an officer of customs not lower in 
rank than  4[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs], except with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government;  
(b) where  the offence is alleged to have been committed by an officer of customs lower in rank 
than 4[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] except with the 
previous sanction of the  3[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Cu stoms].  
5[(3) Any offence under this Chapter may, either before or after the institution of prosecution, be 
compounded by the  6[Principal Chief Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner of Customs] on 
payment, by the person accused of the offence to the Central Government, of  7[such compounding 
amount and in such manner of compounding] as may be specified by rules.]  
8[Provided  that nothing contained in t his sub -section shall apply to — 
(a) a person who has been allowed to compound once in respect of an y offence under sections 
135 and 135A;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1973, s. 7, for ―two years‖ (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 2006, s.  32, for ―section 135‖ (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 50, for ― Assistant Collector of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 26.5.1995). Again Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100 , 
for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
5. Ins. by Act 23 of 2004, s. 71 (w.e.f. 10 -9-2004).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Chief Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
7. Subs. by Act 33 of 2009, s. 89, for ―such compo unding amount‖ (w.e.f. 19 -8-2009).  
8. Ins. by s. 89, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -8-2009).  105 
 (b) a person  who has been accused of committing an offence under this Act which is also an 
offence under any  of the following Acts, namely: — 
(i) the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985  (61 of 1985);  
(ii) the Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 2000 (34 of 2000);  
(iii) the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959);  
(iv) the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (53 of 1972);  
 (c) a person involved in smuggling of goods falling unde r any of the following, namely: — 
(i) goods  specified in the list of Special Chemicals, Organisms, Materials, Equipment and 
Technology in Appendix 3 to Schedule 2 (Export Policy) of ITC (HS) Classification of Export 
and Import Items of the Foreign Trade Policy, as amended from time to time, issued under 
section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992);  
(ii) goods which are specified as prohibited items for import and export in the ITC (HS) 
Classification of Export and Import Items of the Foreign Trade Policy, as ame nded from time to 
time, issued under section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 
1992);  
(iii) any other goods or documents, which are likely to affect friendly relations with a foreign 
State or are  derogatory to national ho nour;  
(d) a person who has been allowed to compound once in respect of any offence under this 
Chapter for goods of value exceeding rupees one  crore;  
(e) a person who has been convicted under this Act on or after the 30th day of December, 2005.]  
138.  Offences to be tried summarily .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), an offence under this Chapter other than an offence 
punishable  1[under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 135 or under sub -section ( 2) of that section] 
may be tried summarily by a Magistrate.  
2[138A.  Presumption of culpable mental state .—(1) In any prosecution for an offence under this 
Act which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the court shall presume the 
existence of such mental state but it shall be a  defence  for the accused to prove the fact that he had no 
such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.  
Explanation. —In this section, ―culpable mental state ‖ includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact 
and belief in, or reason to believe, a fact.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to exist 
beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existen ce is established by a preponderanc e of 
probability.  
138B.  Relevancy of statements under certain circumstances .—(1) A statement made and signed 
by a person before any gazetted  officer of customs during the course of any inquiry or proceeding under 
this Act  shall be relevant, for the purpose of proving, in any prosecution for an offence under this Act, the 
truth o f the facts which it contains, — 
(a) when the person who made the statement is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving 
evidence, or is ke pt out of the way by the adverse party, or whose presence cannot be obtained 
without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the court 
considers unreasonable; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1973, s. 8, for ―under clause ( i) of section 135‖ (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  106 
 (b) when  the person who made the statement is examined as a witness in the case before the court 
and the court is of opinion that, having regard to the circumstances of the case, the statement should 
be admitted in evidence in the interests of justice.  
(2) The provisi ons of sub -section ( 1) shall, so far as may be,  apply  in relation to any proceeding under 
this Act, other than a proceeding before a court, as they apply in relation to a proceeding before a court. ] 
1[138C.   Admissibility of micro films, facsimile copies o f documents and computer print outs as 
documents and as evidence .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in any other la w for the time 
being in force, — 
(a) a micro film of a document or the reproduction of the image or images embodied in such 
micro film (whether enlarged or not); or  
(b) a facsimile copy of a document; or  
(c) a statement contained in a document and included in a printed material produced by a 
computer (hereinafter referred to as a ―computer  print  out‖), if the conditions mentioned in  
sub-section ( 2) and the other provisions contained in this section are satisfied in relation to the 
statement and the computer in question,  
shall  be deemed to be also a document for the purposes of this Act and the rules made  thereunder  and 
shall be admissible  in any proceedings  thereunder, without further proof or production of the original, as 
evidence of any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be 
admissible.  
(2) The conditions referred to in sub -section ( 1) in respect of a computer printout  shall be the 
following,  namely: — 
(a)  the computer printout containing the statement was produced by the computer during the 
period over which the computer was used regularly to store or process information for the purposes  of 
any activities regularly carried on over that period by the person having lawful control over the use of 
the computer;  
(b) during the  said period, there was regularly supplied to the computer in the ordinary course of 
the said activities, information of the kind contained in the statement or of the kind from which the 
information so contained is derived;  
(c) throughout the material part of the  said period, the computer was operating properly or, if not, 
then any respect in which it was not operating pr operly or was out of operation during that part of that 
period was not such as to affect the production of the document or the accuracy of the contents; and  
(d) the information contained in the statement reproduces or is derived from information supplied 
to the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities.  
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing information for the purposes of any 
activities regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) was regularly 
performed by computers, whether — 
(a) by a combination of computers operating over that period; or  
(b) by different computers operating in succession over that period; or  
(c) by different combinations of computers operating in succession over that period; or  
(d)  in any other manner involving the successive operation over that period, in whatever order, of 
one or more computers and one or more combinations of computers,    
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1988, s. 6  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1988)  vide Notification No. 18/88 -C.E. (N.T.), d ated 29 -6-1988 . 107 
 all the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be  treated for the purposes of this section 
as constituting a single computer; and references in this section to a computer shall be construed 
accordingly.  
(4) In any proceedings under this Act and the rules made  thereunder  where it is desired to give a 
statement in evidence by virtue of this section, a certificate doing any of the following things, that is to 
say,— 
(a) identifying the document containing the statement and describing the manner in which it was 
produced;  
(b) giving such particulars of any devi ce involved in the production of that document as may be 
appropriate for the purpose of showing that the document was produced by a computer;  
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in sub -section ( 2) relate,  
and purporting to  be signed by a person occupying a responsible official position in relation to the 
operation of the relevant device or the management of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) 
shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the purposes of this sub -section it shall be 
sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it.  
(5) For  the purposes of this section, — 
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer if it is supplied thereto in any 
appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or (with or without human intervention) by 
means of any appropriate equipment;  
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any official, information is supplied with a 
view to its being stored or processed for the purposes of those activities by a computer operated 
otherwise than in the course of those activities, that information, if duly supplied to that computer, 
shall be taken to be supplied to it in the course of those activities;  
(c) a document shall be taken to have been produced by a computer whether it was produced by it 
directly or (with or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) ―computer ‖ means any device that receives, stores and processes data, applying stipulated 
processes to the information and supplying results of these processes; and  
(b) any reference to information being derived from other information shall be a reference t o 
its being derived there from by calculation, comparison or any other process.]  
1[139. Presumption as to documents in certain cases .—Where any document — 
(i) is produced by any person or has been seized from the custody or control of any person, in 
either case, under this Act or under any other law, or  
(ii) has been received from any place outside India in the course of investigation of any offence 
alleged to have been committed by any person under this Act,  
and such document is tendered by the prosecution  in evidence against him or against him and any other 
person who is tried joi ntly with him, the court shall — 
(a) presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the signature and every other part of such 
document which purports to be in the handwriting of any  particular person or which the court may 
reasonably assume to have been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, is in that 
person ’s handwriting, and in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was executed or attested  
by the person by whom it purports to have been so executed or attested;   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1973, s. 10 for section 139 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  108 
 (b) admit the  document in evidence, notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such document 
is otherwise admissible in evidence;  
(c) in a case falling under clause ( i) also presume, unless the contrary is proved, the truth of the 
contents of such document.]  
1[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, ―document ‖ includes inventories, photographs and 
lists certified by a Magistrate under sub -section ( 1C) of section 110.]  
 140. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Chapter is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, a s well as the company, shall be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to such 
punishment provided in this Chapter if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Chapter has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, ma nager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) ―company ‖ means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) ―director‖ , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
2[140A . Application of section 562 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and of the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 .—(1) Nothing  contained in section 562 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), or in the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), shall apply to a 
person convicted of an offence under this Act unless that person is und er eighteen years of age.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in  
sub-section ( 3) of section 135.]  
CHAPTER XVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
141. Conveyances and goods in a customs area subject to control of officers  of customs .—3[(1)] 
All conveyances and goods in a customs area shall, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this 
Act, be subject to the control of officers of customs.  
4[(2) The imported or export goods may be received, stored, delivered,  despatched  or otherwise 
handled in a customs area in such manner as may be prescribed and the responsibilities of persons 
engaged in the aforesaid activities shall  be such as may be prescribed.]  
142. Recovery of sums due to Government .—(1) 5[Whe re any sum payable by any person] under 
this Act  6[including the amount required to be paid to the credit of the Central Government u nder section 
28B] is not paid, — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 80 of 1985, s. 11 (w.e.f. 27 -12-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1973, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
3. Section 141 nu mbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 18 of 2008, s. 74 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  
4. Ins. by s. 74, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -5-2008).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 66, for certain words (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
6. Ins. by Act 10 of 2000, s. 88 (w.e.f. 12 -5-2000).  109 
 (a)  the proper  officer may deduct or may require any other officer of customs to deduct the 
amount so payable from any money owing to such person which may be under the control of the 
proper officer or such other officer of customs; or  
(b)  the 1[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] may recover 
or may require any other officer of customs to recover the amount so payable by detaining and selling 
any goods belonging to such person which are under the control of the  1[Assistant Commissioner  of 
Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] or such other officer of customs; or  
2[(c) if the amount cannot be recovered from such person in the manner provid ed in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b)— 
(i) the 1[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] may 
prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from such person and send it to the 
Collector of the district in which such person owns any property or resides or carries on his 
business and the said Collector on receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover from such 
person the amount specified there under as if it were an arrear of land revenue; or  
(ii) the proper officer may, on an authorisation by  3[Principal Commissioner  of Customs  or 
Commissioner of Customs] and in accordance with the rules made in this behalf,  distrain  any 
movable or immovable property belonging to or under the control of such person, and detain the 
same until the amount payable is paid; and in case, any part of t he said amount payable or of the 
cost of the distress or keeping of the property, remains unpaid for a period of thirty days next 
after any such distress, may cause the said property to be sold and with the proceeds of such sale, 
may satisfy the amount pay able and the costs including cost of sale remaining unpaid and shall 
render the surplus, if any, to such person; ] 
4[Provided  that where the person (hereinafter referred to as predecessor), by whom any sum 
payable under this Act including the amount required to be paid to the credit of the Central 
Government under section 28B is not paid, transfers or otherwise disposes of his business or trade in 
whole or in part, or effects any change in the ownership thereof, in consequence of which he is 
succeeded  in such business or trade by any other person, all goods, materials, preparations, plants, 
machineries, vessels, utensils, implements and articles in the custody or possession of the person so 
succeeding may also be attached and sold by the proper officer , after obtaining written approval from 
the 3[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of Customs], for the purposes of 
recovering the amount so payable by such predecessor at the time of such transfer or otherwise 
disposal or change.]  
5[(d) (i) the proper officer may, by a notice in writing, require any other person from whom 
money is due to such person or may become due to such person or who holds or may subsequently 
hold money for or on account of such person, to pay to the credit of the Central  Government either 
forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held, or at or within the time specified in the notice 
not being before the money becomes due or is held, so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the 
amount due from such person or the whole of the money when it is equal to or less than that amount;  
(ii) every person to whom the notice is issued under this section shall be bound to comply with 
such notice, and in particular, where any such notice is issued to a post office, banking compa ny or an 
insurer, it shall not be necessary to produce any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or any other 
document for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made before the payment is 
made, notwithstanding any rule, practice or requireme nt to the contrary;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 66, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
4. Ins. b y Act 23 of 2004, s. 72 (w.e.f. 10 -9-2004).  
5. Ins. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 79 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  110 
 (iii) in case the  person to whom a notice under this section has been issued, fails to make the 
payment in pursuance thereof to the Central Government, he shall be deemed to be a defaulter in 
respect of the amount specified in the notice and all the consequences of this Ch apter shall follow.]  
(2) Where the terms of any bond or other instrument executed under this Act or any rules or 
regulations made  thereunder  provide that any amount due under such instrument may be recovered in the 
manner laid down in sub -section ( 1), the amount may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, 
be recovered in accordance with the provisions of that sub -section.  
1[142A.   Liability under Act to be first charge .—Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any Central Act or State  Act, any amount of duty, penalty, interest or any other sum payable 
by an assessee or any other person under this Act, shall, save as otherwise provided in section 529A of the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and the Fin ancial Institutions Act, 
1993  (51 of 1993) and 2[the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and the Enforcement  of 
Security Interest A ct, 2002  (54 of 2002)  and the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016) .]] 
143.  Power to allow imp ort or export on execution of bonds in c ertain cases .—(1) Where this 
Act or any other law requires anything to be done before a person can import or export any goods or clear 
any goods from the control of officers of customs and the  3[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or 
Deputy Commissioner of Customs] is satisfied that having regard to the circumstances of the case, such 
thing cannot be done before such import, export or clearance without detriment to that person, 
the 3[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] may, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act or such other law, grant leave for such import, export or clearance on the 
person executing a bond in such amount, with such surety or security and subject to s uch conditions as 
the 3[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] approves, for the doing 
of that thing within such time after the import, export or clearance as may be specified in the bond.  
(2) If the thing is done within the time specified in the bond, the  3[Assistant Commissioner  of 
Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] shall cancel the bond as discharged in full and shall, on 
demand, deliver it, so cancelled, to the person who has executed or who is entitled to receive it; and in 
such a case that person shall not be liable to any penalty provided in this Act or, as the case may be, in 
such other law for the contravention of the provisions thereof relating to the doing of that thing.  
(3) If the thing is not done within th e time specified in the bond, the  3[Assistant Commissioner  of 
Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] shall, without prejudice to any other action that may be 
taken under this Act or any other law for the time being in force, be entitled to proceed upon  the bond in 
accordance with law.  
143A . [Duty deferment.]Omitted by The Finance Act, 2013  (17 of 2013) , s. 80 (w.e.f. 10-5-2013).  
4[143AA.  Power to simplify or provide different procedure, etc., to facilitate trade .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, the Board may, for the purposes of 
facilitation of trade, take such measures or prescribe separate procedure or documentation for a class of 
importers or exporters or for categories of goods or on the basis of the modes of transport of goods, in 
order to, — 
(a) maintain transparency in the import and export documentation; or  
(b) expedite clearance or release of goods entered for import or export; or  
(c) reduce the transaction cost of clearance of importing or exporting goods;  or 
(d) maintain balance between customs control and fa cilitation of legitimate trade.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 51 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
2. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 248, for ―and the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and the Enforcement of  
Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002)‖ (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016) vide Notification S.O. No. 3355(E), dated 1 -11-2016.  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
4. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 97 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  111 
 144.  Power  to take samples .—(1) The proper officer may, on the entry or clearance of any goods or 
at any time while such goods are being passed through the customs area, take samples of such goods in 
the presence of the owner thereof, for examination or testing, or for ascertaining the value thereof, or for 
any other purposes of this Act.  
(2) After the purpose for which a sample was taken is carried out, such sample shall, if practicable, be 
restored to the owner, but if the owner fails to take delivery of the sample within three months of the date 
on which the sample was taken, it may be disposed of in such manner as the  1[Principal Commissioner of 
Customs or Commiss ioner of Customs] may direct.  
(3) No duty shall be chargeable on any sample of goods taken under this section which is consumed 
or destroyed during the course of any test or examination thereof,  2***. 
145. Owner, etc.,  to perform operations incidental to  compliance with customs law .—All 
operations necessary for making any goods available for examination by the proper officer or for 
facilitating such examination shall be performed by, or at the expense of, the owner, importer or exporter 
of the goods, as t he case may be.  
3[146. Licence for customs brokers .—(1) No person shall carry on business as a customs broker 
relating to the entry or departure of a conveyance or the import or export of goods at any customs station 
unless such person holds a licence gran ted in this behalf in accordance with the regulations.  
(2) The Board may make regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section 
and, in particular, such regulations may provide for — 
(a) the authority by which a licence may be granted under this section and the period of validity 
of such licence;  
(b) the form of the licence and the fees payable therefor;  
(c) the qualifications of persons who may apply for a licence and the qualifications of persons to 
be employed by a licensee t o assist him in his work as a customs broker;  
(d) the manner of conducting the examination;  
(e) the restrictions and conditions (including the furnishing of security by the licensee) subject to 
which a licence may be granted;  
(f) the circumstances in which  a licence may be suspended or revoked; and  
(g) the appeals, if any, against an order of suspension or revocation of a licence, and the period 
within which such appeal may be filed.]  
4[146A.  Appearance by  authorised  representative .—(1) Any person who is en titled or required to 
appear before an officer of customs or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with any proceedings under 
this Act, otherwise than when required under section 108 to attend personally for examination on oath or 
affirmation, may, subject to the other provisions of this section, appear by an  authorised  representative.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, ―authorised  representative‖  means a person  authorised  by the 
person referred to in sub -section ( 1) to appear on his behalf, being — 
(a) his relative or regular employee; or  
(b) a 5[custom broker] licensed under section 146; or  
(c) any legal practitioner who is entitled to  practise  in any civil court in India; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
2. The words ―, if such duty amounts to  five rupees or more‖ omitted by Act 17 of 2013, s. 81 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 82, for section 146 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
4. Ins. by Act 44 of 1980, s. 50 and The Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -10-1982).  
5. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 83 , for ―customs house agent‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  112 
 (d)  any person who has acquired such qualifications as the Central Government  may specify by 
rules made in this behalf.  
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no person who was a member of the Indian 
Customs and Central Excise Service -Group A and has retired or resigned from such Service after having 
served for not less than three years in any capacity in that Service shall be entitled to appear as 
an authorised  representative in any proceedings before an officer of customs for a period of two years 
from the date of his retirement or resignation, as the case may be. 
(4)   No person, — 
(a) who has been dismissed or removed from Government service; or  
1[(b) who is convicted  of an offence connected with any proceeding under this Act, the Central 
Excise and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), or the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 (45 of 1968) or the Finance 
Act, 1994 (32 of 1994); or]  
(c) who has become an insolvent,  
shall be qualified to r epresent any person under sub -section ( 1), for all times in the case of a person 
referred to in clause ( a), and for such time as the  2[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner 
of Customs] or the competent authority under the  3[Central Excise and S alt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), or the 
Gold (Control) Act, 1968 (45 of 1968) or the Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994)], as the case may be, may, 
by order, determine in the case of a person referred to in clause ( b), and for the period during which the 
insolvency c ontinues in the case of a person referred to in clause ( c). 
(5)   If any person, — 
(a) who is a legal practitioner, is found guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity by any 
authority entitled to institute proceedings against him, an order passed by  that authority shall have 
effect in relation to his right to appear before an officer of customs or the Appellate Tribunal as it has 
in relation to his right to practice  as a legal practitioner;  
(b) who is not a legal practitioner, is found guilty of misconduct in connection with any 
proceedings under this Act by such authority as may be specified by rules made in this behalf, that 
authority may direct that he shall thenceforth be disqualified to repr esent any person under  
sub-section ( 1). 
(6) Any order or direction under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) shall be 
subject to th e following conditions,  namely: — 
(a) no such order or direction shall be made in respect of any p erson unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard;  
(b) any person against whom any such order or direction is made may, within one month of the 
making of the order or direction, appeal to the Board to have the order or direction cancel led; and  
(c) no such order or direction shall take effect until the expiration of one month from the making 
thereof, or, where an appeal has been preferred, until the disposal of the appeal.]  
147.  Liab ility of principal and agent .—(1) Where  this Act requires anything to be done by the 
owner, importer or exporter of any goods, it may be done on his behalf by his agent.  
(2) Any such thing done by an agent of the owner, importer or exporter of any goods shall, unless the 
contrary is proved, be deemed to have been done with the knowledge and consent of such owner, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 83, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 83, for ―Central Excise s and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) or the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 (45 of 
1968)‖ (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  113 
 importer or exporter, so that in any proceedings under this Act, the owner, importer or exporter of the  
goods shall also be liable as if the thing had been done by himself.  
(3) When any person is  expressly or impliedly  authorised  by the owner, importer or exporter of any 
goods to be his agent in respect of such goods for all or any of the purposes of this Act, such person shall, 
without prejudice to the liability of the owner, importer or exporter , be deemed to be the owner, importer 
or exporter of such goods for such purposes  1[including lia bility therefor under this Act] : 
Provided  that where any duty is not levied or is short -levied or erroneously refunded on account of 
any reason other than any wilful act, negligence or default of the agent, such duty shall not be recovered 
from the agent unless in the opinion of  2[Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of 
Customs] the same cannot be recovered from the owner, importer or exporte r. 
148.  Liability of agent appointed by the per son in charge of a conveyance .—(1) Where  this Act 
requires anything to be done by the person in charge of a conveyance, it may be done on his behalf by his 
agent.  
(2) An agent appointed by the person in charge of a conveyance and any person who represents 
himself to any officer of customs as an agent of any such person in charge, and is accepted as such by that 
officer, shall be liable for the  fulfilment  in respect of the matter in question of all obligat ions imposed on 
such person in charge by or under this Act or any law for the time being in force, and to penalties and 
confiscations which may be incurred in respect of that matter.  
149.  Amendment of documents .—Save as otherwise provided in sections 30 a nd 41, the proper 
officer may, in his discretion,  authorise  any document, after it has been presented in the custom house to 
be amended:  
Provided  that no amendment of a bill of entry or a shipping bill or bill of export shall be 
so authorised  to be amended  after the imported goods have been cleared for home consumption or 
deposited in a warehouse, or the export goods have been exported, except on the basis of documentary 
evidence which was in existence at the time the goods were cleared, deposited or export ed, as the case 
may be.  
150. Procedure for sale of goods and  application of sale proceeds .—(1) Where any goods not 
being confiscated goods are to be sold under any provisions of this Act, they shall, after notice to the 
owner thereof, be sold by public auction or by tender or with the consent of the owner in any other 
manner.  
(2) The proceeds of any such sale shall be applied — 
(a) firstly to the payment of the expenses of the sale,  
(b)  next to the payment of the freight and other charges, if any, payable in respect of the goods 
sold, to the carrier, if notice of such charges has been given to the person having custody of the 
goods,  
(c)  next to the payment of the duty, if any, on the goods sold,  
(d)  next to the payment of the charges in respect of  the goods sold due to the person having the 
custody of the goods,  
(e)  next to the payment of any amount due from the owner of the goods to the Central 
Government under the provisions of this Act or any other law relating to customs,  
and the balance, if a ny, shall be paid to the owner of the goods.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 2013, s. 84 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  114 
 1[Provided  that where it is not possible to pay the balance of sale proceeds, if any, to the owner of the 
goods within a period of six months from the date of sale of such goods or such further period as 
the 2[Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs] may allow, such balance of sale 
proceeds shall be paid to the Central Government.]  
151. Certain officers required t o assist officers of customs. —The following officers are hereby 
empowered and required to assist officers of customs in th e execution of this Act, namely: — 
(a) officers of the Central Excise Department;  
(b) officers of the Navy;  
(c) officers  of Police;  
(d) officers of the Central or State Governments employed at any port or airport;  
(e)  such other officers of the Central or State Governments or a local authority as are specified by 
the Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette.  
3[151A. Instruc tions to officers of customs .—The Board may, if it considers it necessary or 
expedient so to do for the purpose of uniformity in the classification of goods or with respect to the levy 
of duty thereon,  4[or for the implementation of any other provisions of this Act or of any other law for the 
time being in  force, insofar as they relate to any prohibition, restriction or procedure for import or export 
of goods] issue such orders, instructions and directions to officers of customs as it may deem fit and such 
officers of customs and all other persons employed in the execution of this Act shall observe and follow 
such orders, instructions and directions of the Board:  
Provided  that no such orders, instructions or directions shall be issued — 
(a) so as to require any such officer of customs to make a particular assessment or to dispose of a 
particular case in a particular manner; or  
(b) so as to interfere with the discretion of the  5[Commissioner of Customs] (Appeals) in the 
exercise of his appellate functions.]  
6[151B.  Recip rocal arrangement for exchange of information facilitating trade .—(1) The Central 
Government may enter into an agreement or any other arrangement with the Government of any country 
outside India or with such competent authorities of that country, as it deems fit, for facilitation of trade,  
enforcing the provisions of this Act and exchange of information for trade facilitation, effective risk analysis, 
verification of compliance and prevention, combating and investigation of offences under the provisions of 
this Act or under the correspondin g laws in force in that country.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of this section shall apply 
to the contracting State with which reciprocal agreement or arrangements have been made, subject to such 
conditions, exceptions or qualifications as may be specified in that notification.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the information received under sub -section ( 1) may 
also be used as evidence in investigations and proceedings under this Act.  
(4) Where  the Central Government has entered into a multilateral agreement for exchange of information 
or documents for the purpose of verification of compliance in identified cases, the Board shall specify the 
procedure for such exchange, the conditions subject to  which such exchange shall be made and designation of 
the person through whom such information shall be exchanged.  
                                                           
1. The p roviso i ns. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 52 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Ins. by Act 80 of 1985, s. 12 (w.e.f. 27 -12-1985).  
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 53 (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 50, for ―Collector of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
6. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 98 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  115 
 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), 
anything done or any action taken or purport ed to have been done or taken, in pursuance to any agreement 
entered into or any other arrangement made by the Central Government prior to the date on which the 
Finance Bill, 2018 receives the assent of the President, shall be deemed to have been done or t aken under 
the provisions of this section.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expressions, — 
(i) ―contracting State‖ means any country outside India in respect of which agreement or 
arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the Government or authority of such 
country through an agreement or otherwise;  
(ii) ―corresponding law‖ means any law in force in the contracting State corresponding to any of 
the provisions of this Act or dealing with offences in that country correspondin g to any of the 
offences under this Act.]  
152.  Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that subject to such conditions, if any, as may be  specified in the notification — 
(a) any power exercisable by  the Board under this Act shall be exercisable also by  1[a 2[Principal 
Chief Commissioner of Customs or Chief Commissioner of Customs] or a   3[Principal Commissioner  
of Customs or Commissioner of Customs]] empowered in this behalf by the Central Government ; 
(b) any power exercisable by a  3[Principal Commissioner  of Customs or Commissioner of 
Customs] under this Act may be exercisable also by a  4[Joint Commissioner  of Customs] or 
an 5[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of Customs] empowered in this 
behalf by the Central Government;  
(c) any power exercisable by a  4[Joint Commissioner  of Customs] under this Act may be 
exercisable also by an  5[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Co mmissioner of Customs] 
empowered in this behalf by the Central Government;  
(d) any power exercisable by an  5[Assistant Commissioner  of Customs or Deputy Commissioner 
of Customs] under this Act may be exercisable also by a  Gazetted  Officer of Customs empowe red in 
this behalf by the Board.  
6[153. Modes for service of notice order, etc .—(1) An order, decision, summons, notice or any 
other communication under this Act or the rules made thereunder may be served in any of the 
following modes, namely: — 
(a) by giving or tendering it directly to the addressee or importer or exporter or his customs 
broker or his authorised representative including employee, advocate or any other person or to any 
adult member of his family residing with him;  
(b) by a registered pos t or speed post or courier with acknowledgement due, delivered to the 
person for whom it is issued or to his authorised representative, if any, at his last known place of 
business or residence;  
(c) by sending it to the e -mail address as provided by the per son to whom it is issued, or to the 
e-mail address available in any official correspondence of such person;  
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 29 of 1988, s. 7, for ―a Collector of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 1 -7-1988) vide Notification No. 18/88 (N.T.) -C.E., dated  
29-6-1988.  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2014, s. 78, for ―Chief Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 78, ibid., for ―Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 6 -8-2014).  
4. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 100, for ―Deputy Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f.  11-5-1999).  
5. Subs. by s. 100, ibid., for ―Assistant Commissioner of Customs‖ (w.e.f. 11 -5-1999).  
6. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 99, for section 153 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  116 
 (d) by publishing  it in a newspaper widely circulated in the locality in which the person to 
whom it is issued is last known to have resided or carried on business; or  
(e) by affixing it in some conspicuous place at the last known place of business or residence of 
the pers on to whom it is issued and if such mode is not practicable for any reason, then, by 
affixing a copy thereof on the notice board of the office or uploading on the official website, if 
any. 
(2) Every order, decision, summons, notice or any communication sha ll be deemed to have been 
served on the date on which it is tendered or published or a copy thereof is affixed or uploaded in the 
manner provided in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) When such order, decision, summons, notice or any communication is sent by registered post 
or speed post, it shall be deemed to have been received by the addressee at the expiry of the period 
normally taken by such post in transit unless the contrary is proved.]  
154.  Correc tion of clerical errors, etc .—Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any decision or order 
passed by the Central Government, the Board or any officer of customs under this Act, or errors arising 
therein from any accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the Central Government, 
the Board or such officer o f customs or the successor in office of such officer, as the case may be.  
1[154A. Rounding off of duty, etc .—The amount of duty, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum 
payable, and the amount of refund, drawback or any other sum due, under the provisions  of this Act shall 
be rounded off to the nearest rupee and, for this purpose, where such amount contains a part of a rupee 
consisting of  paise  then, if such part is fifty  paise  or more, it shall be increased to one rupee and if such 
part is less than fifty  paise  it shall be ignored.]  
2[154B.  Publication of information respect ing persons in certain cases .—(1)   If the Central 
Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest to publish the names of 
any person and any other particulars relating to any proceedings or prosecutions under this Act in respect 
of such person, it may cause to be published such names and particulars in such manners as it thinks fit.  
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in relation to a ny penalty imposed under this Act 
until the time for presenting an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) under section 128 or the Appellate 
Tribunal under section 129A, as the case may be, has expired without an appeal having been presented or 
the appeal, i f presented, has been disposed  of. 
Explanation .—In the case of a firm, company or other association of persons, the names of the 
partners of the firm, directors, managing agents, secretaries and treasures or managers of the company, or 
the members of the association, as the case may be, may also be published if, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, circumstances of the case justify it.]  
155. Protection o f action taken under the Act .—(1)   No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie again st the Central Government or any officer of the Government or a local 
authority for anything which is done, or intended to be done in good faith, in pursuance of this Act or the 
rules or regulations.  
(2) No proceeding other than a suit shall be commenced a gainst the Central Government or any 
officer of the Government or a local authority for anything purporting to be done in pursuance of this Act 
without giving the Central Government or such officer a month ’s previous notice in writing of the 
intended proce eding and of the cause thereof, or after the expiration of three months from the accrual of 
such cause.  
156. General power to make rules .—(1) Without prejudice to any power to make rules contained 
elsewhere in this Act, the Central Government may make rule s consistent with this Act generally to carry 
out the purposes of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1990, s. 62 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1990).  
2. Ins. by Act 29 of 2006, s. 3 3 (w.e.f. 13 -7-2006).  117 
 (2) In particular  and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
1[(a) the manner of determining the transaction value of the imported goods and export goods 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;]  
(b) the conditions subject to which accessories of, and spare parts and maintenance and repairing 
implements for, any article shall be chargeable  at the same rate of duty as that article;  
2[(c) the due date  and the manner of making deferred payment of duties, taxes, cesses or any other 
charges under sections 47 and 51.]  
(d) the detention and confiscation of goods the importation of which is prohibited and the 
conditions, if any, to be fulfilled before such detention and confiscation and the information, notices 
and security to be given and the evidence requisite for the purposes of such detention or confiscation 
and the mode of verification o f such evidence;  
(e) the reimbursement by an informant to any public officer of all expenses and damages incurred 
in respect of any detention of any goods made on his information and of any proceedings consequent 
on such detention;  
(f) the information requ ired in respect of any goods mentioned in a shipping bill or bill of export 
which are not exported or which are exported and are afterwards re -landed;  
3[(g) the publication, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, of names and other 
particu lars of persons who have been found guilty of contravention of any of the provisions of this 
Act or the rules.]  
4[(h) the amount to be paid  5[for compounding and the manner of compounding] under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 137.]  
157.  General power to mak e regulations .—(1) Without  prejudice to any power to make regulations 
contained elsewhere in this Act, the Board may make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules, 
generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prej udice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) the form  6[and manner to deliver or present]  of a bill of entry, shipping bill, bill of export, 
7[arrival manifest or import manifest ], import report, 8[departure manifest or export manifest ], export 
report,  9[bill of  transhipment, declaration for  transhipment]  boat note and bill of coastal goods;  
10[(ai) the manner of export of goods, relinquishment of title to the goods and abandoning them to 
customs and destruction or rendering of goods commercially valueless in the presence of the proper 
officer under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 26A;  
(aii) the form and manner of making application for refund of duty under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 26A;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2007, s. 113, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 10 -10-2007) vide Notification No. 93/2007 -Cus. (N.T.), dated  
10-9-2007 . 
2. Ins. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 138 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
3. Added by Act 36 of 1973, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973). 
4. Ins. by Act 23 of 2004, s. 73 (w.e.f. 10 -9-2004).  
5. Subs. by Act 33 of 2009, s. 90, for ―for compounding‖ (w.e.f. 19 -8-2009).  
6. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 100 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
7. Subs. by s. 56, ibid., for ―import manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
8. Subs. by s. 56, ibid., for ―export manifest‖ (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
9. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999, s. 115, for ―bill of transhipment‖ (w.e.f. 11 -9-1999).  
10. Ins. by Act 33 of 2009, s. 91 (w.e.f. 19 -8-2009).  118 
 1[(aa) the 2[form and manner] in which an application for refund shall be made under  
section 27;]  
3[(ab) the form, the particulars, the manner and the time of delivering the passenger and crew 
manifest for arrival and departure  and passenger name record information and the penalty for delay in 
delivering such information under sections 30A and 41A;]  
(b) the conditions subject to which the  transhipment  of all or any goods under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 54, the transportation of  all or any goods under section 56 and the removal of warehoused 
goods from one warehouse to another under section 67, may be allowed without payment of duty;  
(c) the conditions  subject to which any manufacturing process or other operations may be carried 
on in a warehouse under section 65.  
4[(d) the time and manner of finalisa tion of provisional assessment;  
(e) the manner of conducting pre -notice consultation;  
(f) the circumstan ces under which, and the manner in which, supplementary notice may be issued;  
(g) the form and manner in which an application for advance ruling or appeal shall be made, and 
the procedure for the Authority, under Chapter VB;  
(h) the manner of clearance or removal of imported or export goods;  
(i) the documents to be furnished in relation to imported goods;  
(j) the conditions, restrictions and the manner of making deposits in electronic cash ledger, the 
utilisation and refund therefrom and the manner of maintaining such ledger;  
(k) the manner of conducting audit;  
(l) the goods for controlled delivery and the manner thereof;  
(m) the measures and separate procedure or documentation for a class of importers or exporters or 
categories of goods or on the basis  of the modes of transport of goods.]  
158.  Provisions with resp ect to rules and regulations .—(1) All rules and regulations made under 
this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Any rule or regulation which the Central Government or the Board  is empowered to m ake under 
this Act may provide — 
(i)  for the levy of fees in respect of applications, amendment of documents, furnishing of 
duplicates of documents, issue of certificates, and supply of statistics, and for rendering of any 
services by off icers of customs under this Act;  
5[(ii) that any person who contravenes any provision of a rule or regulation or abets such 
contravention or who fails to comply with any provision of a rule or regulation with which it was his 
duty to comply, shall be liabl e to a penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.]   
6[159.    Rules, certain notifications and orders  to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule or 
regulation made under this Act, every notification issued under sections 11, 11B, 11H, 11 -I, 11K, 11N,  
14, 25, 28A, 43, 66, 69, 70, 74, 75, 76, 98, 98A, 101 and 123 and every order made under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 25, other than an order relating to goods of strategic, secret, individual or personal nature, shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1991, s. 14 (w.e.f. 20-9-1991).  
2. Subs. by  Act 22 of 1995, s. 67, for ―for m‖ (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  
3. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 108 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2017).  
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 100, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2018).  
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 2008, s. 75, for clause ( ii) (w. e.f. 10 -5-2008).  
6. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 68, for section 159 (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  119 
 session,  for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session, or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the ses sion or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
notification or order, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made or notification or 
order should not be issued or  made, the rule or regulation or notification or order shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythi ng previously done under 
that rule or regulation or notification or order.]  
1[159A.    Effect of amendments, etc., of rules, regulati ons, notifications or orders .—Where any 
rule, regulation, notification or order made or issued under this Act or any notification or order issued 
under such rule or regulation, is amended, repealed, superseded or rescinded, then, unless a different 
intention appears, such amendment, repeal, supersession or rescindin g shall not — 
(a)  revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the amendment, repeal, 
supersession or rescinding takes effect; or  
(b)  affect the previous operation of any rule, regulation, notification or order so amended, 
repealed, superseded or rescinded or anything duly done or suffer ed thereunder; or  
(c)  affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any rule, 
regulation, notification or order so amended, repealed, superseded or rescinded; or  
(d)  affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed 
under or in violation of any rule, regulation, notification or order so amended, repealed, superseded or 
rescinded; or  
(e)  affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, priv ilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the rule, regu lation, notification or order, as 
the case may be, had not been amended, repealed, superseded or rescinded.]  
160.  Repeal and savings .—(1) The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed to the 
extent mentioned in the fourth column thereof.  
(2) In the Indian Ta riff Act, 1934 (32 of 1934) — 
(a)  for section 2, the following secti on shall be substituted, namely: — 
―2. Duties specified i n the Schedules to be levied .—The rates at which duties of customs 
shall be levied under the Customs Act, 1962, are specified in the First and Second 
Schedules.  
(b)  sections  5 and 6 shall stand repealed.  
 (3) Notwithstanding the repeal of any enactment by this section, — 
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, order or notice issued or any appointment or declaration  
made or any licence, permission or exemption granted for any assessment made, confiscation 
adjudged or any duty levied or any penalty or fine imposed or any forfeiture, cancellation or 
discharge of any bond ordered or any other thing done or any other act ion taken under any repealed 
enactment shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been 
done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act;  
(b) any document referring to any enactment hereby repealed shall be construed as referring to 
this Act or to the corresponding provision of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2001, s. 113 (w.e.f. 11 -5-2001).   120 
 (4) This Act  shall apply to all goods which are subject to the control of customs at the commencement 
of this Act notwithstanding that the goods were imported before  such commencement.  
(5) Where the period prescribed for any application, appeal, revision or other proceeding under any 
repealed enactment had expired on or before the commencement of this Act, nothing in this Act shall be 
construed as enabling any such ap plication, appeal or revision to be made or a proceeding to be instituted 
under this Act by reason only of the fact that a longer period  therefore  is prescribed or provision is made 
for extension of time in suitable cases by the appropriate authority.  
(6) The provisions of section 65 shall apply to goods warehoused before the commencement of this 
Act if the operations permissible under that section were carried on after such commencement.  
(7) Any duty or penalty payable under any repealed enactment may be r ecovered in a manner 
provided under this Act but without prejudice to any action already taken for the recovery of such duty or 
penalty under the repealed enactment.  
(8) The mention of particular matters in sub -sections ( 4), (5), (6) and ( 7) shall not be held to prejudice 
or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with regard to 
the effect of repeals.  
(9) Nothing in this Act shall affect any law for the time being in force relating to the constitution and 
powers of any Port authority in a major port as defined in the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908).  
161.   Removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
particularly in relation to the transition from the  enactments repealed by this Act to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order, do anything not inconsistent with such 
provisions which appears to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty .  121 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See Section 160)  
Repeals  
Year  No. Short title  Extent of repeal  
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1878  8 The Sea Customs Act  The whole  
1896  8 The Inland Bonded Warehouses Act  The whole  
1924  19 The Land Customs Act  The whole  
1934  22 The Aircraft Act  Section 16  
 
___________  
 
 
 
--------------------------The Defence of India Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE DEFENCE OF INDIA  ACT, 196 2                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application, duration and savings.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
EMERGENCY POWERS  
3. Power to make rules.  
4. Special powers to control civilian personnel employed in connection with the Armed Forces of the 
Union . 
5. Enhanced penalties.  
6. Temporary amendments to Acts.  
CHAPTER III  
CIVIL DEFENCE SERVICES  
7. Constitution of Civil Defence Service.  
8. Appointment of members and officers.  
9. Dismissal of members of Civil Defence Service.  
10. Functions of members of Civil Defence Services.  
11. Penalty.  
12. Power to make rules.  
CHAPTER IV  
SPECIAL TRIBUNALS  
13. Constitution of Special Tribunals.  
14. Jurisdiction of Special Tribunals.  
15. Procedure of Special Tribunals.  
16. Exclusion of public from proceedings of Special Tribunals.  
17. Power of Special Tribunals.  
18. Sentences of Special Tribunals.  
CHAPTER V  
EMPLOY MEN T OF TECHNICAL PERSONNEL IN THE NATIONAL SERVICE  
19. Definitions.  
20. Liability for employment in national service.  
21. National Service Tribunals.  
22. Notified establishments.  2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Employment of technical personnel in the national service.  
24. Reinstatement.  
25. Relinquishment of employment by dismissal of, and engagement by Establishment  of, technical 
personnel . 
26. Penalties and procedure.  
27. Service of summons, notices, orders, etc.  
28. Power to make rules.  
CHAPTER VI  
REQUISITIONING AND  ACQUISITION OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
29. Requisitioning of immovable property.  
30. Payment of compensation.  
31. Power to obtain information and give direction.  
32. Power of entry into, and inspection of, property, etc.  
33. Eviction from requ isitioned property.  
34. Penalty for contravention of any order regarding requisitioning.  
35. Release from requisition.  
36. Acquisition of requisitioned property.  
37. Compensation for acquisition of requisitioned property.  
38. Power to make rules.  
39. Certa in properties requisitioned under previous law to be deemed to be requisitioned under this 
Chapter.  
CHAPTER VII  
SUPPLEMENTAL  
40. Power to delegate.  
41. Rules to be laid before Houses of Parliament.  
42. Jurisdiction of ordinary courts.  
43. Effect of Act and  rules, etc., inconsistent with other enactments.  
44. Ordinary avocations of life to be interfered with as little as possible.  
45. Savings as to orders.  
46. Chapter III not to apply to measures taken for the protection of Armed Forces.  
47. Protection of ac tion taken under the Act.  
48. Repeal and saving.  
49. Validation o f certain requisitions.  
  3 
 THE DEFENCE OF INDIA ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 51 OF 1962  
[12th December, 1962 .] 
An Act to provide for special measures to ensure the public safety and interest, the defence  of 
India and civil defence and for the trial of certain offences and for matters connected 
therewith.  
WHEREAS  the President has declared by Proclamation under clause (1) of article 352 of the 
Constitution that a grave emergency exists whereby the security  of India is threatened by external 
aggression;  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to provide for special measures to ensure the public safety and interest, 
the defence of India and civil defence  and for the trial of certain offences and for matters connected 
therewith;  
BE it, therefore, enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
 PRELIMINARY   
1. Short title, extent, application, duration and savings .—(1) This Act may be called the Defence 
of India Act, 1962.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India and it applies also — 
(a) to citizens of India outside India;  
(b) to persons in the service of the Government, wherever they may be;  
(c) in respect of the regulation and discipline of the naval, military and air forces or any other 
armed forces of the Union, to members of, and persons attached to, employed with, or following, 
those forces, wherever they may be;  
(d) to, and to persons on, ships and aircra ft registered in India, wherever they may be.  
(3) It shall remain in force during the period of operation of the Proclamation of Emergency issued on 
the 26th October, 1962, and for a period of six months thereafter but its expiry under the operation of thi s 
sub-section shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under, this Act or any rule made 
thereunder or any order made under any such rule, or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or in curred under this Act or any 
rule made thereunder or any order made under any such rule, or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence under this Act or any 
contravention of any rule made under this Act or of any order mad e under any such rule, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instit uted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not expired.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “civil defence ” includes any measures not amounting to actual  combat, for affording defence 
against any form of hostile attack by a foreign power or for depriving any form of hostile attack by a 
foreign power of its effect either wholly or in part whether such measures are taken before, during or 
after the time of t he attack;  
(b) “Civil Defence Services ” mean the services formed wholly or mainly to meet the needs of 
civil defence;  4 
 (c) “enemy” means— 
(i) any person or country committing external aggression against India;  
(ii) any  person belonging to a country committing such aggression;  
(iii) such other country as may be declared by the Central Government to be assisting the 
country committing such aggression;  
(iv) any person belonging to such other country;  
(d) “enemy territory ” means— 
(i) any area which is under the sovereignty of a country referred to in sub -clause ( i); or a 
country referred to in sub -clause ( iii), of clause ( c) of this section;  
(ii) any area which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gaze tte, 
specify to be enemy territory for the purposes of this Act or any rule made thereunder;  
(e) “military operations ” mean the operations of the Armed Forces of the Union;  
(f) “occupied territory ” means any territory of India which is for the time being i n the occupation 
of a country referred to in sub -clause ( i) or a country referred to in sub -clause ( iii), of clause ( c) of 
this section;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “Proclamation of Emergency ” means the Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 352 
of the Constitution on the 26th October, 1962;  
(i) “State Government ” in relation to a Union territory means the administrator thereof.  
CHAPTER II  
EMERGENCY POWERS  
3. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make such rules as appear to it necessary or expedient for securing the defence of India and civil defence, 
the public safety, the maintenance of public order or the efficient conduct o f military operations, or for 
maintaining supplies and services essential to the life of the community.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1), the rules may 
provide for, and may empower any authority to make ord ers providing for, all or any of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(1) ensuring  the safety and welfare or the Armed Forces of the Union, ships and aircrafts, and 
preventing the prosecution of any work likely to prejudice the operations of the Armed Forces of the 
Union;  
(2) prohibiting anything likely to prejudice the training, discip line or health of the Armed Forces 
of the Union;  
(3) preventing any attempt to tamper with the loyalty of persons in, or to dissuade (otherwise than 
with advice given in good faith to the person dissuaded for his benefit or that of any member of his 
family  or any of his dependents) persons from entering, the service of the Government;  
(4) preventing or prohibiting anything likely to assist the enemy or to prejudice the successful 
conduct of military operations or civil defence including — 
(a) communications with the enemy or agents of the enemy;  
(b) acquisition, possession without lawful authority or excuse and publication of information 
likely to assist the enemy;  
(c) contribution to, participation or assistance in, the floating of loans raised by or on beha lf 
of the enemy;  5 
 (d) advance of money to, or contracts or commercial dealings with the enemy, enemy 
subjects or persons residing, carrying on business, or being, in enemy territory or occupied 
territory; and  
(e) acts, publications or communications prejudi cial to civil defence or military operations;  
(5) preventing the spreading without lawful authority or excuse of reports or the prosecution of 
any purpose, likely to cause disaffection or alarm, or to prejudice India ’s relations with foreign 
powers or to p rejudice maintenance of peaceful conditions in any area or part of India, or to promote 
feelings of ill -will, enmity or hatred between different classes of the people of India;  
(6) requiring the publication of news and information;  
(7) (a) prohibiting the printing or publishing of any newspaper, news -sheet, book or other 
document containing matters prejudicial to the defence of India and civil defence, the public safety, 
the maintenance of public order, the efficient conduct of military operations or the ma intenance of 
supplies and services essential to the life of the community;  
(b) demanding security from any press used for the purpose of printing or publishing, and 
forfeiting the copies of, any newspaper, news -sheet, book or other document containing any of the 
matters referred to in sub -clause ( a); 
(c) forfeiture of such security and the circumstances in which and the authority by whom such 
forfeiture may be ordered;  
(d) closing down any press or any premises used for the purpose of printing or publishing any 
newspaper, news -sheet, book or other document containing any of the matters referred to in            
sub-clause ( a) in spite of the forfeiture of such security;  
(8) regulating the conduct of persons in respect of areas the control of which is considered 
necessary or expedient, and the removal of persons from such areas;  
(9) requiring any person or class of persons to comply with any scheme of defence or civil 
defenc e; 
(10) ensuring the safety of — 
(a) ports, dockyards, lighthouses, light -ships and aerodromes;  
(b) railways, tramways, roads, bridges, canals and all other means of transport by land or 
water;  
(c) telegraphs, post offices, signa lling apparatus and all other means of communication;  
(d) sources and systems of water -supply, works for the supply of water, gas or electricity, and 
all other works for public purposes;  
(e) vessels, aircraft, transport vehicles as defined in the Motor Vehicles                                 
Act, 1939  (4 of 1939), and rolling stocks of railways and tramways;  
(f) warehouses and all other places used or intended to be used for storage purposes;  
(g) mines, oil -fields, factories or industrial or commercial undertaki ngs generally, or any 
mine, oil -field, factory or industrial or commercial undertaking in particular;  
(h) laboratories and institutions where scientific or technological research or training is 
conducted or imparted;  
(i) all works and structures being part of, or connected with, anything earlier mentioned in 
this clause; and  
  6 
 (j) any other place or thing used or intended to be used for the purposes of Government or a 
local authority or a semi -Government or autonomous organis ation, the protection of which is 
considered necessary or expedient for securing the defence of India and civil defence, the public  
safety, the public order, or the efficient conduct of military operations, or for maintaining supplies 
and services essentia l to the life of the community;  
(11) the demolition, destruction or rendering useless in case of necessity of any building or other 
premises or any other property;  
(12) prohibiting or regulating traffic, and the use of vessels, buoys, lights and signals, i n ports and 
territorial, tidal and inland waters;  
(13) the control of lights and sounds;  
(14) the control of persons entering, trave lling in or departing from, India;  
(15) notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, — 
(i) the appr ehension and detention in custody of any person whom the authority empowered 
by the rules to apprehend or detain (the authority empowered to detain not being lower in rank 
than that of a District Magistrate) suspects, on grounds appearing to that authority  to be 
reasonable, of being of hostile origin or of having acted, acting, being about to act or being likely 
to act in a manner prejudicial to the defence of India and civil defence, the security of the State, 
the public safety or interest, the maintenance  of public order, India ’s relations with foreign States, 
the maintenance of peaceful conditions in any part or area of India or the efficient conduct of 
military operations, or with respect to whom that authority is satisfied that his apprehension and 
detention are necessary for the purpose of preventing him from acting in any such prejudicial 
manner,  
(ii) the prohibition of such person from entering or residing or remaining in any area,  
(iii) the compelling of such person to reside and remain in any area, or to do or abstain from 
doing anything, and  
(iv) the review of orders of detention passed in pursuance of any rule made under               
sub-clause ( i); 
(16) restricting and regulating the charter of foreign vessels and aircraft;  
(17) regulating  the structure and equipment of vessels for the purpose of ensuring the safety 
thereof and of persons therein;  
(18) regulating work in dockyards, shipyards and aerodromes in respect of the construction and 
repairs of vessels and aircraft;  
(19) prohibiting or regulating the sailings of vessels from ports, traffic at aerodromes and the 
movement of aircraft, and traffic on railways, tramways and roads, and reserving and requiring to be 
adapted, for the use of the Government, all or any accommodation in vessels , aircraft, railways, 
tramways or road vehicles for the carriage of persons, animals or goods;  
(20) the impressment of vessels, aircraft, vehicles, and animals for transport;  
(21) prohibiting or regulating the use of postal, telegraphic or telephonic servi ces, including the 
taking possession of such services, and the delaying, seizing, intercepting or interrupting of postal 
articles or telegraphic or telephonic messages;  
(22) regulating the delivery otherwise than by postal or telegraphic service of postal articles and 
telegrams;  
(23) the control of trade or industry for the purpose of regulating or increasing the supply of, and 
the obtaining of information with regard to articles or things of any description whatsoever which 
may be used in connection with t he conduct of military operations or civil defence or for maintaining 
supplies and services essential to the life of the community;  7 
 (24) the control of generation, supply, distribution, use or consumption of electrical energy;  
(25) the taking over by the C entral Government or the State Government, for a limited period, of 
the management of any property (including any undertaking) relating to supplies and services 
essential to the life of the community;  
(26) the control of agriculture (including the cultivat ion of agricultural land and crops to be raised 
therein) for the purpose of increasing th e production and supply of food grains and other essential 
agricultural products;  
(27) the provision, storage and maintenance of commodities and things required for the  conduct 
of military operations or for the defence of India and civil defence;  
(28) the requisition of services of persons for maintaining supplies and services essential to the 
life of the community;  
(29) the provision, construction, maintenance or altera tion of buildings, premises or other 
structures or excavations required for the conduct of military operations or the defence of India and 
civil defence;  
(30) the protection of property by the performance of such fire prevention and other duties as may 
be allotted to any person;  
(32) the securing of any building, premises or other structures from being readily recognisable in 
the event of a hostile attack by a foreign power;  
(32) prohibiting, restricting of otherwise regulating the bringing into, or taking out of, India of 
goods or articles of any description (including coin, bullion, bank notes, currency notes, securities and 
foreign exchange), and bringing into any part or place in India of any such goods or articles as 
aforesaid intended t o be taken out o f India without being removed from the ship, aircraft or other 
conveyance in which they are being carried, and applying the provisions of the Sea Customs           
Act, 1878  (8 of 1878), and in particular section 19 thereof to such prohibitions, restrictions and 
regulations;  
(33) controlling the possession, use or disposal of, or dealing in, coin, bullion, bank notes, 
currency notes, securities or foreign exchange;  
(34) the control of any road or pathway, waterway, ferry or bridge, river, canal or  other source of 
water -supply;  
(35) the requisitioning and acquisition of any movable property; and the principles on which and 
the manner in which compensation shall be determined and given in respect of such requisitioning or 
acquisition;  
(36) the preven tion of any corrupt practice or abuse of authority or other mala fide  action in 
relation to the production, storage, purchase, sale, supply or transport of goods for any purpose 
connected with the defence of India and civil defence, the efficient conduct o f military operations or 
the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the life of the community;  
(37) the prevention o f hoarding, profiteering, black marketing, or adulteration of or any other 
unfair practices in relation to, any goods procured by or supplied to the Government or notified by or 
under the rules as  essential to the life of the community;  
(38) prohibiting or regulating the possession, use or disposal of — 
(a) explosives, inflammable substances, corrosive and other dangerous substances or articles, 
arms and ammunitions of war;  
(b) vessels;  
(c) wireless telegraphic apparatus;  
(d) aircraft; and  
(e) photographic and signa lling apparatus and any means of recording information;  8 
 (39) prohibiting or regulating the bringing into, or taking out o f, India and the possession, use or 
transmission of ciphers and other secret means of communicating information;  
(40) prohibiting or regulating the publication of inventions and designs;  
(41) prohibiting or regulating the publication of results of research  work having a bearing on 
efforts relating to defence of India or military operations;  
(42) preventing the disclosure of official secrets;  
(43) prohibiting or regulating meetings, assemblies, fairs and processions;  
(44) preventing or controlling any use of uniforms, whether official or otherwise, flags, official 
decorations like medals, badges and other insignia and anything similar thereto, where such use is 
calculated to deceive or to prejudice the public safety, the maintenance of public order, the defence of 
India and civil defence;  
(45) ensuring the accuracy of any report or declaration legally required of any person;  
(46) preventing the unauthorized change of names;  
(47) preventing anything likely to cause misappre hension in respect of the identity of any official 
person, official document or official property or in respect of the identity of any person, document or 
property purporting to be, or resembling, an official person, official document or official property;  
(48) the precautionary measures which the Government or any department thereof or any local 
authority, members of police forces and fire brigades and members of any other service or authority 
employed primarily for purposes other than civil defence purpos es should be required to take within 
their respective jurisdictions or with respect to any personnel employed by them;  
(49) the seizure and custody or destruction of injured, unclaimed or dangerous animals;  
(50) the salvage of damaged buildings and propert y and disposal of the dead;  
(51) the evacuation of areas and the remov al of property or animals there from;  
(52) the accommodation in any area of persons evacuated from another area and the regulation of 
the conduct of evacuated persons accommodated in such area;  
(53) the billeting of evacuated persons or persons authorised to exercise functions under this Act;  
(54) the instruction of members of the public in civil defence and their equipment for purposes of 
civil defence;  
(55) the entry into, and search of, any place reasonably suspected of being used for any purpose 
prejudicial to the public safety or interest, to the defence of India and civil defence or to the efficient 
conduct of military operations, and for the seizure and disposal of anything found there and 
reasonably suspected of being used for such purpose;  
(56) the preparation of any scheme of defence service o r any other service connected with the 
defence of India and requiring any person or class of persons to comply with such scheme;  
(57) the eviction of unauthorised occupants from such public premises [as defined in the Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthori sed Occupants) Act, 1958  (32 of 1958) ] as are, in the opinion of the  
Central Government, required for the purposes connected with the defence of India and civil defence, 
the public safety or interest, the efficient conduct of military operations or the mai ntenance of 
supplies and services essential to the life of the community.  
(3) The rules made under sub -section ( 1) may further — 
(i) provide for the arrest and trial of persons contravening any of the rules or any order issued 
thereunder;  
(ii) provide that any contravention of, or any attempt to contravene, or any abetment of, or any 
attempt to abet, the contravention of any of the provisions of the rules or any order issued under any 
such provision, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may  extend to seven years, or 
with fine, or with both;  9 
 (iii) provide for the seizure, detention and forfeiture of any property in respect of which such 
contravention, attempt or abetment as is referred to in clause ( ii) has been committed and for the 
adjudica tion of such forfeiture whether by a court or by any other authority;  
(iv) confer powers and impose duties — 
(a) upon the Central Government or officers and authorities of the Central Government as 
respects any matter , notwithstanding that the matter is one  in respect of which the State 
Legislature has power to make laws; and  
(b) upon any State Government or officers and authorities of any State Government as 
respects any matter, notwithstanding that the matter is one in respect of which the State 
Legislatur e has no power to make laws;  
(v) prescribe the duties and powers of public servants and other persons as regards preventing the 
contravention of, or securing the observance of, the rules or any order made thereunder;  
(vi) provide for preventing obstruction  and deception of, and disobedience to, any person acting, 
and interference with any notice issued, in pursuance of the rules or any order made thereunder;  
(vii) prohibit attempts by any person to screen from punishment any one, other than the husband 
or wife of such person, contravening any of the rules or any order made thereunder;  
(viii) empower or direct any authority to take such action as may be specified in the rules or as 
may seem necessary to such authority for the purpose of ensuring the public safety or interest or the 
defence of India and civil defence;  
(ix) provide for charging  fees in respect of the grant or issue of a licence, permit, certificate or 
other document for the purposes of the rules.  
4. Special powers to control civilian personnel employed in connection with the Armed Forces 
of the Union .—The Central Government may,  by notification in the Official Gazette, direct by general or 
special order that any persons who not being members of the Armed Forces of the Union are attached to, 
or employed with, or following those Forces, shall be subject to naval, military or air fo rce law, and 
thereupon such persons shall be subject to discipline and liable to punishment for offences under the Navy 
Act, 1957  (62 of 1957), the Army Act, 1950  (46 of 1950) and the Air Force Act, 1950  (45 of 1950), as the 
case may be, as if they were in cluded in such class of persons subject to any of those Acts as may be 
specified in the notification or in the absence thereof, by an officer empowered by the Central 
Government in this behalf.  
5. Enhanced penalties .—(1) If any person contravenes, with int ent to wage war against India or to 
assist any country committing external aggression against India, any provision of the rules made under 
section 3 or any  order issued under any such rule, he shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life, or imp risonment for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) If any person, — 
(a) contravenes any such provision of, or any such rule or order made under the Aircraft            
Act, 1934  (22 of 1934), as may be notified in this behalf by the Central Government, or  
(b) in any area notified in this behalf by a State Government, contravenes any such provision      
of, or any such rule made under, the Arms Act, 1959  (54 of 1959), the Indian Explosives                
Act, 1884  (4 of 1 884), the Explosive Substances Act, 1908  (6 of 1908), or the Inflammable 
Substances Act, 1952  (20 of 1952), as may be notified in this behalf by the State Government,  
he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any of the aforesaid Acts or rules made t hereunder, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or, if his intention is to assist 
any country committing external aggression against India, or, to wage war against India, with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonme nt for a term which may extend to ten years and shall in either case 
also be liable to fine.  10 
 (3) For the purposes  of this section, any person who attempts to contravene, or abets or attempts to 
abet, or does any act preparatory to, a contravention of any provision of any law, rule or order shall be 
deemed to have contravened that provision.  
6. Temporary amendments to  Acts.—During the continuance in force of this Act ,— 
(1) the Indian Official Secrets Act, 1923  (19 of 1923) shall have effect as if — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 thereof, after the words “in his possession or control ”, the 
words “any information lik ely to assist the enemy as defined in the Defence of India Act, 1962, 
or” had been inserted; and after the words “in such a place, ” the words “or which relates to or is 
used in, a protected area as defined in the rules made under the Defence  of India Act, 1962, or 
relates to anything in such area, ” had been inserted;  
(b) for sub -section ( 4) of section 5 thereof, the following sub -section had been substituted, 
namely:— 
“(4) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or if such offence is committed with 
intent to assist any country committing  external aggression against India or to wage war 
against India, with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment fo r a term which may 
extend to ten years and shall in either case also be liable to fine. ”; 
1*                                *                                  *                                 *                             * 
(2) the Aircraft Act, 1934  (22 of 1934) shall have effect as if — 
(a) at the end of clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5, the following words had been 
inserted, namely: — 
“including the taking of steps necessary to secure compliance with, or to prevent 
contravention of, the rules re gulating such matters, or, where any such rule has been 
contravened, to rectify, or to enable proceedings to be taken in respect of, such 
contravention. ”; 
(b) in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 8, for the words, brackets, letters and figures   
“clause ( h) or clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5 ”, the words, brackets, letters and figures 
“clause ( d), (e), (h), (i), (k) or ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5, or the commission of an offence 
punishable under section 11, ” had been substituted:  
(c) in section 11, after the words “in the air”, the words “or in such a manner as to interfere 
with any of the Armed Forces of the Union or any ships or aircraft ” had been inserted;  
(d) in section 13, for the words, brackets, letters and figures “clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5 ” the words, brackets, letters and figures “clause ( c), (d), (e), (h), (i), (j), or ( k) of                
sub-section ( 2) of section 5 or punishable under section 11 ” had been substituted; and  
(e) section  14 had been omitted;  
(3) the Payment of Wages Act, 1936  (4 of 1936), shall have effect as if after clause ( i) of                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 7 thereof, the following clause had been inserted, namely: — 
“(ii) deductions made with the written authorisation of — 
(i) the employed person; or  
(ii) the president or secretary of the registered trade union of which the employed person 
is a member on such conditions as may be prescribed,  
for contribution to the National Defence Fund or to any Defence Sa vings Scheme approved by 
the State Government; ”; 
  
                                                           
1. Sub -clause ( c) omitted by Act 24 of 1967, s. 13 (w.e.f. 10 -7-1968).  11 
 (4) the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939)  (in this clause referred to as the “said Act”) shall 
have effect subject to the following provisions, namely: — 
(a) the  State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise, subject to 
such conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, any person — 
(i) also to perform such functions of the State Government under Chapter IV (in this 
clause referred t o as the “said Chapter ”) of the said Act, other than the making of rules as 
may be specified in the notification; and  
(ii) to perform to the exclusion of the State Transport Authority or Regional Transport 
Authority, as the case may be, such functions of the State Transport Authority or any 
Regional Transport Authority under the said Chapter as may be specified in the notificati on; 
and the expression “proper authority ” in this clause shall, in relation to the performance of any 
such function as aforesaid, be construed in accordance with the provisions of such notification, if 
any, relating to that function;  
(b) notwithstanding an ything to the contrary in section 58 or section 62 of the said Act, the 
proper authority may grant a permit or a temporary permit under the said Chapter to be effective 
for any specified period or for the period of operation of this Act, whichever is less;  
(c) the State Government may, by general or special order, in writing, provide that the proper 
authority, — 
(i) in deciding to grant or refuse to grant a permit under the said Chapter, shall not be 
bound to take into consideration representations made by a ny persons other than the applicant 
for the permit or to follow the procedure laid down in section 57 of the said Act, and may 
take into consideration an application for a stage carriage permit or a public carrier ’s permit 
which has not complied with the p rovisions of sub -section ( 2) of that section.  
(ii) in fixing the maximum and minimum fares or freights for stage carriages and public 
carriers, shall not be bound to give the representatives of the interests affected an opportunity 
of being heard or to fol low the procedure laid down in section 43 of the said Act, or where 
such action is taken for the purpose of preventing the charge of excess fares or freights, to 
have regard to any of the considerations set forth in clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of 
that section;  
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of section 60 of the said Act, the proper authority may, 
if in its opinion the public interest so requires, cancel, or modify the conditions of, or suspend for 
such period as it thinks fit, any permit or counter -signature under the said Chapter which is valid 
in its jurisdiction;  
(e) the Central Government or the State Government may, by general or special order in 
writing exempt from all or any of the provisions of the said Chapter any transport vehicl e used or 
required for use in connection with any work or purpose declared by the Central Government or, 
as the case may be, the State Government in the order to be a work or purpose connected with the 
defence of India, the conduct of military operations o r civil defence;  
(f) if the State Government by general or special order in writing so directs, the provisions of    
sub-section ( 2) of section 38 of the said Act shall have effect in relation to any controlled motor 
vehicles specified in the order as if t he words “not being in any case more than two years or less 
than six months ” had been omitted.  
Explanation. —In this clause “controlled motor vehicle ” means any motor vehicle declared by 
the Government to be a controlled motor vehicle by order made in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
CIVIL DEFENCE SERVICES  
7. Constitution of Civil Defence Service .—(1) The State Government may constitute for any area 
within the State a body of persons to be called the Civil Defence  Service and may appoint a person 
(hereinafter called the Director) to command such body.  12 
 (2) Subject to any orders which the Central Government may make in this behalf, any member of a 
Civil Defence Service of any State may at any time be required to disc harge functions in relation  to civil 
defence in any other State and shall while so discharging such functions be deemed to be a member of a 
Civil Defence Service of that other State and be vested with the powers, functions and privileges and be 
subject to the liabilities of a member of a Civil Defence Service of that other State.  
8. Appointment of members and officers .—(1) Any authority authorised in this behalf by the State 
Government may appoint as members of a Civil Defence Service so many persons who ar e fit and willing 
to serve as such as it is authorised by the State Government to appoint, and the Director may appoint any 
such member to any office or command in the Service.  
(2) Every person so appointed to be a member of a Civil Defence Service shall b e given a certificate 
of membership in such form as may be prescribed.  
9. Dismissal of members of Civil Defence Service .—The Director or any other authority authorised 
in this behalf by the State Government may, by order in writing, dismiss summarily from a Civil Defence 
Service any member thereof if, in the opinion of the Director or such other authority, he fails to discharge 
satisfactorily, or is guilty of misconduct in the discharge of, his duties as such member, or his continued 
presence in the Service  is otherwise undesirable.  
10. Functions of members of Civil Defence Services .—(1) The members of a Civil Defence Service 
shall perform such functions in relation to the carrying out of measures for civil defence as may be 
assigned to them by rules made un der this Act or by any other law for the time being in force.  
(2) The Director or any person authorised in this behalf by the Director or by the State Government 
may by order at any time call out a member of a Civil Defence Service for training or to disch arge any 
such functions as aforesaid.  
11. Penalty .—If any member of a Civil Defence Service on being called out by an order under       
sub-section ( 2) of section 10 neglects or refuses without sufficient excuse to obey such order or to 
discharge his funct ions as a member of the Civil Defence Service or to obey any lawful order or direction 
given to him for the performance of his duties he shall, on conviction by a competent court, be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
12. Power t o make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may — 
(a) prescribe the duties of members of Civil Defence Services and regulate the manner in which 
they may be called out for service;  
(b) regulate the organisation, appointment, conditions of service, discipline, accoutrement, and 
clothing of members of any or al l of the Civil Defence Services;  
(c) prescribe the form of certificates of membership of any or all of the Civil Defence Services;  
(d) provide that a contravention of, or an attempt to contravene, and any abetment of or attempt to 
abet the contravention of , any of the provisions of the rules or of any order issued under any such 
provision shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with 
fine, or with both;  
(e) provide for the arrest and trial of persons contravening,  or reasonably suspected of 
contravening, any of the provisions of the rules or of any order issued under any such provision;  
(f) provide for the seizure, detention and forfeiture of any property in respect of which such 
contravention, attempt or abetment as is referred to in clause ( d) has been committed;  
(g) prescribe the duties and powers of public servants and other persons as regards preventing the 
contravention of, or securing the observance of, the rules or of any order issued thereunder;  13 
 (h) provide  for preventing the obstruction and deception of, and disobedience to, any person 
acting, and interference with any notice issued, in pursuance of the rules or of any order issued 
thereunder;  
(i) prohibit attempts to screen from punishment any person contr avening any of the rules.  
CHAPTER IV  
SPECIAL TRIBUNALS  
13. Constitution of Special Tribunals .—(1) The State Government may, for the whole or any part of 
the State, constitute one or more Special Tribunals which or each of which shall consist of three members 
appointed by that Government.  
(2) No person shall be appointed as a member of a Special Tribunal unless he — 
(a) is qualified under clause (2) of article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of a 
High Court; or  
(b) has for a total period of not less than three years exercised, whether continuously or not, the 
powers under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) (hereafter in this Chapter referred to 
as the Code) of any one or more of the following, namely: — 
(i) Sessions Jud ge, Additional Sessions Judge, Chief Presidency Magistrate, Additional Chief 
Presidency Magistrate,  
(ii) District Magistrate, Additional District Magistrate.  
(3) At least one member of a Special Tribunal shall be qualified for appointment thereto under     
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), and where only one member is so qualified under that clause, at least one 
other member shall be qualified for appointment under clause ( b) of that sub -section by virtue of having 
exercised powers exclusive of those specified  in sub -clause ( ii) of the said clause ( b). 
14. Jurisdiction of Special Tribunals .—During the period during which the Proclamation of 
Emergency is in operation, the State Government may, by general or special order, direct that a Special 
Tribunal shall try  any offence — 
(a) under any rule made under section 3, or  
(b) punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
ten years under section 5 of this Act or under sub -section ( 4) of section 5 of the Indian Official 
Secrets Act, 1923  (19 of 1923), as amended by section 6 of this Act,  
triable by any court having jurisdiction within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Special Tribunal 
and may in any such order direct the transfer to the Special Tribunal of any part icular case from any other 
Special Tribunal or any other criminal court not being a High Court.  
15. Procedure of Special Tribunals .—(1) A Special Tribunal may take cognizance of offences 
without the accused being committed to it for trial.  
(2) Save in cases of trials of offences punishable with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years or more, it shall not be necessary in any trial for a Special 
Tribunal to take down the evidence at length in writing, but the Special Tribunal shall cause a 
memorandum of the substance of what each witness deposes, to be taken down, and such memorandum 
shall be signed by a member of the Special Tribunal and shall form part of the record.  
(3) A Special Tribunal shall not be bound to adjourn any trial for any purpose unless such 
adjournment is, in its opinion, necessary in the interests of justice.  
(4) A Special Tribunal shall not, merely by reason of a change in its members, be bound to recall and 
to re -hear any witness who h as given evidence, and it may act on the evidence already recorded by or 
produced before it . 
  14 
 (5) After an accused person has once appeared before it, a Special Tribunal may try him in his 
absence if, in its opinion, his absence has been brought about by the accused himself for the purpose of 
impeding the course of justice, or if the behaviour of the accused in court has been such as, in the opinion 
of the Special Tribunal, to impede the course of justice.  
(6) In the event of any difference of opinion amon g the members of a Special Tribunal, the opinion of 
the majority shall prevail.  
(7) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules providing for — 
(i) the times and places at which Special Tribunals may sit; and  
(ii) the proce dure to be adopted in the event of any member of a Special Tribunal being prevented 
from attending throughout the trial of any accused person.  
(8) A Special Tribunal shall, in all matters in respect to which no procedure has been prescribed by 
this Act or by rules made thereunder, follow the procedure prescribed by the Code for the trial of warrant 
cases by Magistrates.  
16. Exclusion of public from proceedings of Special Tribunals .—In addition, and without 
prejudice, to any powers which a Special Tribunal m ay possess by virtue of any law for the time being in 
force to order the exclusion of the public from any proceedings , if at any stage in the course of a trial of 
any person before a Special Tribunal, application is made by the prosecution, on the ground t hat the 
publication of any evidence to be given or of any statement to be made in the course of the trial would be 
prejudicial to the safety of the State, that all or any portion of the public shall be excluded during any part 
of the hearing, the Special T ribunal may make an order to that effect, but the passing of the sentence shall 
in any case take place in public.  
17. Power of Special Tribunals .—A Special Tribunal shall have all the powers conferred by the 
Code on a Court of Session exercising original jurisdiction.  
18. Sentences of Special Tribunals .—(1) A Special Tribunal may pass any sentence authorised by 
law. 
(2) A person sentenced by a Special Tribunal — 
(a) to death or imprisonment for life, or  
(b) to imprisonment for a term of five years or more, under this Act or the rules made thereunder 
or under sub -section ( 4) of section 5 of the Indian Official Secrets Act, 1923  (19 of 1923), as 
amended by section 6 of this Act,  
shall have a right of appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the sente nce has been passed, but 
save as aforesaid and notwithstanding the provisions of the Code, or of any other law for the time being in 
force, or of anything having the force of law by whatsoever authority made or done, there shall be no 
appeal from any order  or sentence of a Special Tribunal, and no court shall have authority to revise such 
order or sentence, or to transfer any case from a Special Tribunal, or to make any order under section 491 
of the Code, or have any jurisdiction of any kind in respect of any proceedings of a Special Tribunal.  
(3) The powers conferred upon the appropriate Government by Chapter XXIX of the Code shall apply 
in respect of a person sentenced by a Special Tribunal.  
CHAPTER V  
 EMPLOY MEN T OF TECHNICAL PERSONNEL IN THE NATIONAL SERVICE   
19. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “employment in the national service ” means employment in a notified establishment in 
pursuance of an order passed under section 23;  
(b) “employer ” means any person who e mploys technical personnel to do any work in an 
establishment and includes any person entrusted with the supervision and control of technical 
personnel in such an establishment;  15 
 (c) “establishment ” means— 
(i) any office, or  
(ii) any  place where any industry, trade, business or occupation is carried on; and includes 
any technical institution or training centre established, selected or approved by the Central 
Government;  
(d) “National Service Tribunal ” means a Tribunal constituted unde r section 21;  
(e) “notified establishment ” means any Government establishment and any establishment 
declared by notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 22 to be engaged in work of national 
importance;  
(f) “notified occupation ” means any occupation wh ich the Central Government may, by rules 
made under this Chapter, specify as a notified occupation for the purposes of this Chapter;  
(g) “technical personnel ” means all persons who possess knowledge of or skill in one or more of 
the notified occupations, w hether or not they are employed in any establishment, and includes such 
persons or class of persons undergoing training in any of those occupations in any establishment as 
may be declared by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette to  be technical 
personnel for the purposes of this Chapter.  
20. Liability for employment in national service .—All technical personnel, being citizens of India 
and not being members of the Armed Forces of the Union or members of any Reserve of any such Force 
who are liable, under the terms of their service in such Reserve, to be called up for service at any time and 
not only on partial or general mobilisation, shall be liable under this Chapter to undertake employment in 
the national service.  
21. National Serv ice Tribunals .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute, for such areas and in 
such places as it thinks fit, National Service Tribunals to exercise the functions assigned to such tribunals 
by or under this Chapter.  
(2) The composition, powers and proced ure of National Service Tribunals shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
22. Notified establishments .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare any establishment, which is engaged in work which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, is likely to assist the defence of India and civil defence, the efficient conduct of military 
operations, or the m aintenance or increase of supplies and services essential to the life of the community, 
to be an establishment engaged in work of national importance and thereupon such establishment shall be 
a notified establishment and while making such declaration, the Central Government may require that 
establishment to make such provisions as may be specified in the notification in regard to the terms of 
service and conditions of work of its employees.  
(2) Every notified establishment shall be eligible to apply to a Na tional Service Tribunal or to the 
Central Government for technical personnel and having so applied, shall take into its employment such 
technical personnel within such period and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.  
23. Employment of technica l personnel in the national service .—(1) Subject to any rules made in 
this behalf under this Chapter, the Central Government may require a National Service Tribunal to report 
what technical personnel, whether employed in an  establishment or not, is availab le within its jurisdiction 
for employment in the national service and may by order in writing, — 
(a) require the employer in any establishment by which such technical personnel is employed to 
release such personnel as may be specified in the order, for employment in the national service;  
(b) direct any technical personnel to undertake such employment in the national service as may be 
specified in the order;  
(c) direct that any technical personnel engaged in any establishment under conditions not 
amountin g to employment in the national service shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 8), be deemed 
to have been taken into employment in the national service; and  16 
 (d) require any notified establishment, notwithstanding that it has not made any application under  
section 22, to take into its employment such technical personnel within such period as may be 
specified in the order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub -section ( 1), a National Service Tribunal may — 
(a) exercise the powers conferred on the Central Govern ment by clauses ( a) and ( b) of                
sub-section ( 1); 
(b) require by order any employer to give training in his establishment to persons for qualifying 
them as technical personnel;  
(c) direct  by order technical personnel to present themselves at such place and time as may be 
specified in the order for interview or inquiry, and if so required, for submission to a test of their 
technical skill.  
(3) Any order made by the Central Government under sub-section ( 1) and by a National Service 
Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) shall be complied with within such period or on such date as may be 
specified in this behalf in the order.  
(4) The Central Government or, as the case may be, a National Service Tribun al, may, by order in 
writing, transfer technical personnel from one form or place of employment in the national service to 
another; and the employer and the personnel concerned shall comply with such order.  
(5) No person included in the definition of techn ical personnel, who has been directed to undertake 
employment in the national service or transferred from one form or place of employment to  another under 
the foregoing provisions, shall be discharged from or leave his employment in such service unless the  
employer or person concerned has previously obtained the permission of the Central Government or, as 
the case may be, of the National Service Tribunal.  
(6) Any person included in the definition of technical personnel who is required to undertake 
employmen t in the national service or transferred from one form or place of employment to another under 
the foregoing provisions of this section, may be required by the Central Government, or, as the case may 
be, the National Service Tribunal concerned, to submit h imself to be examined by such medical authority 
as may be prescribed.  
(7) An appeal shall lie to the Central Government against any order passed by a National Service 
Tribunal under this section and the decision of the Central Government shall be final.  
(8) The terms of service of technical personnel taken into employment in the national service shall be 
such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that any rights which such technical personnel may have under the provident or 
superannuation fund or other scheme rela ting to gratuity, bonus or other benefit for the advantage of 
employees maintained by the establishment from which they are released shall be preserved.  
24. Reinstatement .—(1) Every person who was employed in an establishment immediately before 
his employm ent in the national service and whose employment in the national service has not been 
terminated by dismissal for serious misconduct shall, on his release from such employment in the national 
service, be entitled to be reinstated in his former employment, in accordance with such conditions as may 
be prescribed:  
Provided that in determining such conditions regard shall be had to the additional skill and experience 
acquired by him in the course of his employment in the national service.  
(2) The Central Govern ment may by rules made in this behalf provide for the appointment of 
Technical Personnel (Reinstatement) Tribunals to deal with such matters in relation to reinstatement of 
persons released from employment in the national service as may be prescribed.  
  17 
 25. Relinquishment of employment by dismissal of, and engagement by Establishment              
of, technical personnel .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, a National Service Tribunal may  
require any establishment (including a notified establishment) to post before a specified date and to keep 
posted, on its premises notices intimating that — 
(a) no person included within the definition of technical personnel who is employed in the 
establishment shall at any time  after the posting of the notice, leave his employment without the 
previous permission in writing of the National Service Tribunal;  
(b) if the National Service Tribunal refuses such permission, that tribunal may lay down, subject 
to the prescribed conditions, the terms of service o n which the employer shall continue to retain him 
in employment;  
(c) if any such person leaves his employment without the previous permission in writing of the 
Tribunal as aforesaid he may be directed by the Tribunal to return to his employment.  
(2) After notices referred to in sub -section ( 1) have been posted on the premises of any establishment 
(including a notified establishment), no employer in the establishment shall engage, discharge or dismiss 
any person included in the definition of technical person nel except in accordance with rules made in this 
behalf.  
26. Penalties and procedure .—(1) Whoever contravenes any order of the Central Government or of 
a National Service Tribunal made under section 23 or wilfully fails to comply with any summons, 
requirem ent, direction or order issued or made by the Central Government or by a National Service 
Tribunal under any other provision of this Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding six months, or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) except with the 
previous sanction in writing, — 
(a) in the case of contravention of any order or any wilful failure to comply with any summons, 
requirem ent or direction of the Central Government, of the Central Government;  
(b) in the case of contravention of any order or any wilful failure to comply with any summons, 
requirement or direction of a National Service Tribunal, of the National Service Tribunal . 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898), an 
offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.  
(4) No court inferior to a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Class shall try any  offence 
punishable under sub -section ( 1). 
27. Service of summons, notices, orders, etc. —Any summons, notice, requirement, direction or 
order issued, made or given to any person under this Chapter may be served by being sent by registered 
post addressed to  that person at his last known residence.  
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing p ower, such rules may prescribe — 
(a) the occupations which shall be notified occupations for the purposes of this Chapter;  
(b) the composition, powers and procedure of National Service Tribunals;  
(c) the technical personnel, which may be taken into the employment of any notified 
establishment under sub -section ( 2) of section 22 and the period within which and the terms and 
conditions on which such personnel shall be so taken;  
(d) the  medical authority before whom any person may be required to submit himself for 
examination under sub -section ( 6) of section 23;  
(e) the terms of service of technical personnel taken into employment in the national service;  18 
 (f) the conditions in accordance  with which persons released from employment in the national 
service may be reinstated in their former employment;  
(g) the appointment of Technical Personnel (Reinstatement) Tribunals and the matters in relation 
to reinstatement which such Tribunals may be  required to deal with;  
(h) the provisions relating to engagement, discharge or dismissal of persons by any employer in 
any establishment on the premises of which notices have been posted under sub -section ( 1) of     
section 25;  
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed or which is to be provided for by rules.  
(3) Any rule made under this Chapter may provide that a contravention of the rule shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, 
or with both.  
CHAPTER VI  
REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
29. Requisitioning of immovable property .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, if in the opinion of the Central Government  or the State Government it is 
necessary or expedient so to do for securing the defence of India, civil defence, public safety, 
maintenance of public order or efficient conduct of military operations, or for maintaining supplies and 
services essential to t he life of the community, that Government may by order in writing requisition any 
immovable property and may make such further orders as appear to that Government to be necessary or 
expedient in connection with the requisitioning:  
Provided that no property  or part thereof which is exclusively used by the public for religious worship 
shall be requisitioned.  
(2) The requisition shall be effected by an order in writing addressed to the person deemed by the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, to be the owner or person in possession 
of the property, and such order shall be served in the prescribed manner on the person to whom it is 
addressed.  
(3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under sub -section ( 1), the period of such requis ition shall 
not extend beyond the period for which such property is required for any of the purposes mentioned in 
that sub -section.  
30. Payment of compensation .—Whenever in pursuance of section 29 the Central Government or 
the State Government, as the case  may be, requisitions any immovable property, there shall be paid to the 
persons interested compensation the amount of which shall be determined by taking into consideration the 
following, namely: — 
(i) the rent payable in respect of the property or if no rent is payable, the rent payable in respect of 
similar property in the locality;  
(ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the property the person interested is compelled to 
change his residence or plac e of business, the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to such change;  
(iii) such sum or sums, if any, as may be found necessary to compensate the person interested for 
damage caused to the property on entry after requisition or during the period of re quisition, other than 
normal wear and tear:  
Provided that where any person interested being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so 
determined makes an application within the prescribed time to the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case  may be, for referring the matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation 
to be paid shall be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Central Government or the 
State Government, as the case may be may determine:  
  19 
 Provided further that where there is any dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or as to 
the apportionment of the amount of compensation, it shall be referred to an arbitrator  appointed in this 
behalf by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case m ay be, for determination, 
and shall be determined in accordance with the decision of such arbitrator.  
Explanation. —In this section and in section 37, the expression “person interested ” in relation to any 
property includes all persons claiming or entitled t o claim an interest in the compensation payable on 
account of the requisitioning or acquisition of that property under this Act.  
31. Power to obtain information and give direction .—The Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, may, with a view to requisitioning any property under section 29 or 
determining the compensation payable under section 30, by order — 
(a) require any person to furnish to the authority mentioned therein such information in his 
possession relating to any property  as may be specified;  
(b) direct that the owner, occupier or the person in possession of the property shall not, without 
the permission of Government, dispose of it or where it is a building, structurally alter it till the expiry 
of such period as may be s pecified in the order.  
32. Power of entry into, and inspection of, property, etc. —Any person authorised in this behalf by 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may enter into any immovable 
property and inspect such property fo r the purpose of determining whether, and if so in what manner, an 
order under section 29 should be made in relation to such property or with a view to securing compliance 
with any order made under that section.  
33. Eviction from requisitioned property .—(1) Any person remaining in possession of any 
requisitioned property in contravention of any order made under section 29 may be summarily evicted 
from the property by any officer empowered in this behalf by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be.  
(2) Any officer so empowered may, after giving to any woman not appearing in public reasonable 
warning and facility to withdraw, remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door of any building 
or do any other act necessary for effec ting such eviction.  
34. Penalty for contravention of any order regarding requisitioning .—If any person contravenes 
any order made under section 29 or section 31, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine , or with both.  
35. Release from requisition .—(1) Where any property requisitioned under section 29 is to be 
released from such requisition, the Government by which or under whose authority the property was 
requisitioned or any person  generally or speciall y authorised by it in this behalf may, after such inquiry, if 
any, as it or he may in any case, consider necessary to make or cause to be made, specify by order in 
writing the person to whom possession of the property shall be given and such possession sha ll, as far as 
practicable, be given to the person who appears to the Government or, as the case may be, the person 
authorised as aforesaid, to be entitled to the possession of the property at the time such order is made.  
(2) The delivery of possession of t he property to the person specified in the order under                  
sub-section ( 1) shall be a full discharge of the Government from all liabilities in respect of the property , 
but shall not prejudice  1*** any rights in respect of the property which any other person may be entitled 
by due process of law to enforce against the person to whom possession of the property is delivered.  
36. Acquisition of requisitioned property .—(1) Any immovable property which has been 
requisitioned under section 29 may, i n the manner hereinafter provided, be acquired in the circumstances 
and by the Government specified below, namely: — 
(a) where any works have, during the period of requisition, been constructed on, in or over the 
property wholly or partly at the expense of any Government, the property may be acquired by that 
Government if it decides that the value of or the right to use, such works shall, by means of the 
acquisition of the property, be preserved or secured for the purposes of any Government, or  
                                                           
1. The word “by” omitted by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  20 
 (b) where the  cost to any Government of restoring the property to its condition at the time of its 
requisition as aforesaid would, in the determination of that Government, be excessive having regard 
to the value of the property at that time, the property may be acquire d by that Government.  
(2) When any Government as aforesaid decides to acquire any immovable property, it shall serve on 
the owner thereof or where the owner is not readily traceable or the ownership is in dispute, by publishing 
in the Official Gazette, a n otice stating that the Government has decided to acquire it in pursuance of this 
section.  
(3) Where a notice of acquisition is served on the owner of the property or is published in the Official 
Gazette under sub -section ( 2), then, at the beginning of the day on which the notice is so served or 
published, the property shall vest in the Government free from any mortgage, pledge, lien or other similar 
encumbrances and the period of requisition thereof shall come to an end.  
(4) Any decision or determination of  a Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be final, and shall not 
be called in question in any court.  
(5) For the purposes of this section, “works” includes every description of buildings, structures and 
improvements of the property.  
37. Compensation for acquisition of requisitioned property .—(1) The compensation payable for 
the acquisition of any property under section 36 shall be — 
(a) the price which the requisitioned property would have fetched in the open market if it had 
remained in the same condition as it was at the time of requisitioning and been sold on the date of 
acquisition, or  
(b) twice the price which the requisitioned property would have fetched in the open market if it 
had been sold on the date of the requisition,  
whichever  is less.  
(2) Where any person interested is aggrieved by the amount of compensation determined in 
accordance with sub -section ( 1), he may make an application within the prescribed time to the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be,  for referring the matter to an arbitrator 
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government, and the amount of 
compensation to be paid shall be such as may be determined by the arbitrator in accordance with             
sub-section  (1). 
(3) The provisions of section 31 and section 32 shall apply in relation to the acquisition of any 
property or the determination of compensation for such acquisition as they apply in relation to the 
requisitioning of any property or the determination of compensation for such requisitioning.  
(4) Where there is any dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or as to the apportionment of 
the amount of compensation, it shall be referred to an arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Central 
Gove rnment or the State Government, as the case may be, for determination, and his decision thereon 
shall be final.  
38. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may 
be, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, m ake rules for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
prescribe— 
(a) the procedure to be followed in arbitration proceedings under this Chapter;  
(b) the  period within which the owner of any property or any other person interested in the 
amount of compensation may apply to the Government concerned for referring the matter to an 
arbitrator;  
(c) the principles to be followed in apportioning the costs of proc eedings before the arbitrator;  
(d) the method of payment of compensation;  21 
 (e) the manner of service of notices and orders;  
(f) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
39. Certain properties requisitioned under previous law to be deemed to be requisitioned under 
this Chapter .—Any property referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 24 of the Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952  (30 of 1952), which continued, immediately before the 
commencement of that Act, to be subje ct to requisition under the Requisitioned Land (Continuance of 
Powers) Act, 1947  (17 of 1947), and has not, immediately before the commencement of this Act, been 
released from requisitioning shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for th e time being 
in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any court, be deemed to be the property requisitioned 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 29 if such property is, in the opinion of the Central Government, now 
required for any of the purposes speci fied in that sub -section:  
Provided that — 
(a) all agreements or awards for the payment of compensation in respect of any such property for 
any period of requisition before the commencement of this Act and in force immediately before such 
commencement, shall  continue to be in force and shall apply to the payment of compensation in 
respect of that property for any period after such commencement;  
(b) anything done or any action taken (including any orders, notifications or rules made or issued) 
under the Requis itioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952  (30 of 1952), or under the 
Requisitioned Land (Continuance of Powers) Act, 1947  (17 of 1947), and continued under the       
first-mentioned Act, shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter or any 
rules or orders made thereunder, be deemed to have been done or taken under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER VII  
SUPPLEMENTAL  
40. Power to delegate .—(1) The Central Government may, by order, direct that any power or duty 
which by thi s Act or by any rule made under this Act is conferred or imposed upon the Central 
Government shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
direction, be exercised or discharged also — 
(a) by any officer or author ity subordinate to the Central Government, or  
(b) whether or not the power or duty relates to a matter with respect to which a State Legislature 
has power to make laws, by any State Government or by any officer or authority subordinate to such 
Government, or 
(c) by any other authority.  
(2) The State Government may, by order, direct that any power or duty which by this Act or by any 
rule made under this Act is conferred or imposed on the State Government or which, being by this Act or 
any such rule conferred  or imposed on the Central Government, has been directed under sub -section ( 1) to 
be exercised or discharged by the State Government, shall, in such circumstances and under such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercised or disc harged by any officer or 
authority not being (except in the case of a Union territory) an officer or authority subordinate to the 
Central Government.  
41. Rules to be laid before Houses of Parliament .—Every rule made by the Central Government 
under this Act  shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the sessio n in which it is so laid or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effe ct, as 
the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  22 
 42. Jurisdiction of ordinary courts .—(1) Except as may be provided in this Act or in any ru le made 
thereunder or in any order made under any such rule by the Central Government or the State Government 
or by an officer not below the rank of Collector empowered under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of 
section 40 to make such order, the ordinary  criminal and civil courts shall continue to exercise 
jurisdiction.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any provision in any such rule or order as 
aforesaid to the effect that the decision of any authority not being a court shall be f inal or conclusive shall 
be a sufficient excepting provision within the meaning of sub -section ( 1). 
43. Effect of Act and rules, etc., inconsistent with other enactments .—The provisions of this Act 
or any rule made thereunder or any order made under any su ch rule shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
44. Ordinary avocations of life to be interfered wit h as little as possible .—Any authority or 
person acting in pursuance of this Act shall interfere with the ordinary avocations of life and the 
enjoyment of property as little as may be consonant with the purpose of ensuring the public safety and 
interest an d the defence of India and civil defence.  
45. Savings as to orders .—(1) No order made in exercise of any power conferred by or under this 
Act shall be called in question in any court.  
(2) Where an order purports to have been made and signed by any authority in exercise of any power 
conferred by or under this Act, a court shall, within the meaning of the Indian Evidence                          
Act, 1872  (1 of 1872), presume that such orde r was so made by that authority.  
46. Chapter III not to apply to measures taken for the protection of Armed Forces .—Unless 
otherwise expressly provided in any rules or orders made under Chapter III, nothing contained in that 
Chapter or any such rules or or ders shall apply to the Armed Forces of the Union or to any measures 
taken by any of the authorities in control of the Armed Forces for the purpose of securing the defence or 
safety of such forces or for the protection of any naval, military or air force i nstallations or stores.  
47. Protection of action taken under the Act .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or any rules made  thereunder or any orders issued under any such rule.  
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything in good faith done or  
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder or any order issued under any 
such rule.  
48. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Defence of India Ordinance, 1962  (4 of 1962), and the Defence of 
India (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962  (6 of 1962) , are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any rules made, anything done or any action taken under the 
Defence of India Ordinance, 1962  (4 of 1962), as amended by the Defence of India (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1962  (6 of 1962) shall be deemed to have been made, done or taken under this Act as if this 
Act had commenced on the 26th October, 1962.  
49. Validation o f certain requisitions. —All property, immovable or movable, purporting to have 
been requisitioned under the Defence  of India Ordinance, 1962  (4 of 1962 ), on or after the 26th     
October, 1962 and before the coming into force of the relevant provisions of that Ordinance or the 
Defence of India Rules, 1962 made thereunder, shall be deemed to have been validly requisitio ned, as if 
that Ordinance and those rules had been in force on and from the 26th October, 1962 and accordingly, the 
provisions of this Act and those rules shall apply to and in relation to such requisition.  
 
--------------------------The Delhi Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1962--------------------------
1 THE DELHI MOTOR VEHICLES TAXATION ACT, 1962  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Levy of tax.  
4. Declaration and payment of tax . 
5. Issue of token.  
6. Additional declaration  
7. Liability for additional tax.  
8. Production of certificate of insurance.  
9. Liability to pay arrears of tax of person succeeding to the ownership, possession or control of 
motor vehicles.  
10. Refund of tax.  
11. Penalty payable when tax not paid.  
12. Arrear s of tax and penalty recoverable as arrears of land revenue.  
13. Exemptions.  
14. Reduction of tax in cases of certain motor vehicles.  
15. Effect of payment of tax in other States with respect to motor vehicles brought into Delhi . 
16. Appeal.  
17. Powers of police officers and other officers.  
18. Penalty for incomplete and untrue declaration, etc.  
19. Other penalties.  
20. Utilization of the proceeds of tax.  
21. Trial of offences.  
22. Protection for bona fide  acts.  
23. Power to make rules.  
24. Repeal.  
25. Amendment of section 184, Act 66 of 1957.  
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II . 2 THE DELHI MO TOR VEHICLES TAXATION ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 57 OF 1962  
[15th December , 1962.]  
An Act to impose a tax on motor vehicles in the Union territory of Delhi and for other matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and commen cement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Motor Vehicles 
Taxation Act, 1962 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the 2[Administrator]  may, by notification i n the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires — 
3[(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of Delhi appointed by the President under article 
239 of the Constitution ;] 
(b) “Delhi ” means the Union territory of Delhi;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “quarter ” means a period of three months commencing on the first day of April, the first day 
of July, the first day of October or the first day of January in each year;  
(e) “registered owner ” means the person in whose name a motor vehicle is registered under the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939  (4 of 1939) ; 
(f) “tax” means the tax levied under this Act;  
(g) “taxation authority ” means any person or authority appointed by the  2[Administrator] by 
notification in the Official Gazette to exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred or 
imposed upon a taxation authority by or under this Act;  
(h) “token ” means a ticket to be displayed on a motor vehicle as an indication that the tax has 
been duly paid or that no tax is payable;  
(i) “year” means the financial year;  
(j) all words and expressions used, but not defined in this Act, and defined in the Motor Vehic les 
Act, 1939  (4 of 1939) , shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Levy of tax .— 4[(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, on and from the commencement of 
the Delhi Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1989, there  shall be levied and collected on — 
(a) all motor vehicles described in column ( 1) of Part A of Schedule I and used or kept for use in 
Delhi, a tax at the rate specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the said Part;  
(b) all motor vehicles described in column ( 1) of Part B of Schedule I and used or kept for use in 
Delhi— 
(i) on their first registration in Delhi, a one time tax at the amount specified in the 
corresponding entry in column (2) of the said Part;  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 196 3, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1254 (E), dated 18th September, 1962, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3 ( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 1983, s. 2, for “ Chief Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1-12-1983 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1989, s. 2, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1-2-1990).  3 (ii) the same having been earlier  registered in Delhi or in any other State, then having regard 
to the month of their first registration in Delhi or, as the case may be, in that other State, a one 
time tax at the amount specified in the respective columns (3) to (14) of Part C of Schedule  I: 
Provided that where such motor vehicles are more than ten years old from the date of their first 
registration, the owners thereof shall present the registration certificates of such motor vehicles to the 
taxation authority for an endorsement therein to  the effect that the motor vehicles are more than ten years 
old and their use or keeping for use in Delhi do not attract any tax.]  
1[(2) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, increase from time to time, the 
rate specified in Schedule I in relation to any motor vehicles:  
Provided that the rate as so increased shall in no case exceed the rate as so specified by more than 
twenty -five per cent . thereof :] 
2[Provided further that any such increase shall not apply in respect of a mot or vehicle specified in    
Part B of Schedule I on which one time tax has been levied and collected.]  
4. Declaration and payment of tax .—(1) Every registered owner or person having possession or 
control of a motor vehicle used or kept for use in Delhi shall fill up and sign a declaration in the 
prescribed form stating the prescribed particulars and shall deliver the same to the taxation authority 
within the prescribed time.  
(2) The tax to which a registered owner or person having possession or control o f a motor vehicle 
appears by such declaration to be liable under section 3 shall be paid by him ,— 
3[(a) where such vehicle is described in Part A of Schedule I, — 
(i) for a year at the rate specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) thereof (hereinafter 
referred to as the annual rate); or  
(ii) for one or more quarters, at one -fourth of the annual rate fo r each quarter; or  
(iii) for any period less than a quarter expiring on the l ast day of the quarter, at one -twelfth of 
the annual rate for ea ch complete month or part thereof included in such period; or  
(b) where such vehicle is described in Part B of Schedule I, a one time tax at the amount specified 
in the corresponding entry in column (2) in the said Part or, as the case may be, the amount s pecified 
in the respective columns in Part C.]  
 (3) The tax shall be paid within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) In calculating the tax due for any period less than one year, fraction of a rupee shall be counted as 
a rupee.  
5. Issue of token .—(1) When a person pays the amount of tax leviable under section 3 in respect of 
any motor vehicle or proves to the satisfaction of the taxation authority that no such tax is payable in 
respect of such vehicle, the taxation authority shall ,— 
(a) issue to such person a token in the prescribed form specifying therein the period for which 
such tax has been paid or that no such tax is payable, and  
(b) specify in the certificate of registration granted in respect of the vehicle under the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939  (4 of 1939) , or in the case of vehicle s not registered under that Act, in a certificate 
in such form as may be prescribed, that the tax has been paid for the period specified under clause ( a) 
or that no tax is payable in respect of that ve hicle, as the case may be.  
(2) No motor vehicle liable to tax under this Act shall be used or kept for use in Delhi unless the 
registered owner or the person having possession or control of such vehicle has obtained a valid token in  
respect of that vehicle , and that token is displayed on the vehicle in  the prescribed manner.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1983, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-12-1983 ). 
2. The proviso  added by Act 25 of 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1990).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1990).   4 6. Additional declaration .—(1) When a motor vehicle used or kept for use in Delhi is altered or is 
proposed to be used in such manner as to render the registered owner or the person who  has possession or 
control of such vehicle liable to the payment of additional tax under section 7 , such owner or person shall 
fill up, sign and deliver in the manner provided in sub -section ( 2), an additional declaration and shall, 
along with such additio nal declaration (accompanied by the certificate of registration in respect of such 
motor vehicle), pay to the taxation authority an additional tax payable under that section which he appears 
by such additional declaration to be liable to pay in respect of such vehicle.  
(2) The additional declaration shall be in the prescribed form containing the prescribed particulars and 
shall be delivered to the taxation authority after being duly filled up and signed within the prescribed 
time. The additional declaration  shall indicate clearly also the nature of alteration made in the motor 
vehicle or, as the case may be, the altered use to which the vehicle is proposed to be put.  
(3) On receipt of the additional tax under sub -section ( 1), the taxation authority shall iss ue to the 
registered owner or the person who has possession or control of the vehicle, a fresh token in place of the 
original token and shall cause an entry of such payment to be made in the certificate of registration.  
7. Liability for additional tax .—Whe n any motor vehicle in respect of which a tax for any period is 
payable or has been paid, is altered during such period, or proposed to be used during such period in such 
manner as to cause the vehicle to become a vehicle in respect of which a higher rate of tax is payable, the 
registered owner or the person who has possession or control of the vehicle, shall, in addition to the tax, if 
any, due from him for that period, be liable to pay for the unexpired portion of such period since the 
vehicle is altered or proposed to be used, an additional tax of a sum equal to the difference between the 
amount of tax payable for such unexpired portion at the higher rate and the rate at which the tax was 
payable or paid before the alteration or use of the vehicle for tha t portion; and until such additional tax 
has been paid, the taxation authority shall not grant a fresh token in respect of the vehicle so altered or 
proposed to be so used.  
Explanation —In calculating the unexpired portion under this section any broken peri od in a month 
shall be considered as a full month.  
8. Production of ce rtificate of insurance .—Every registered owner or person having possession or 
control of a motor vehicle shall, at the time of making payment of the tax, produce before the taxation 
authority a valid certificate of insurance in respect of the vehicle complying with the requirements of 
Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939  (4 of 1939) . 
9. Liability to pay arrears of tax of person succeeding to the ownership, possession or contro l of 
motor vehicles .—(1) If the tax leviable in respect of any motor vehicle remains u npaid by any person 
liable for payment thereof and such person before having paid the tax has transferred the ownership of 
such vehicle or has ceased to be in possession or control of such vehicle, the person to whom the 
ownership of the vehicle has been transferred or the person who has possession or control of such vehicle 
shall be liable to pay the said tax to the taxation authority.  
(2) Nothing contained in this sectio n shall be deemed to affect the liability to pay the said tax of the 
person who has transferred the ownership or has ceased to be in possession or control of such vehicle.  
1[10. Refund of tax .—(1) When any person who has paid the tax in respect of a motor vehicle 
produces before the taxation authority a certificate signed by the registering authority stating that the tax 
token and the certificate of registration issued in respect of such vehicle hav e been surrendered on the 
date specified by the registering authority in his certificate, such person shall, on an application made in 
that behalf to the taxation authority and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be entitled to a 
refund,— 
(a) in a case where payment of tax has been made in accordance with clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 4, for each complete month of the period for which such tax has been paid and which is 
unexpired on the date on which the tax token and the certificate  of registration were surrendered, of 
an amount equal to one -twelfth of the annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1989, s. 4, for section 10 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1990).  5 (b) in a case where payment of tax has been made in accordance with clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 4, at the rates specified in Schedule IA.  
(2) When any person has paid the tax in respect of a motor vehicle and the vehicle is removed outside 
Delhi before the expiry of the period for which the tax has been paid and taxed in another State or the 
registration of such veh icle is cancelled before the expiry of the period for which the tax has been paid, 
such person shall, on an application made in that behalf to the taxation authority and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed, be entitled to a refund, — 
(a) in a case where payment of tax has been made in accordance with clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 4, for each complete month of the period for which such tax has been paid, and during 
which the vehicle was removed from Delhi or such vehicle’s registratio n is cancel led, of an amount 
equal to one -twelfth of the annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle; and  
(b) in a case where payment of tax has been made in accordance with clause ( b) of s ub-section ( 2) 
of section 4, at the rates specified in Schedule I B. 
(3) Where the rates of tax leviable under Part B of Schedule I are increased by notification in t he 
Official Gazette under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, the Administrator may, from time to time, by the same 
notification or by a separate notification in the Official Gazette, correspondingly increase the rates of 
refund payable under this sectio n and the refund of tax payable  in respect of th e vehicles registered on or 
after the date of such notification shall be at such increase d rates.]  
11. Penalty payable when tax not paid .—When any registered owner or any person who has 
possession or control of any motor vehicle used or kept for use in Del hi is in default in making a payment 
of the tax the taxation authority may direct that, in addition to the amount of arrears, a sum not exceeding 
the annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle shall be recov ered from him by way of penalty : 
Provided that  before giving any such direction the registered owner or such person shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
12. Arrears of tax and penalty recoverable as arrears of land revenue .—(1) Any tax due and not 
paid as provided for by or under this Act and any sum directed to be recovered by way of penalty under 
section 11 shall be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
(2) The motor vehicle in respect of which the tax is due or in respect of which any sum has been 
directed to be recovered as penalty under section 11, or its accessories may be distrained and sold in 
pursuance of this section whether or not such vehicle or accessories is or are in the possession or control 
of the person liable to pay the tax or penalty.  
13. Exemptions .—(1) Where the registered owner or the person having possession or control of a 
motor vehicle is an agriculturist and that motor vehicle has been designed for agri cultural operations and 
is used  solely for such operations in relation to his own land t hen, that vehicle shall be exempt from the 
payment of the tax.  
Explanations .—For the purposes of this sub -section the expression “agricultural operations ” 
includes, — 
(i) tilling, sowing, harvesting, crushing of any agricultural produce or any other similar operation 
carried out for the purpose of agriculture;  
(ii) transport of manure, seeds, insecticide s and other like articles required for work in the land 
from the market to the land; and  
(iii) trans port of any agricultural produce from the land to the place of storage or from the place 
of storage to the market.  
(2) When the registered owner or the person having possession or control of a motor vehicle has 
given previous intimation in writing to the t axation authority that the motor vehicle would not be used in 
any public place for a particular period, being not less than one month, and deposits the certificate of 
registration of such motor vehicle with the taxation authority and obtains an acknowledge ment therefor 
from tha t authority, he shall be exempt  from the payment of the tax for that period.  6 (3) Where the  1[Administrator] is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so 
to do, he may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as he may specify in 
the notification, exempt either totally or partially any class of motor vehicles other than those falling 
under sub -section ( 1) or any motor vehicles belonging to any class of persons from the pa yment of the 
tax. 
14. Reduction of tax in cases of certain motor vehicles .—Where the registered owner of a motor 
vehicle used or kept for use in Delhi is a co -operative society registered under any law relating to                       
co-operative societi es for the time being in force, the tax payable in respect of that motor vehicle shall be 
one half of the rates specified in Schedule I, if the taxation authority is satisfied, after such enquiry as it 
deems fit that, — 
(i) the co -operative society is solel y enagaged in the business of transport of goods or passengers 
or both from one place to another in motor vehicles;  
(ii) at least seventy -five per cent . of the members of the co -operative society are its employees;  
(iii) at least fifty per cent . of the mem bers of the co -operative society are not related to each other; 
and 
(iv) the motor vehicle is used or kept for use exclusively for the purpose of the co -operative 
society.  
Explanation —For the purpose s of this section a member shall be deemed to be related to any other 
member if that member is the husband, wife, brother or sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant of 
that other member.  
15. Effect of payment of tax in other States with respect to moto r vehicles brought into Delhi .—
Where in respect of a motor vehicle the tax payable under the law relating to taxation on motor vehicles 
in force in any State has been paid in that State for any period and that motor vehicle is brought into Delhi 
for use during that period, then, — 
(i) no tax under this Act shall be payable in respect of that motor vehicle; and  
(ii) the token issued in that State in respect of that motor vehicle shall be deemed to be a token 
issued under this Act,  
for such period or for a p eriod of ninety days from the date on which the motor vehicle is brought into 
Delhi, whichever is shorter:  
Provided that the registered owner or the person having possession or control of the motor vehicle 
complies with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 4.  
16. Appeal .—(1) Any person who is aggrieved by any order or direction of the taxation authority 
may file an appeal before such person or authority, in such manner, within such time and on payment of 
such fees, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The appe al shall be heard and decided in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every decision on such appeal shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court of 
law. 
17. Powers of police officers and other officers .—Any police officer in uniform, no t below the rank 
of Sub -Inspector or any other officer prescribed in this behalf may — 
(a) enter at any time between sunrise and sunset any premises where he has reason to believe that 
a motor vehicle is kept, or,  
(b) require the driver of any motor vehicle  in any public place to stop such vehicle and cause it to 
remain stationary so long as may reasonably be necessary,  
for the purpose of satisfying himself that the amount of the tax in respect of such vehicle, has been paid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1983, s. 2, for “ Chief Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1983).   7  
 18. Penalty for incomplete and untrue declaration, etc .—Whoever — 
(a) delivers in respect of a motor vehicle a declaration or additional declaration wherein the 
particulars required by or under this Act to be therein set forth are not fully and truly stated, o r 
(b) obstructs any officer in the exercise of the powers conferred by clause ( a) of section 17 or 
fails to stop the motor vehicle when required to do so by such officer under clause ( b) of that section , 
shall on conviction be punishable — 
(i) with fine whi ch may extend to a sum equal to the annual tax payable in respect of such 
vehicle; and  
(ii) in the event of such person having been previously convicted of an offence under this section, 
with fine which may extend to a sum equal to twice the annual tax pay able in respect of such vehicle.  
19. Other penalties .—Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder other than those punishable under section 18 shall on conviction be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one hundre d rupees and in the event of such person having been previously convicted of an 
offence under this section, with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.  
1[20. Utilization of the proceeds of tax .—The proceeds of the tax collected under this Act (which 
shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India) reduced by the cost of collection as determined by the 
Central Government shall, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, be paid 
to,— 
(i) the Municipal Corporation of Delhi e stablished under section 3 of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957  (66 of 1957) ; 
(ii) the New Delhi Municipal Committee established under section 11 of the Punjab Municipal  
Act, 1911  (Punjab Act 3 of 1911) , as extended to Delhi; and  
(iii) the Cantonme nt Board, Delhi, constituted under the Cantonments Act, 1924  (2 of 1924) , 
for the performance of their respective functions under the said Acts and the payment shall be made in 
such proportion as may be prescribed.]  
21. Trial of offences .—No court inferior  to that of a magistrate of the second class shall try an 
offence punishable under this Act.  
22. Protection for bona fide  acts.—No prosecution, suit or other proceedings, shall lie against the 
taxation authority or any other authority for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act. 
23. Power to make rules .—(1) The 2[Administrator]  may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act . 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, 
the 2[Administrator] may make rules for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, the tax shall be paid;  
(b) the form of declaration and additional declaration, particulars to be stated therein and the time 
within which the declaration or additional declaration shall be delivered under section 4 or section 6, 
as the case may be;  
(c) the fo rm of the tax token and the manner in which the tax token shall be displayed in the 
motor vehicle under section 5;  
(d) the conditions subject to which refund of tax may be allowed under section 10;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1965, s. 2, for section 20 (w.e.f. 27 -11-1965).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 1983, s. 2, for “ Chief Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1983).   8 (e) the aut hority before which, the manner  in which, the ti me within which and the fee on 
payment of which, an appeal may be filed and the manner in which such appeal shall be heard and 
decided under section 16 ; 
(f) the issue of duplicate tokens and of certified copies of the records of the taxation authority an d 
the fees chargeable therefor;  
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this section and every  notification issued under sub -section ( 2) of   
section 3  2[and sub -section ( 3) of section 10] shall be laid, as soon  as may be, after it is made or issued, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediat ely following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or notification, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made or the 
notification should not be issued, the rule or notificati on shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification .] 
24. Repeal .—(1) On and from the commencement of this Act, the Acts specified in Schedule II shall 
stand repealed.  
(2) The repeal of the said Acts by sub -section ( 1) shall not affect, — 
(a) the previous operation of the said Acts or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or right conferred, accrued or incu rred under any of the said 
Acts; or 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any of the said Acts;  
(d) any  investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the said Acts had not been repealed.  
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2) and notwithstanding the repeal of the Punjab 
Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1924  (Punjab Act 4 of 1924) , as extended to Delhi, — 
(i) every declaration delivered under that Act in respect of any motor vehicle shall be deemed to 
be a declaration delivered under this Act; and  
(ii) every token issued under that Act and valid immediately before the commencem ent of this 
Act, shall continue to be valid after such commencement for the unexpired portion of the period for 
which it has been issued.  
25. Amendment of section 184, Act 66 of 1957. — In the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, 
for section 184, the following secti on shall be substituted, namely :— 
“184. Central Government to pay proceeds of entertainment and betting taxes to              
Corporation. —The proceeds of the entertainment and betting taxes collected in Delhi under the 
provisions, of the U.  P. Entertainment and Betting Tax Act, 1937  (U.P. Act 8 of 1937) , as extended to 
Delhi (which shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of India) reduced by the cost of collection as 
determined by the Central Government shall, if Parliament by appropriation  made by law in this 
behalf so provides, be paid to the Corporation for the performance of its functions under this Act .”. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1983, s. 5, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1-12-1983 ).  
2. Ins. b y Act 25 of 1989, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1990).   9   1[SCHEDULE I  
(See section 3)  
 
 Description of motor vehicle  Annual rate of tax for each motor vehicle  
 (1) (2) 
  Rupees  
GROUP  A.—Motor vehicles fitted solely with pneumatic   
                      tyres  
I. Motor vehicles (including tricycles) used for transport or 
haulage of goods or materials, the registered laden 
weight of which —  
 (a) does not exceed one tonne   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   .  .  Two hundred and twenty  
 (b) exceeds one tonne but does not exceed two tonnes  .  .  Three hundred and ten  
 (c) exceeds two ton nes but does not exceed four tonnes   .  .  Four hundred and seventy  
 (d) exceeds  four tonnes but does not exceed six tonnes  .  .  Six hundred and thirty  
 (e) exceeds six tonnes but does not exceed eight tonnes  .  .  Seven hundred and eighty  
 (f) exceeds eight tonnes but does not exceed nine tonnes  .  .  Nine hundred and forty  
 (g) exceeds nine tonnes but does not exceed ten tonn es .  .  Eleven hundred  
 (h) exceeds ten tonnes  
 .  . The rate specified in ( g) above plus one hundred 
and fifty -six rupees for every one tonne or part 
thereof in addition to ten tonnes.  
II. Additional tax payable in respect of  vehicles referred 
to in Item I, used for drawing trailers —   
 (a) for each trailer the registered laden weight of which 
does not exceed two tonnes    One hundred and fifty  
 (b) for each trailer the registered laden weight of 
which exceeds two tonnes:    Three hundred  
 Provided that two or more vehicles shall not be 
chargeable under this Item in respect of the same 
trailer.   
III. Motor vehicles (including tricycles) plying for hire 
and used for the transport of passengers, when —  
  (a) licensed to carry, in all not more than two  
passengers (excluding driver)  One hundred  
  (b) licensed to carry, in all more than two but not more 
than four passengers (excluding driver and 
conductor)  Two hundred  
  (c) licensed to carry, in all more than four passengers 
but not more than six passengers (excluding 
driver and conductor)  Three hundred and seventy -five 
 (d) licensed to carry, in all more than six  passengers 
but not more than eighteen passengers (excluding 
driver and conductor)    Six hundred and thirty  
 (e) licensed to carry more than eighteen passengers 
(excluding driver and conductor)  The rate specified in ( d) above plus ninety four 
rupees for every passenger in addition to 
eighteen passengers.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1989, s. 6, for Schedule I (w.e.f. 1 -2-1990).  10  Description of motor vehicle  Annual rate of tax for each motor vehicle  
                        (1) (2) 
  Rupees  
IV. Motor vehicles owned by Airline Companies or 
Corporations for carrying passengers and staff —  
 (a) the seating capacity of which does not exceed four  
(excluding driver)  Two hundred  
 (b) the seating capacity of which exceeds four but does 
not exceed six (excluding driver)  Three hundred and seventy -five 
 (c) the seating capacity of which exceeds six but does 
not exceed eighteen (excluding driver)  Six hundred and thirty  
  (d) the seating capacity of which exceeds eighteen  The rate specified in ( c) above plus ninety four  
rupees  for every person in addition to 
eighteen persons.  
 V. Break -down vans used f or towing disabled vehicles and  
tower wagons used for maintenance of overhead electric 
lines  Three hundred and ten  
GROUP B.—Motor vehicles other than those fitted solely  
                    with pneumatic tyres  The rates shown in Group A in this Part plus 
fifty per cent. thereof.  
PART B  
 Description of motor vehicle  Amount  
                          (1) (2) 
  Rupees  
GROUP  A—Motor vehicles fitted solely with pneumatic   
                     tyres —  
I. Motor cycles and tricycles (including motor scooters 
and cycles with attachment for propelling the same by 
mechanised power) —  
 (a) motor cycles, scooters (flat rate)  . . . . .  . . . . . . . .   . . Four hundred  
 (b) scooterettes and autocycles (flat rate) . . . . .. . . . .  . . Two hundred  
 (c) tricycles (flat rate) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Five hundred  
 (d) motor vehicles specified in ( a) or ( c) above used 
for drawing a trailer or side car  The rate specified in ( a) or ( c) above plus one hundred 
and fifty rupees  
II Motor vehicles (adapted and used for invalids) the 
registered unladen weight of which does not exceed 
three hundred kilograms  One hundred  
III Motor vehicles other than those liable to tax under the 
foregoing provisions of this Schedule the registered 
unladen weight of which —  
 (a) does not exceed one thousand kilograms . . . . . . .  . . One thousand two hundred and fifty  
 (b) exceeds one t housand kilograms but does not 
exceed one thousand and five hundred kilograms  One thousand and six hundred  
 (c) exceeds one thousand and five hundred kilograms 
but does not exceed two thousand kilograms  Two thousand and three hundred  
 (d) exceeds two thousand kilograms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . The amount specified in ( c) above plus one thousand 
and five hundred for every one thousand kilograms 
or part thereof in addition to two thousand 
kilograms.  11  Description of motor vehicle  Amount  
 (1) (2) 
  Rupees  
IV Additional tax payable in respect of vehicles referred 
to in Item III if such vehicles are used for drawing 
trailers —  
 (a) for each trailer the registered unladen weight of 
which does not exceed one tonne  Six hundred  
 (b) for each trailer the registered unladen weight of 
which exceeds one tonne : One thousand and two hundred  
 Provided that two or more vehicles shall not be 
chargeable under this Item in respect of the same 
trailer.   
GROUP B.—Motor vehicles other than those fitter solely with 
pneumatic tyres.  The amount shown in Group A of this Part plus fifty 
per cent. thereof.  
NOTE:—The registered unladen weight of motor vehicles shall be as specified in the certificate of registration.  
PART C  
Sl. 
No
. Age of the 
motor vehicle 
from the month 
of first 
registration  Group A of Part B —Amount on motor vehicles specified in Items — Group B of Part B 
Motor vehicles  
I(a) I(b) I(c) I(d) II  III(a)  III(b)  III(c)  III(d)  IV(a)  IV(b)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11 (12) (13) (14) 
  Rs.  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 
01 more than  one 
year but not 
more than two 
years  360 180 450 135 90 1125  1440  2070  1350  540 1080  The amount shown 
for Goup A Motor 
vehicles plus fifty 
per cent. thereof. 
02 more than two 
years but not 
more than three 
years  320           160 400 120 80 1000  1280  1840  1200  480 960  
03 more than three 
years but not 
more than four 
years  280 140 350 105 70 875 1120  1610  1050  420 840  
04 more than four 
years but not 
more than five 
years  240 120 300 90 60 750 960 1380  900 360 720  
05 more than five 
years but not 
more than six 
years  200 100 250 75 50 625 800 1150  750 300 600  
06 more than six 
years but not 
more than seven 
years  160 80 200 60 40 500 640 920 600 240 480  12 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11 (12) (13) (14) 
07 more than seven 
years but not 
more than eight 
years  120 60 150 45 30 375 480 690 450 180 360  
08 more than eight 
years but not 
more than nine 
years  80 40 100 30 20 250 320 460 300 120 240  
09 more than nine 
years but not 
more than ten 
years  40 20 50 15 10 125 160 230 150 60 120  
10 more than ten 
years  Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil  
NOTES :—1. The amount indicated in column (6) is in addition to the amount specified in column (3) or (5).  
2. The amount indicated in column (11) is for every one thousand kilograms or part  thereof and in addition to the amount 
specified in column (10).  
3. The amount indicated in column (12) or (13) is in addition to the amount specified in column (8), (9), (10) or (11).  
SCHEDULE IA  
[See section l0 ( I)(b)] 
GROUP  A.—Motor vehicles fitted solely with pneumatic tyres  
PART 1.—Motor cycles, tricycles  (including motor scooters and cycles with attachment for propelling the same by 
mechanised power ) 
                                                         Rate of refund per quarter or part thereof  
Sl. 
No.  If after registration the  vehicle is 
not used for a quarter or more 
and its age from the month of 
first registration is —  Motor 
cycles, 
scooters  Scooterettes,  
autocycles  Tricycles  Vehicles specified in column (3) or 
(5) used for drawing a trailer or side 
car (for side car)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 
01 one year or less  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
02 more than one year but not more 
than two years  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
03 more than two years but not more 
than three years  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
04 more than three years but not 
more than four years  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
05 more than four years but not 
more than five years  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
06 more than five years but not more 
than six years  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
07 more than six years but not mo re 
than seven years  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
08 more than seven years but not 
more than eight years  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
09 more than eight years but not 
more than nine years  5.00 2.50 6.00 1.75 
10 more than nine years  Nil Nil Nil Nil 
      13 PART II.—Motor vehicles (adapted and used for invalids) the registered unladen  weight of which does not exceed three 
hundred kilograms  
Sl. 
No. If after registration the vehicle is not used for a quarter or more and 
its age from the month of first registration is — Rate of refund per quarter  
  Rs. 
(1) (2) (3) 
01 one year or less .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .   .   .   .   .    .    .    .  1.25 
02 more than one year but not more than two years   .    .    .   .   .    .    .  1.25 
03 more than two years but not more than three years    .    .   .   .    .    .  1.25 
04 more than three yea rs but not more than four years  .    .   .   .    .    .  1.25 
05 more than four yea rs but not more than five years.   .    .   .   .    .    .  1.25 
06 more than five years but not more than six years .     .    .   .   .    .    .  1.25 
07 more than six years but not more than seven years .  .    .   .   .    .    . 1.25 
08 more than seven years but not more than eight years .    .   .   .    .    .  1.25 
09 more than eight years b ut not more than nine years   .    .   .   .    .    .  1.25 
10 more than nine years  Nil 
PART III. —Motor vehicles other than those liable to tax under Part I or Part II  
Sl. 
No. If after registration the vehicle 
is not used for a quarter or more 
and its age from the month of 
first registration is — Rate of refund per quarter when the registered unladen weight of the vehicle  
does not exceed  
1000 kgs . exceeds 1000 kgs . 
but does  not exceed  
1500 kgs.  exceeds  1500 kgs . 
but does not  
exceed 2000 kgs.  exceeds 2000 kgs. the 
amount  specified in 
this column is for 
every 1000 kgs . or part 
thereof and is in 
addition to the rate  
specified in col umn (5)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 
01 one year or less  15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
02 more than one year but not 
more than two years  15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
    03 more than two years but not 
more than three years  15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
 04 more than three years but not 
more than four years  15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
 05 more than four years but not 
more than five year s 15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
 06 more than five years but not 
more than six years  15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
 07 more than six years but not 
more than seven years  15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
 08 more than seven years but not 
more than eight year s 15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
 09 more than eight years but not 
more than nine year s 15.50  20.00  28.75  18.75  
 10 more than nine years  Nil Nil Nil Nil 
      14 PART 1V.—Additional tax payable in respect of vehicles referred to in Part III if such vehicles are used for drawing trailers  
Sl. 
No. If after registration the motor vehicle is not used for a  
quarter or more and its age from the month of first 
registration is — For each trailer the registered unladen weight of which  
does not exceed one tonne  exceeds one tonne  
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
  Rs. Rs, 
01 one year or  less  .    .    .   .   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  7.50 15.00  
02 more than one year but not more than two years .  .    .  7.50 15.00  
03 more than two years but not more than three years  .   .  7.50 15.00  
04 more than three year s but not more than four years.   .  7.50 15.00  
05 more than four years but not more than five years .     . 7.50 15.00  
06 more than five years but not more than six years .   .    .  7.50 15.00  
07 more than six years but not more than seven years  .   . 7.50 15.00  
08 more than seven years but not more than eight years .  . 7.50 15.00  
09 more than eight years but not more than nine years .  . 7.50 15.00  
10 more than nine years  .    .    .    .    .    .     .      .     .     .   Nil Nil 
GROUP  B.—Motor vehicles other than those fitted solely with pneumatic tyres  
The rate shown in Group A plus fifty per cent. thereof.  
Explanation .—ln this Schedule “quarter ” means a period of three months commencing on the first day of the month following the month 
in which the intimation of non -use of the vehicle on which the lumpsum tax h as been levied and collected is given by the 
owner to the taxation authority.  
SCHEDULE  IB 
[See section 10( 2)(b)] 
GROUP A. —Motor cycles fitted solely with pneumatic tyres  
PART 1.—Motor cycles, tricycles (including motor scooters and cycles wilh attachment for propelling the same by mechanised power  
Sl. 
No. If after registration, removal or cancellation of 
registration of vehicle takes place and its age from 
the month of first registration is — Rate of refund  
Motor cycles, 
scooters  Scooterettes,  
autocycles  Tricycles  Vehicles specified in 
column (3) or (5) 
used for drawing a 
trailer or side car (for 
side car)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 
01 one year or less  .    .    .    .    .     .    .      .    .    .     .      360 180 450 135 
02 more than one year but not more than two years    . 320 160 400 120 
03 more than two years but not more than three years . . 280 140 350 105 
04 more than three years but not more than four years.   240 120 300 90 
05 more than four years but not more than five years . . 200 100 250 75 
06 more than five years but not more than six years .   . 160 80 200 60 
07 more than six years but not more than seven years . . 120 60 150 45 
08 more than seven years but not more than eight years  80 40 100 30 
09 more than eight years but not more than nine years . 40 20 50 15 
10 more than nine years  .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .   .    .  .  Nil Nil Nil Nil 
      15 PART II.-Motor vehicles (adapted and used for Invalids) the regis tered unlade n weight of which does not exceed three hundred kilograms  
Sl. 
No. If after registration, removal or cancellation of registration of motor vehicles (adapted and used for 
invalids) takes place and its ag e from the month of first r egistration — Rate of refund  
(1)  (2) (3) 
  Rs.  
01 one year or less  .     .      .      .       .       .       .     .      .      .        .       .       .     .     .       .       .      .       .                               90 
02 more than one year but not more than two years .      .     .        .       .      .      .       .      .      .     .       .  80 
03 more than two years but not more than three years  .     .       .        .        .      .      .      .       .       .     .    70 
04 more than three years but not more than four years  .     .       .       .       .      .      .      .       .      .      .     60 
05 more than four years but not more than five years  .      .        .       .      .       .      .      .       .      .      .     50 
06 more than five years but not more than six years   .      .         .        .      .       .     .     .       .      .       .  40 
07 more than six years but not more than seven years .      .        .        .       .       .      .      .       .      .     .  30 
08 more than seven years  but not more than eight years .   .        .        .       .       .      .      .       .      .     .  20 
09 more than eight years but not more than nine years .     .        .        .       .       .      .      .       .      .      .  10 
10 more tha n nine years .      .        .        .       .       .      .      .       .      .      .      .        .        .       .       .       Nil 
PART III .—Motor vehicles other than those Iiable to tax under Part I or Part II  
Sl.  
No. If after registration, removal or can cellation of 
registration of vehicles takes place and its age from 
the month of regis tration — Rate of refund per year when the registered unladen weight of the 
vehicle  
does not 
exceed 1000 
kgs. exceeds 
1000 kgs. 
but does not 
exceed 
1500 kgs.  exceeds 1500 kgs. 
but does not 
exceed 2000 kgs.  exceeds 2000 kg s.  the 
amount specified in 
this column is for 
every 1000 kgs. or part 
thereof and is in 
addition to the rate 
specified in column (5)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 
01 one year or less  .    .    .     .     .      .      .     .      .     .      1125  1440  2070  1350  
02 more than one year but not more than two years  .  . 1000  1280  1840  1200  
03 more than two years but not more than three years . 875 1120  1610  1051  
04 more than three years but not more than four years.  750 960 1380  900 
05 more than four years but not more than five years  . 625 800 1150  750 
06 more than five years but not more than six years  . 500 640 920 600 
07 more than six years but not more than seven years . 375 480 690 450 
08 more than seven years but not more than eight years  250 320 460 300 
09 more than eight years but not more than nine years . 125 160 230 150 
10 more than nine years .    .    .    .    .     .    .    .     .     .  Nil Nil Nil Nil 
      16 PART IV. —Additional tax payable in res pect of vehicles referred to in  Item VII—if such vehicles are used for drawing trailers  
Sl.  
No. If after registration, removal or cancellation for 
registration of a  vehicle takes place and its age 
from the month of first registration is — Rate of refund  
For each trailer the registered exceeds one tonne laden weight of which 
does not exceed one tonne  
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
  Rs. Rs. 
01 one year or less .    .     .    .      .      .     .      .      .      .       540 1080  
02 more than one year but not more than two years     . 480 960 
03 more than two years but not more than three years . 420 840 
04 more than three years but not more than four years.  360 720 
05 more than four years but not more than five years . 300 600 
06 more than five years but not more than six years   . 240 480 
07 more than six years but not more than seven years . 180 360 
08 more than seven years but not more than eight years  120 240 
09 more than eight years but not more than nine years . 60 120 
10 more than nine years  .    .    .     .    .    .    .    .    .    .  Nil Nil 
GROUP  B.—Motor vehicles other than those fitted solely with pneumatic tyres. The rate shown in Group A plus fifty per cent . 
thereof.’.17 SCHEDULE II  
[See section 24( 1)] 
1. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1924 (Punjab Act 4 of 1924) as extended to Delhi.  
2. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1940 (Punjab Act 2 of 1940) as extended to 
Delhi.  
3. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1954 (6 of 1954).  
4. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1955 (2 of 195 6). 
5. The Punjab Motor Vehicles Taxation (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1956 (10 of 1956).  
 
--------------------------The Extradition Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE EXTRADITION ACT, 1962  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Application of Act.  
CHAPTER II  
EXTRADITION OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO FOREIGN STATE TO WHICH CHAPTER III DOES NOT APPLY  
4. Requisition for surrender.  
5. Order for magisterial inquiry.  
6. Issue of warrant for arrest.  
7. Procedure before magistrate.  
8. Surrender of fugitive criminal.  
9. Power of magistrate to issue warrant of arrest in certain cases.  
10. Receipt in evidence of exhibits, depositions and other documents and authentication 
thereof.  
11. Chapter not to apply to commonwealth countries to which Chapter III applies.  
CHAPTER III  
RETURN OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO FOREIGN STATES WITH EXTR ADITION A RRANGEMENTS  
12. Application of Chapter.   
13. Liability of fugitive criminals from foreign States to be apprehended and returned.  
14. Endorsed and provisional warrants.  
15. Endorsed warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal.  
16. Provisiona l warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal.  
17. Dealing with fugitive criminal when apprehended.  
18. Return of fugitive criminal by warrant.  
CHAPTER IV  
SURRENDER OR RETURN OF ACCUSED OR CONVICTED PERSONS FROM FOREIGN STATES  
19. Mode of requisition  or form of warrant for the surrender or return to India  of accused or 
convicted person who is in a foreign State or Commonwealth country.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Conveyance of accused or convicted person surrendered or returned.  
21. Accused or convicted person sur rendered or returned by foreign State not to be tried for 
certain offence.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Liability of fugitive criminals to be arrested and surrendered or returned.  
23. Jurisdiction as to offences committed at sea or in air.  
24. Discharge  of person apprehended if not surrendered or returned within two 
months.  
25. Release of persons arrested on bail.  
26. Abetment of extradition offences.  
27. Lawfulness of, and retaking on escape from, custody under warrants.  
28. Property found on fugit ive criminal.  
29. Power of Central Government to discharge any fugitive criminal.  
30. Simultaneous requisitions.  
31. Restrictions on surrender.  
32. Sections 29 and 31 to apply without any modification thereof.  
33. Act not to affect the Foreigners Act , 1946.  
34. Extra territorial jurisdiction.  
34A.  Prosecution on refusal to extradition.  
34B.  Provisional arrest.  
34C.  Provision of life imprisonment for death penalty.  
35. Notified orders and notifications to be laid before Parliament.  
36. Power to  make rules.  
37. Repeal s and savings.  
 THE SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
  
THE EXTRADITION ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1962  
[15th September , 1962 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the extradition of fugitive criminals  
1[and to provide for matters conne cted there with or incidental thereto.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows:―  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Extradition Act, 
1962.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Governmen t may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, ― 
3[(a) “composite offence ” means an act or conduct of a person occurred, wholly or in part, in 
a foreign State or in india but its effects or Intended effects, taken as a whole, would constitute an 
extradition offence in India or in a foreign State, as the case may be;]  
(b) “conviction ” and “convicted ” do not include or refer to a conviction which under foreign 
law is a conviction for  contumacy, but the term “person accused ” includes a per son so convicted 
for contu macy ; 
4[(c) “extradition offence ” means ― 
(i) in relation to a foreign State, being a treaty State, an offence provided for in the 
extradition treaty with that State;  
(ii) in relation to a foreign State other than a treaty State an offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year under the laws of India or of a 
foreign State and includes a composite offence;]  
(d) “extradition treaty ” means a treaty  5[,agreement or arrange ment) made by India with a 
foreign State relating to the extradition of fugitive criminal s, and includes any treaty  5[,agreement 
or arrange ment] relating to the extradition of fugitive criminals made before the 15th day of 
August, 1947, which extends to, and is binding on, India;  
(e) “foreign State ” means any State outside India  6* * *  and in cludes every constituent part, 
colony or dependency of such State;  
7[(f) “fugitive criminal ” means a person who is accused or con victed of an extradition offence 
within the jurisdiction of a foreign State and includes a person who, while in India, conspir es, 
                                                           
1. Added by Act 66 of 1993, s.  2 (w.e.f. 18-12-1993).  
2. 5th January, 1963, vide Notification No. G.S.R. 55, dated 5th January, 1963, see Gazet te of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (i). 
3. Subs . by Act 66 of 1993, s . 4, for clause  (a) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for cl ause (c) (w.e.f.18 -12-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “or agreement” (w.e.f. 18-12-1993).  
6. The words “other than a commonwealth c ountry ,” omitte d by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-1993 ). 
7. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause  (f) (w.e.f.  18-12-1993).  4 
 attempts to commit or incites or participates as an accomplice in the commission of an extradition 
offence in a foreign State;]  
(g) “magistrate ” means a m agistrate of the first cl ass or a presidency magistrate ; 
(h) “notified order ” means an order noti fied in the Official Gazette;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and  
(j) “treaty State ” means a foreign State with which an extradition treaty is in operation.  
3.  Application of Act.―1[(1) The Central Government may, by notifi ed order, direct that the 
provisions of this Act, other than  Chapter III, shall apply , to such foreign State or part thereof as may 
be specified in the order.]  
(2) The Central Government may, by the same notified order as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) or 
any subsequent notified order, restrict such application to fugitive criminals found, or suspected to be, 
in such part of India as may be specified in the order.  
(3) Where the notified o rder relates to a treaty State ,― 
(a) it shall set out in full the extradition treaty with that State ;  
(b) it shall not remain in force for any period longer than that treaty ; and 
(c) the Central Government may, by the same or any subsequent notified order, render the 
application of thi s Act subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as 
may be deemed expedient for implementing the treaty with that State.  
2[(4) Where there is no extradition treaty made by In dia with any foreign State, the  
Central Government m ay, by notified order, treat any Convention to which India and a foreign State 
are parties, as an extradition treaty made by India with that foreign State providing for extradition in 
respect of the offences specified in that Convention.]  
CHAPTER II  
EXTRAD ITION OF  FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO FOREIGN STATE  3* * * TO WHICH CHAPTER III DOES  
NOT APPLY  
4. Requisition for surrender .―A requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal of a 
foreign State  4* * * may be made to the Central Government ― 
(a) by a diplomat ic representative of the foreign  State 4* * * at Delhi; or  
(b) by the Government of that foreign State  4* * * communicating with the Central 
Government through its diplomatic representative in that State 5***; 
and if neither of these modes is convenient, t he requisition shall be made in such other mode as is 
settled by arrangement made by the Government of the foreign State  4* * * with the Government of 
India.  
5. Order for magisterial Inquiry. ―Where such requisition is made, the Central Government 
may, if it thinks fit, issue an order to any Magistrate who would have had jurisdiction to inquire into 
the offence if it had been an offence committed within the local limits of his jurisdiction dire cting him 
to inquire into the case.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).   
2. Ins. by s. 5 , ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. The words “ AND TO COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES ” omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4.  The words “or commonwealth country” omitted by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f.18 -12-1993).  
5.  The words “or country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  5 
 6. Issue of warrant for arrest .― On receipt of an order of the Central Government under  
section 5, the magistrate shall issue a warrant for the arrest of the fugitive criminal.  
7.  Procedure before magistrate .―(1) When the fugitive criminal ap pears or is brought before 
the magistrate, the magistrate shall inquire into the case in the same manner and shall have the same 
jurisdiction and powers, as nearly as may  be, as if the case were one triable by a court of session or  
High Court.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the magistrate shall, in 
particular, take such evidence as may be produced in support of the requisition of the foreign State           
1* * *  and on behalf of the fugitive cr iminal, including any evidence to show that the offence of which 
the fugitive criminal accused or has been convicted is an offence of political character or is not an 
extradition offence.  
(3) If the Magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie  case is not m ade out in support of the 
requisition of the foreign State  1* * *, he shall discharge the fugitive criminal.  
(4) If the Magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie  case is made out in support of the requisition 
of the foreign State  1* * *  he may commit the  fugitive criminal to prison to await the orders of the 
Central Government and shall report the result of his inquiry to the Central Government, and shall 
forward together with such report, and written statement which the fugitive criminal may desire to 
submit for the consideration of the Central Government.  
 8. Surrender of fugitive criminal. ―If upon receipt of the report and statement under sub -
section ( 4) of section 7, the Central Government  is of opinion that the fugitive cr iminal ought to be 
surrendered to the foreign State 1* * *, it may issue a warrant for the custody and removal of the 
fugitive criminal and for his delivery at a place and to a person to be named in the warrant.  
9. Power of magistrate to issue warrant of arrest in certain cases .―(1) Where it appears to 
any magistrate that a person within the local limits of his jurisdicti on, is a fugitive criminal of a 
foreign State  1* * * , he may, if he thinks fit, issue a warrant for the arrest of that person on such 
information and on such evidence as would, in his opinion, justify the issue of a warrant if the offence 
of which the pers on is accused or has been convicted had been committed within the local limits of 
his jurisdiction.  
(2) The magistrate shall forthwith report the issue of a warrant under sub -section ( 1) to the  
Central Government and shall forward the informa tion, and th e evidence or certified copies thereof to 
that Government.  
(3) A person arrested on a warrant issued under sub -section ( 1) shall not be detained for more than 
three months unless within that period the magistrate receives from the Central Government an ord er 
made with reference to such person under  section 5.  
10. Receipt in evidence of exhibit s depositions and other docu ments and authentication 
thereof .―(1) In any proceedings against a fu gitive criminal of a foreign State  1* * * under this 
chapter, exhibits and depositions (whether received or taken in the presence of the person against 
whom they are used or not) and copies thereof and official certific ates of facts and judicial documents 
stating facts may, if duly authenticated, be received as evidence.  
                                                           
1. The words “or commonwealth country” o mitted by Act 66 of  1993, s.  3 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
 6 
 (2) Warrants, depositions or statement s on oath , which purport to have been issued or taken by 
any court of Justice outside India or copies thereof, ce rtificates of, or judicial documents stating the 
facts of conviction before any such court shall be deemed to be duly authenticated if ― 
(a) the warrant purports to be signed by a judge, m agistrate or officer of the State  1* * * where 
the same was issued or acting in or of such State  1* * *; 
(b) the depositions of statements or copies thereof purport to be certified , under the hand of a 
judge, magistrate or officer of the State 1* * * where the same were taken , or acting in or for such 
State 1* * * , to be original depositions or statements or to be true copies thereof, as the case may 
require ;  
(c) the certificate of, or judicial document stating the fact of, a conviction purports to be 
certified by a judge, magistrate or officer of the State  1* * * where the conviction took place or 
acting in or for such State ;  
(d)  the warrants, depositions, statements, copies, certificates and judicial documents, as the 
case may be, are authenticated by the oath of some witness or by the official seal of a Minister of 
the State 1* * *  where the same were  2* * *  issued, taken or given.  
11. Chapter not to apply to Commonwealth countries to which Chapter II I applies. ― 
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to fugitive criminals 3* * * to which Chapter III applies.  
CHAPTER III  
RETURN OF FUGITIVE CRIMINALS TO  4[FOREIGN  STATES ] WITH EXTRADITION ARRANGEMENTS  
12. Application of Chapter .― ( 1) This Chapter shall apply  only to any such 5[foreign state] to 
which, by reason of an extradition arrangement entered into with that 6[State], it may seem expedient 
to the Central Government to apply the same.  
(2) Every such application shall be by notified order, and the Central  Government may, by the 
same or any subsequent notified order, direct that this Chapter and Chapters I, IV and V s hall, in 
relation to any such 5[foreign State], apply subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and 
qualifications as it may think  fit to specify in the order for the purpose of implementing the 
arrangement.  
13. Liability of fugitive criminals from foreign States to be apprehended and 
returned .―Where a fugitive criminal of any 5[foreign State] to which this Chapter applies is found i n 
India, he shall be liable to be apprehended and returned in the manner provided by this Chapter to that 
5[foreign State].  
14. Endorsed and provisional warrants .―A fugitive criminal may be apprehended in India 
under an endorsed warrant or a provisional wa rrant.  
15. Endorsed warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal .―Where a warrant for the 
apprehension of a fugitive cr iminal has been issued in any 5[foreign State] to which this Chapter 
applies and such fugitive criminal is, or is suspected to be, in In dia, the Central Government may, if 
satisfied that the warrant was issued by a person having lawful authority to issue the same, endorse 
such warrant in the manner prescribed, and the warrant so endorsed shall be sufficient authority to 
apprehend the perso n named in the warrant and to bring him before and magistrate in India.  
                                                           
1. The words “or country” omitted by Act 66 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
2. The word “respectively” omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. The words “of a commonwealth country”  omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f.  18-12-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “COMMONWEALTH COUNTRI ES” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “commonwealth country”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for  “country” (w.e.f.  18-12-1993).  7 
 16. Provisional warrant for apprehension of fugitive criminal .―(1) Any magistrate may issue 
a provisional warrant for the apprehension of a fugitive criminal from any 1[foreign State] to which 
this Chapter applies who is, or is suspected to be, in or on his way to India, on such information and 
under such circumstanc es as would, in his opinion, justify the issue of a warrant, if the offence of 
which the fugitive criminal is accused or has been convicted had been committed within his 
jurisdiction and such warrant may be executed accordingly.  
(2) A magistrate issuing a  provisional warrant shall forthwith send a report of the issue of the 
warrant together with the information or a certified copy thereof to the Central Government, and the 
Central Government may, if it thinks fit, discharge the person apprehended under suc h warrant.  
(3) A fugitive criminal apprehended on a provisional warrant may, from time to time, be 
remanded for such reasonable time, not exceeding seven days at any one time, as under the 
circumstances seems requisite for the production of an endorsed wa rrant.  
17. Dealing with fugitive criminal when apprehended .―(1) If the magistrate, before whom a 
person apprehended under this Chapter is brought, is satisfied on inquiry that the endorsed warrant for 
the apprehension of the fugitive criminal is duly authenticated and that the offence of which the 
person is accus ed or has been convicted i s an extradition offence, the magistrate shall commit the 
fugitive criminal to prison to await his return and shall forthwith send to the Central Government a 
certificate of the committal.  
(2) If on such inquiry the magistrate is of opinion that the endorsed warrant is not duly 
authenticated or that the offence of which such person is accused or has been convicted is not an 
extradition offence, the magistrate may, pending the receipt of the orders of the Central Government, 
detain such person in custody or release him on bail.  
(3) The magistrate shall report the result of his inquiry to the Central Government and shall 
forward together with such report any written statement which the fugitive criminal may desire to 
submit for the co nsideration of that Government.  
18. Return of fugitive criminal by warrant .―The Central Government may, at any time after a 
fugitive criminal has been committed to prison under this Chapter, issue a warrant for the custody and 
removal to the 1[foreign State] concerned of the fugitive criminal and for his delivery at a place and t o 
a person to be named in the warrant.  
CHAPTER IV  
SURRENDER OR RETURN OF ACCUSED OR CONVICTED PERSONS FROM FOREIGN STATES  2* * *  
19. Mode of requisition or form of warrant for the surrender or return to India of accused 
or convicted person who is in a for eign State 3* * *.― (1) A requisition for the surrender of a person 
accused or convicted of an extradition offence  committed in India and who is or is suspected to be, in 
any foreign State 4* * * to which Chapter III does not apply, may be made by the  
Central Governme nt― 
(a) to a diplomatic representative of that State 5* * * at Delhi; or  
(b) to the Government of that State 5* * *  through the diplomatic representative of India in 
that State   5* * * ;  
and if neither of these modes is convenient , the requisition shall be  made in such other mode as is 
settled by arrangement made by the Government of India with that State  5* * *.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 3 , for “commonwealth country” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
2. The words “ OR COMMONWEALTH COUN TRIES ” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. The words “or commonwealth country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. The words “or a commonwealth count ry” omitted by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
5. The words “or country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f.18 -12-1993).  8 
 (2) A warrant issued by a magistrate in India for the apprehension of any person who is, or is 
suspected to be, in any  1[foreign State] to which C hapter III applies shall be in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
20. Conveyance of accused or convicted person surrendered or returned .―Any person 
accused or convicted of an extradition offence who is surrendered or returned by a foreign State 2*** 
may, under the warrant of arrest for his surrender or return issued in such State or country, be brought 
into India and delivered to the prope r authority to be dealt with according to law.  
3[21. Accused or convicted person surrendered or returned by foreign State not to be tried 
for certain offences .―Whenever any person accused or convicted of an offence, which, if committed 
in India would be an  extradition offence, is surrendered or returned by a foreign State, such person 
shall not, until he has been restored or has had an opportunity of returning to that State, be tried in 
India for an offence other than ― 
(a) the extradition offence in relatio n to which he was surrendered or returned; or  
(b) any lesser offence disclosed by the facts proved for the purposes of securing his surrender 
or return other than an offence in relation to which an order for his surrender or return could not 
be lawfully m ade; or  
(c) the offence in respect of which the foreign State has given its consent.]  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Liability of fugitive criminals to be arrested and surrendered or returned .―Every 
fugitiv e criminal of a foreign State 2* * *  shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be liable to be 
arrested and surrendered or returned, whether the offence in respect of which the surrender or return is 
sought was committed before or after t he commencement of this Act, and whether or not a court in 
India has jurisdiction to try that offence.  
23. Jurisdiction as to offences committed at sea or in air .―Where the offence in respect of 
which the surrender or return of a fugitive criminal is sough t was committed on board any vessel on 
the high seas or any aircraft while in the air outside India or the Indian territorial waters which comes 
into any port or aerodrome of India, the Central Government and any magistrate having jurisdiction in 
such port  or aerodrome may exercise the powers conferred by this Act.  
24. Discharge of person apprehended if not surrendered or returned within two months .― 
if a fugitive criminal who, in pursuance of this Act, has been committed to prison to await his 
surrender or return to any foreign State 4* * *  is not conveyed out of India within two months after 
such committal, the High Court, upon application made to it by or on behalf of the fugitive criminal 
and upon proof that reasonable notice of the intention to make such application has been given to the 
Central Government, may order such prisoner to be discharged unless sufficient cause is shown to the 
contrary.  
25. Release of persons arrested on bail .―In the case of a person who is a fugitive criminal 
arrested or detained under th is Act, the provisions of 5[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973                
(2 of 1974) ] relating to bail shall apply in the same manner as they would apply if such person were 
accused of committing in India the offence of which he is accused or has been convicted, and in 
relation to such bail, the magistrate before whom the fugitive criminal is brought shall have, as far as 
may be, the same powers and jurisdiction as a cour t of session under that Code.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 3, for “commonwealth country” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
2. The words “or commonwealth country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. Subs . by s. 12, ibid., for section 21 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. The words “or country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid., for “the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) ”  (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  9 
 26. Abetment of extradition offences .―A fugitive criminal who is acc used or convicted of 
abetting 1[, conspiring, attempting to commit, inciting or participating as an accomplice in the 
commission of] any extradition offence shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be accused or 
convic ted of having committed such offence and shall be liable to be arrested and surrendered 
accordingly.  
27. Lawfulness of, and re -taking on escape from, custody under warrants .―It shall be lawful 
for any person to whom a warrant is directed for the apprehensi on of a fugitive criminal to hold in 
custody and convey the person mentioned in the warrant to the place named in the warrant, and if 
such person escapes out of any custody to which he may be delivered in pursuance of such warrant, he  
may be re -taken as a person accused of an offence against the law of India may be re -taken upon an 
escape.  
28. Property found on fugitive criminal .―Everything found in the possession of a fugitive 
criminal at the time of his arrest which may be material as evidence in proving the extradition offence 
may be delivered up with the fugitive criminal on his surrender or return, subject to the rights, if a ny, 
of third parties with respect thereto.  
29. Power of Central Government to discharge any fugitive criminal .― If it appears to the 
Central Government that by reason of the trivial nature of the case or by reason of the application for 
the surrender or re turn of a fugitive criminal not being made in good faith or in the interests of justice 
or for political reasons or otherwise, it is unjust or inexpedient to surrender or return the fugitive 
criminal, it may, by order, at any time stay any proceedings unde r this Act and direct any warrant 
issued or endorsed under this Act to be cancelled and the person for whose arrest the warrant has been 
issued or endorsed to be discharged.  
30. Simultaneous requisitions .―If requisitions for the surrender of a fugitive criminal are 
received fr om more than one foreign State 2***, the Central Government may, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case, surrender the fugitive criminal to such State or country as that Gover nment 
thinks fit.  
31. Restrictions on surrender .―3[(1)] A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered or returned to 
a foreign State 4***.―   
(a) if the offence in respect of which his surrender is sought is of a political character or if he 
proves to the sa tisfaction of the magistrate or court before whom he may be produced or of the 
Central Government that the requisition or warrant for his surrender has, in fact, been made with a 
view to try or punish him for an offence of a political character;  
(b) if pr osecution for the offence in respect of which his surrender is sought is according to 
the law of that State 5*** barred by time;  
6[(c) unless provision is made by that law of the foreign State or in the extradition treaty with 
the foreign State that the fugitive criminal shall not be determined or tried in that State for an 
offence other than — 
(i) the extradition offence in relation to which he is to be surrendered or returned;  
(ii) any lesser offence disclosed by the facts proved for the purposes of securing his 
surrender or return other than an offence in relation to which an order for his surrender or 
return could not be lawfully mad e; or  
(iii) the offence in respect of which the Central Government has given its consent;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 14 (w.e.f 18 -12-1993).  
2. The words “or commonwealth country or from any foreign State and any commonwealth country” omitted by s. 15, ibid. 
(w.e.f 18 -12-1993).  
3.  Section  31 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that secti on by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. The words “or  commonwealth country” omitted  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f.18 -12-1993).  
5. The words “or country” omitted  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993) .  10 
 (d) if he has been accused of some offence in India, not being the offence for which his 
surrender or return is sought, or is undergoing sentence under any convict ion in India until after 
he has been discharged, whether by acquittal or on expiration of his sentence or otherwise;  
(e) until after the expiration of fifteen days from the date of his being committed to prison by 
the magistrate.  
1[(2) For the purposes of  sub-section ( 1), the offence specified in the Schedule shall not be 
regarded as offences of a political character.  
(3) The Central Government having regard to the extradition treaty made by India with any 
foreign State may, by notified order, add or omit  any offence from the list given in the Schedule.]  
32. Sections 29 and 31 to apply without any modification thereof .― Notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in section 3 or section 12, the provisions of sections 29 and 31 shall apply 
without any modifi cation to every foreign State 2***. 
33. Act not to affect the Foreigners Act, 1946 .―Nothing in this Act shal l affect the provisi ons 
of the Foreigners Act, 1946  (31 of 1946), or any order made thereunder.  
3[34. Extra territorial jurisdiction .―An extradition offence committed by any person in a 
foreign State shall be deemed to have been committed in India and such  person shall be liable to be 
prosecuted in India for such offence.  
34A. Prosecution on refusal to extradition .― Where the Central Government is of the opinion 
that a fugitive criminal cannot be surrendered or returned pursuant to a request for extradition  from a 
foreign State, it may, as it thinks fit, take steps to prosecute suc h fugitive criminal in India.  
34B. Provisional arrest .―(1) On receipt of an urgent request from a foreign State for the 
immediate arrest of a fugitive criminal, the Central Governm ent may request the Magistrate having 
competent jurisdiction to issue a provisional warrant for the arrest of such fugitive criminal.  
(2) A fugitive criminal arrested under sub -section ( 1) shall be discharged upon the expiration of 
sixty days from the date  of his arrest if no request for his surrender or return is received within the 
said period.  
34C. Provision of life imprisonment for death penalty .―Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law for the time being in force, where a fugitive criminal, who has committed an 
extradition offence punishable with death in India, is surrendered or returned by a foreign State on the 
request of the Centra l Government and the laws of that foreign State do not provide for a death 
penalty for such an offence, such fugitive criminal shall be liable for punishment of imprisonment for 
life only for that offence. ] 
35. Notified orders and notifications to be laid before Parliament .―Every notified order made 
or notification issued under this Act shall, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
36. Power to make rules .―(1) The central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette , make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely:―  
(a) the form in which a requisition for the surr ender of a fugitive criminal may be made;  
(b) the form in which a warrant for the apprehension of an y person in a 4[foreign State]  to 
which Chapter III applies may be made;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1993, s. 16 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
2. The words “or commonwealth country” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for section 34 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “commonwealth country” (w.e.f . 18-12-1993).   11 
 (c) the manner in which any warrant may be endorsed or authenticated under this A ct;  
(d) the removal of fugitive criminals accused or in custody under this Act and their control 
and maintenance until such time as they are handed over to the persons named in the warrant as 
entitled to receive them;  
(e) the seizure and disposition of a ny property which is the subject of, or required for proof of, 
any alleged offence to which this Act applies;  
(f) the form and manner in which or the channel through which a magistrate may be required 
to make his report to the Central Government under thi s Act;  
(g) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may  be comprised in 
one session or 1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session  or the successive session  aforesaid], both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses a gree that the rule should not made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previousl y done under that rule.  
37. Repeals and savings .―(1) The Indian Extradition Act, 1903 (15 of 1903), and any law 
corresponding thereto in force at the commencement of this Act in the territories which, immediately 
before the 1st day of November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States and the North East Frontier 
Agency and Tuensang District (Extradition) Regulation, 1961 (3 of 1961), are hereby repealed.  
(2) The Extradition Acts, 1870 to 1932 (33 and 34 Vict. c. 52; 36 and 37 Vict. c. 60; 6 Edw. 7,  c. 
15; 22 and 23 Geo. 5, c. 39,  44 and 45 Vict. c. 69 ) and the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881, in so far as 
they apply to and operate as part of the law of India, are hereby repealed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and  the Schedule , for certain words (w.e.f 15 -5-1986).  12 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See Section 31(2)] 
OFFENCES WHICH ARE NOT TO BE REGARDED AS OFFENCES OF A POLITICAL CHARACTER  
The following list of offences is to be construed according to the law in force in India on the date 
of the alleged offence. Wherever the names of the relevant Acts are not given, the sections referred to 
are the sections of the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860): ― 
1. Offences under the Anti -Hijacking Act, 1982 (65 of 1982).  
2. Offences under the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982 
(66 of 1982).  
3. An offence within the scope of the Convention on the punishment of crimes agains t 
Internationally   protected persons including diplomatic agents, opened for signature at New York on 
14th December, 1973.  
 4. An offence within the scope of the International Convention against the taking of hostages 
opened for signature at New York on 18 th December, 1979.  
 5. Culpable homicide, murder (sections 299 to 304).  
6. Voluntarily causing hurt or grevious hurt by a dangerous weapon or means ( sections 321 to 
333).  
7. Offences under the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (6 of 1908).  
8. Possession of  a fire -arm or ammunition with intention to endanger life [ section 27 of the Arms 
Act, 1959 (54 of 1959)].  
 9. The use of a fire arm with intention to resist or prevent the arrest or detention [ section  28 of the 
Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959)].  
10. Causing o f loss or damage to property used for public utilities or otherwise with intention to 
endanger life ( section 425 read with section 440).  
11. Wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement ( sections  339 to 348).  
12. Kidnapping and abduction including taking of hostages ( sections 359 to 3 69).  
13. Offences related to terrorism and terrorist acts [Terrorist and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1987 (28 of 1987).  
14. Abetting, conspiring or attempting to commit, inciting, participating as an accomplice i n the 
commission of any of the offences listed above.]  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1993, s.  18, for “The First and Second Schedules”  (w.e.f. 18-12-1993 ).  
--------------------------The Foreigners Law (Application and Amendment) Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE FOREIGNERS LAW (APPLICATION AND AMENDMENT)  ACT, 1962  
_______ ____  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Application of Act 16 of 1939 and Act 31 of 1946 to certain persons . 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE FOREIGNERS LAW (APPLICATION AND AMENDMENT)  ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1962  
[24th November, 1962 .] 
An Act to apply the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 and the Foreigners Act, 1946 to 
certain persons to whom they do not at present apply and further to amend the Foreigners 
Act, 1946.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Foreigners Law (Application and Amendment)        
Act, 1962.  
2. Application of Act 16 of 1939 and Act 31 of 1946 to certain persons .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the provisions of the  Registration of 
Foreigners Act , 1939 , and the Foreigners Act , 1946 , and of the rules and orders made thereunder shall 
apply to and in relation to any person who, or either of whose parents, or any of whose grand -parents 
was at any time a citizen or subject of any country at war with, or committing external aggression 
against, India or of any other country assisting the co untry at war with, or committing such aggression 
against, India , as they apply to and in relation to foreigners as defined for the purposes of those Acts.  
3. [Amendment of Act of  31 of 1946. ]—Section  3 rep. by Repealing and Amending Act  56 of 1974, 
s. 2 and the First Schedule,  (w.e.f.  20-12-1974).  
4. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Foreigners Law (Application and Amendment) Ordinance,     
1962 (5 of 1962) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act, as if this Act and commenced on the 26th 
October, 1962.  
 
--------------------------The Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (ADMINISTRATION) ACT, 1962  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Representation in the House of the People . 
4. Officers and functionaries in relation to Goa, Daman and Diu . 
5. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptation . 
6. Power to extend enactments to Goa, Daman and Diu . 
7. [Repealed .]  
8. Power to construe laws . 
9. Validation of certain action and indemnity of officers for certain acts . 
10. Power to remove difficulties . 
11. Repeal and savi ng. 
 
  2 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (ADMINISTRATION) ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 1 OF1962  
[27th March,  1962 .] 
An Act to provide for the administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Goa, Daman and Diu 
(Administration) Act, 1962.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of March, 1962.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of Goa, Daman and Diu appoi nted by the President 
under Article  239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “appointed day ” means the twentieth day of December, 1961;  
(c) “Goa, Daman and Diu ” means the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu.  
3. Representation in the House of the People .—(1) There shall be allotted two seats to the Union 
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu in the Ho use of the People.  
(2) In the Represent ation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) ,— 
(a) in section 4, in sub -section ( 1), after the words “to Dadra and Nagar Haveli ”, the words “to 
Goa, Daman and Diu ” shall be inserted;  
(b) in the First Schedule, — 
(i) after entry 22, the following ent ry shall be inserted, namely :— 
“23. Goa, Daman and Diu ..... 2”; 
(ii) entries 23 and 24 shall be re -numbered as entries 24 and 25, respectively.  
(3) In the Representation of the People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) , in section 4, after the words “to  
Dadra and Nagar Haveli ”, the words “to Goa, Daman and Diu ” shall be inserted.  
4. Officers and functionaries in relation to Goa, Daman and Diu .—Without prejudice to the 
powers of the Central Government to appoint from time to time such officers and authorities as may be 
necessary for the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu, all judges, magistrates and other officers and 
authorities who, immediately before the commencement of this Act, were exercising lawful functions i n 
connection with the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu or any part thereof, shall, unless otherwise 
directed at any time by the Central Government in relation to any such judge, magistrate or other officer 
or authority, or until other provision is made  by law, continue to exercise in connection with such 
administration their respective functions in the same manner and to the same extent as before such 
commencement with such altered designation, if any, as that Government may determine.  
5. Continuance of  existing laws and their adaptation. —(1) All laws in force immediately before 
the appointed day in Goa, Daman and Diu or any part thereof shall continue to be in force therein until 
amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authorit y. 
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application of any such law in relation to the administration of 
Goa, Daman and Diu as a Union territory and for the purpose of bringing the provisions of any such law 
into accord with the provisions of the Consti tution, the Central Government may, within two years from 
the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal 
oramendment, as may be necessary or expedient and thereupon, every such law shall have effect subject 
to the adaptations and modifications so made.  3 
 6. Power to extend enactments to Goa, Daman and Diu .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, extend with such restrictions or modifications as it thinks fit to Goa, 
Daman and Diu any  enactment which is in force in a State at the date of the notification.  
7.[Extension of the jurisdiction of Bombay Hi gh Court to Goa, Daman and Diu .] Rep. by the  
Goa, Daman and Diu Judicial Commissioner's Court (Declaration asHigh Court) Act, 1964  (16 of 1964) , 
section 8 (w.e.f. 16-12-1964).  
8. Power to construe laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in relation to 
Goa, Daman and Diu, any Court or other authority may construe any such law in such manner not 
affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the Court or other 
authority.  
9. Validation of certain action and indemnity of officers for certain acts .—(1) All things done and 
all action taken (including any acts of executive au thority, proceedings, decrees and sentences) in or with 
respect to Goa, Daman and Diu on or after the appointed day and before the commencement of this Act, 
by the Administrator or any other officer, whether civil or military, or by any other person acting  under 
the orders of the Administrator or such officer, which have been done or taken in good faith in a 
reasonable belief that they were necessary for the peace and good government of Goa, Daman and Diu 
shall be as valid and operative as if they had been done or taken in accordance with law.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding whatsoever, whether civil or criminal, shall lie in any Court of 
law against the Administrator or any other officer of Government; whether civil or military, or against 
any other p erson acting under the orders of the Administrator or such other officer, for, or on account of, 
or in respect of, anything done or any action taken in Goa, Daman and Diu or any part thereof on or after 
the appointed day and before the commencement of this  Act which has been done or taken in good faith 
and in a reasonable belief that it was necessary for the peace and good government of Goa, Daman and 
Diu: 
Provided that if any such suit on other legal proceeding has been instituted before the commencement 
of this Act, it shall, on such commencement, abate.  
10. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act or in connection with the administration of Goa, Daman and Diu, the Central Government may, 
by order, make such further provision as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty.  
(2) Any order under sub -section ( 1) may be made so as to be retrospective to any date not earlier than 
the appointed day.  
11. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Ordinance, 1962  (2 of 
1962) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken in exercise of any of the powers 
conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have  been done or taken in exercise of the 
powers conferred by or under this Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE HINDI SAHITYA SAMMELAN ACT, 1962  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan as an institution of national importance . 
3. Definitions . 
4. Incorporation . 
5. Effect of incorporation of Sammelan . 
6. Functions of Sammelan . 
7. Governing Body.  
8. First Governing Body and its duties . 
9. Term of office and procedure of first Governing Body and allowances payable to members thereof . 
10. First Governing Body to take over management of  properties of Sammelan.  
11. Determination of first members . 
12. Rules to be made by the first Governing Body . 
13. Elections to Governing Body . 
14. Dissolution of first Governing Body . 
15. Fund of the Sammelan . 
16. Accounts and audit . 
17. Power to make rule.  
18. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc . 
19. Power to remove difficulties . 
  2 
 THE HINDI SAHITYA SAMMELAN ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 13 OF 1962  
[30th March , 1962 .] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan  having its head office at 
Allahabad to be an institution of national importance and to provide for its incorporation and 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The Hindi Sahitya Sammelan         
Act, 1962.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan as an institution of national                
importance .—Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan which has its 
head office at Allahabad are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby  
declared that the institution known as the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “Sammelan ” means the institution known as the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, incorporated under     
this Act;  
(d) “Society ” means the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan  which has its head office at Allahabad and is 
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1960) . 
 4. Incorporation .—(1) The first members of the Sammelan  and all persons who may hereafter 
become members thereof in accordance with the rules made in this behalf, so long as they continue to hold 
membership thereof, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan.  
(2) The Samm elan shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract and may by that name sue 
and be sued  
(3) The head office of the Sammelan shall be at Allahaba d. 
2[(4) The first members of the Sammelan shall be — 
(a) all persons who, immediately before the appointed day, were members of the Society;  
(b) all persons who, before that day, have been Presidents of the Society; and  
(c) a ll persons who, before that d ay, were awarded the Mangla Par shad Paritoshik by                    
the Society.]  
5. Effect of incorporation of Sammelan .—On and from the appointed day,  
(a) any reference to the Society in any law (other than this Act) or in any contract or other 
instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Sammelan;  
3[(b) all property, mov able or immov able,  of  the Society shall be the property of the Sammelan;]  
                                                           
1. 28th June, 1962 vide notification No. S.O. 1954(E), dated 25 th June, 1962, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary, Part II,           
Sec. 3(ii). 
2. Subs.  by Act 1 of 1963 , s. 2, for sub-section ( 4)  (w.e.f .  28-6-1962 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 25-1-1963). 3 
 (c) all righ ts and liabilities of the Society shall  1*** be the rights and liabilities of the        
Sammelan; and  
(d) every person employed for the Society immediately before the appointed day shall hold his 
office or service in the Sammelan  by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same 
terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave,  gratuity, provident 
fund and othe r matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been passed, an d shall 
continue to do so unless and until his appointment is terminated or until his tenure or terms and 
conditions are duly altered b y the rules made in this behalf : 
Provided  that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to any such employee, his employment may be 
terminated by the Sammelan in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by  the Sammelan of compensa tion equivalent 
to three month’s  remuneration in the case of permanent employees and one month’ s remuneration in the 
case of permanent employees . 
6. Functions of Sammelan .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the 
Sammelan shall perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to promote the spread of Hindi language and to develop it and secure its enrichment in the 
manner indicated in Article 351 of the Constitution;  
(b) to work for the promotion, devel opment and advancement of Hindi literature in India and 
foreign countries and to print and publish such literature;  
(c) to work for the promotion, development and advancement of Devanagari script , and to print 
and publish literature of other Indian  languag es in Devanagari script;  
(d) to arrange for the holding of examinations through the medium of Hindi language and to confer 
degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions;  
(e) to establish and maintain schools, colleges and other institutions for instruc tion in Hindi 
language and Hindi literature and also to affiliate schools, colleges and other institutions for its 
examinations;  
(f) to affiliate institutions having for their object the promotion of Hindi language and              
Hindi literature;  
(g) to award honorary degrees and other academic distinctions to persons who may have rendered 
distinguished service to the cause of Hindi;  
(h) to institute and award prizes (Partioshiks) to distinguished scholars in Hindi;  
(i) to promote and encourage research in Hind i language and Hindi literature;  
(j) to co -operate with other institutions having objects similar to those of the Sammelan, in such 
manner as may be conducive to their common objects;  
(k) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive 
bequests, donations or transfers of moveable and immoveable properties from testators, donors or 
transferors, as the case may be;  
(l) to deal with any property belonging t o or vested in the Sammelan in such manner as the 
Sammelan may deem fit for advancing the objects of the Sammelan:  
(m) with the approval of the Central Government, to borrow on the security of the property of the 
Sammelan money for the purposes of the Samm elan,  
(n) to perform such other functions as may be deemed necessary by the Sammelan for advancing 
the cause of Hindi language and Hindi literature or as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
performance of all or any of the above functions.  
                                                           
1. The words “be transf erred to, and” omitted by Act 1 of 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25-1-1963). 
 4 
 7. Governing Body.—(1) The general superintendence , direction and management of the affairs of the 
Sammelan shall vest in a Governing Body, by whatever name called.  
(2)The Governing Body shall consist of such number of persons not exceeding fifty -five as the Central 
Government may from time to time determine, of whom not more than seven shall be nominated by the 
Central Government from among educationists of repute or eminent Hindi scholars, and the remaining 
members shall be chosen in accordance with the rule s made in this behalf.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the powers and functions of the Governing Body, the term of 
office of, and the allowances, if any , payable to members thereof, the procedure to be followed by the 
Governing Body for the transaction of its business, the quorum necessary therefore and the manner of 
filling casual vacancies among the members thereof shall be such as may be prescribed.  
8. First Governing Body and its duties .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazeette constitute the first Governing Body 
consisting of a Chairman, a Secretary, and thirteen other mem bers to be appointed by that Government.  
(2) The thirteen members referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be chosen as follows: — 
(i) one member to represent the Ministry of the Central Go vernment dealing with education;  
(ii) one  member to represent the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with finance;  
(iii) not more than three members from among the f ormer Presidents of the Society;  and 
(iv) the remaining number from among persons who are. in the opinion of the Central 
Government, eminent in the field of Hindi language or Hindi literature.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the first G overning Body of the Sammelan, — 
(a) to perform all functions of the Sammelan and to carry on the administration of the affairs of the 
Sammelan  until a Governing Body is constituted in accordance w ith the provisions of section 7;  
(b) to make the rules with the approval of the Central Government ; 
(c) to determine the first members of the Sammelan within the meaning of sub -section ( 4)             
of section 4;  
(d) to take all necessary steps for the constitution of the Governing Body in accordance with     
such rules;  
(e) to perform such other functions as it may consider necessary.  
9. Term of office and procedure of first Governing Body and allowan ces payable to members 
thereof .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 14, the members of the first Governing Body shall hold 
office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
(2) All questions at a meeting of the first Governing Body shall be decided by a majority of the 
members present thereof, and in the case of an equality of votes the Chairman or, in his absence, any other 
person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.  
(3) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the first Governing Bo dy shall be  1[five] members.  
(4) The members shall be paid out of the Fund of the Sammelan such  2[salary or allowances or both ] 
may be prescribed and until so prescribed, as may be specified by the Central Government in this be halt.  
10. First Governing Bo dy to take over management of properties of                             
Sammelan. —Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in 
force or in any order of a court, the first Governing Body shall take over the manag ement, control and 
administration of all the properties vested in the Sammelan.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 1 of 1963, s. 4, for “three”  (w.e.f .  25-1-1963). 
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “allowances” (w.e.f .  25-1-1963). 
 5 
 11. Determination of first members .—(1) The first Governing Body shall, as soon as may be, cause 
to be prepared, subject to such instructions, it any, as it may receive from the Central Government, a list of 
all persons who are to be considered as first members of the Sammelan within the meani ng of sub -section 
(4) of section 4.  
(2) The list shall be published in such manner as may be directed by the Central Government.  
(3) If at any time after the publication in the list of first members under sub -section ( 2), it appears to 
the first Governing Body that the name of any person has been wrongly omitted from, or wrongly entered 
in the list, it may order such name to be inserted or omitted from that list and the list shall be amended 
accordingly:  
Provided  that no order omitting the name of any perso n from the list shall be made unless that person 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such omission.  
(4) No persons other than the persons named in the list prepared under this section shall be considered 
as first members of the  Sammelan within the meaning of sub -section ( 4) of section 4.  
12. Rules to be made by the first Governing Body .—(1) The first Governing  Body shall, as soon as 
may be, make rules in respect o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the matters relating to memb ership, including the qualifications and disqualifications for 
membership of the Sammelan ; 
(b) the powers and functions of the Governing Body; the term of office of, and the allowances, if 
any, payable to, members thereof; the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body for the 
transaction of its business, the quorum necessary therefore and the manner of filling casual vacancies 
among the members thereof;  
(c) the conduct of elections for the constitution of the Governing Body and the decisions on doubts 
and disputes at or in connection with the said elections;  
(d) the appointment of an executive committee or any other committee for carrying on the 
functions of the  Governing Body or of the Sammelan; the constitution, powers and duties of such 
committees and the allowances, if any, payable to the members thereof;  
(e) the procedure and the forms for the maintenance of books of accounts and other registers and 
statemen ts for the purposes of this Act;  
(f) the appointment, control and other conditions of service of the employees of the Sammelan;  
(g) the conduct of correspondence, execution of documents and contracts for or on behalf of the 
Sammelan;  
(h) the conduct and pr osecution of suits and proceedings by or against the Sammelan;  
(i) the matters relating to the affiliation of schools, colleges, and other institutions with the 
Sammelan;  
(j) the matters relating to the award of degrees and academic distinctions by the Sam melan:  
(k) the matters relating to the award of prizes (Paritoshiks) by the Sammelan;  
(l) the procedure for the amendment of the rules;  
(m) such other matters as may be necessary for the performance of the functions of the Sammelan.  
(2) A draft of the rule s proposed to be made under sub -section ( 1) shall be forwarded to the Central 
Government for approval and that Government may approve the same with or without modifications.  
(3) No rules made under this section shall have effect until they are approved by the Central 
Government and are published by the first Governing Body in such manner as the Central Government 
may, by order direct.  
(4) A copy of the rules so made shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are made before each House 
of Parliament  6 
 13. Elections to Governing Body .—The first Governing Body shall, within six months of its 
constitution or within such further period as may be specified by the Central Government, arrange to hold 
elections to the Governing Body in accordance with the provisions o f the rules made under section 12 and 
take such further steps as may be necessary for its due constitution within the period specified as aforesaid.  
14. Dissolution of first Governing Body .—On the constitution of the Governing Body under       
section 7 in accordance with the rules made under section 12, the first Governing Body shall cease to exist 
and stand dissolved.  
15. Fund of the Sammelan .—(1) The Sammelan shall maintain a F und to which shall be credited — 
(a) all fees and other charges received by the Sammelan;  
(b) all moneys received by the Sammelan by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions , 
bequests or transfers; and  
(c) all moneys received by the Sammelan in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Sammelan in the performance of its 
functions under this Act, including allowances, if any, payable to the members of the Governing Body or 
of any Committee and the salaries and allowances, if a ny, of the employees of the Sammelan.  
16. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Sammelan shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The acco unts of the Sammelan shall, once at least in every year, be audited by a chartered 
accountant in practice within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, to be appointed 
annually by the Sammelan;  
Provided  that no member of the Sammelan who is a chartered accountant or a person who is in 
partnership with such member shall be eligible for appointment as an auditor under this section.  
(3) Every auditor shall, in the performance of his duties, have at all reasonable times access to the 
books, accounts and other documents of the Sammelan.  
(4) As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, the audited accounts of the Sammelan 
togethe r with the audit report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.  
17. Power to make rule .—(1) The Governing Body may, from time to time, make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act and such rules may amend or repeal the rules made under sectio n 12.  
(2) No rules made under this section shall have effect until they are approved by the Central 
Government and are published by the Governing Body in the prescribed manner.  
18. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc .—No act of the  Sammelan, or of 
the Governing Body, or of any other body set up under the rules made in this behalf shall be invalid merely 
by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy therein, or defect in the constitution thereof, or  
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member      
thereof, or  
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
19. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to th e provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provision or give 
such directions not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removing the dif ficulty.  
 
 
--------------------------The Manipur (Sales of Motor Spirit and Lubricants) Taxation Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE MANIPUR (SALES OF MOTOR SPIRIT AND LUBRICANTS)  
TAXATION ACT, 196 2                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Levy of tax.  
4. Taxing authorities.  
5. Registration of dealers.  
6. Cancellation of registration certificate.  
7. Returns.  
8. Assessment.  
9. Cancellation of assessment.  
10. Assessment and penalty in case of evasion by unregistered persons.  
11. Assessment and penalty in case of evasion by registered persons.  
12. Power to grant exemption from tax.  
13. Penalties.  
14. Appeal.  
15. Powers of revision of Commissioner.  
16. Revision by the Chief Commissioner.  
17. Payment of tax, etc.  
18. Recoveries.  
19. Refunds.  
20. Maintenance of accounts.  
21. Pow ers to order production of accounts, etc.  
22. Power for entry, inspection, search and seizure.  
23. Offences and penalties.  
24. False statement in declaration.  
25. Search and seizure how made.  
26. Power of investigation.  
27. Punishment for vexatious search,  etc. 
28. Things liable to confiscation.  
29. Power to compound offences.  
30. Cognizance of offence.  
31. Protection of persons acting in good faith and limitation of suits and proceedings.  
32. Delegation of Commissioner’s powers.  
33. Computation of the period of limitation.  
34. Information to be furnished regarding change of business.  
35. Services of order, notices, etc.  
36. Power to make rules.  
37. Repeal of Assam Act 4 of 1939 as extended to Manipur.  2 
 THE MANIPUR (SALES OF MOTOR SPIRIT AND LUBRICANTS)  
TAXATION ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 55 OF 1962  
[13th December, 1962 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the levy of a tax on sales of motor spirit and 
lubricants in  the Union territory of Manipur.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Manipur (Sales of Motor 
Spirit and Lubricants) Taxation Act, 1962.  
(2) It extends to the whole of  the Union territory of Manipur.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chief Commissioner ” means the Chief Commissioner of Manipur;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner appointed under section 4;  
(c) “crude oil ” means petroleum in its natural state;  
(d) “dealer ” means any person who sells taxable goods manufactured, made or processed by him 
in, or brought by him into, the Union territory from any place outside that territory for the pu rpose of 
sale in that territory.  
Explanation. —The manager or agent of a dealer who resides outside the Union territory and sells 
taxable goods brought by him into that territory from any place outside that territory, shall, in respect 
of such business, be a dealer for the purposes of this Act;  
(e) “lubricant ” means any form of oil or  other lubricating substance primarily used for lubricating 
the internal machinery or the external parts and fittings of motor vehicles, stationary internal 
combustion engines, steam turbines or engines, power pumps, refrigerators, dynamos and other 
machin ery and shall include all forms of greases, mineral jellies, spindle oils, cutting oils and 
hydraulic brake fluids;  
(f) “motor spirit ” means any substance which by itself or in admixture with other substances is 
ordinarily used directly or indirectly to pr ovide reasonably efficient fuel for automative or stationary 
internal combustion engines, and includes petrol, diesel oil and other internal combustion oils but 
does not include kerosene, furnace oil, coal or charcoal;  
(g) “person ” includes a Department of  Government and a Hindu Joint Family;  
(h) “petrol ” means dangerous petroleum as defined in the Petroleum Act, 1934  (30 of 1934);  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(j) “sale” with all its grammatical variations and cognate expr essions, means any transfer of 
property in goods by one person to another for cash or deferred payment or any other valuable 
consideration;  
(k) “taxable goods ” means such goods as are specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(l) “Union territory ” means the Union territory of Manipur.  
  3 
 3. Levy of tax .—(1) There shall be levied and collected from every dealer a tax on all sales effected 
by him of the following goods at such rates as may be fixed by the Central Government, from time to 
time, by noti fication in the Official Gazette, not exceeding the rates specified below: — 
(i) motor spirit (except diesel oil and internal combustion oils other 
than petrol).  eight naye paise per lit re. 
(ii) lubricant.  nine naye paise per lit re. 
(iii) diesel  oil and internal combustion oils other than petrol.  seven naye paise per lit re. 
(iv) crude oil.  one naya paisa per lit re. 
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall also be published in the Manipur Gazette.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to render any dealer liable to tax on the sale of taxable 
goods where such sale takes place: — 
(i) outside the Union territory;  
(ii) in the course of the import into or export out of the territory of India; or  
(iii) in the course of the inter -State trade or commerce as laid down in section 3 of the          
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956  (74 of 1956).  
(4) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), any shortage in excess of one per cent. of the quantities of each 
consignment of motor spirit received into stoc k by a dealer for sale shall, unless the contrary is proved, be 
presumed to be due to sale, and the tax shall be levied and collected from the dealer accordingly.  
4. Taxing authorities .—(1) The Chief Commissioner may, for carrying out the purposes of this Act, 
appoint a Commissioner of Taxes, and such other persons to assist him as he thinks fit.  
(2) Persons appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise such powers as may be conferred, and 
perform such duties as may be required, by or under this Act.  
5. Registration of dealers .—(1) Every dealer shall, within such time as may be prescribed for the 
purpose, make an application for registration under this Act  to the Commissioner, and every such 
application shall contain such particulars and shall be accompanie d by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where a dealer has more than one place of business whether in the same town or village or in 
different towns or villages, he shall apply for registration and obtain a separate registration certificate in 
respect of each such place of business.  
(3) If the Commissioner is satisfied that the application is in conformity with the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder, he shall register the applicant and grant him a certificate of 
registration in the prescr ibed form which shall specify the class or classes of goods in which the dealer 
carries on business, and such other particulars as may be prescribed for the purposes of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3.  
(4) A certificate of registration granted under this sect ion may either on the application of the dealer 
to whom it has been granted, or, where no such application has been made, after due notice to the dealer, 
be amended by the Commissioner if he is satisfied that by reason of the dealer having changed the name , 
place or nature of his business or the class or classes of goods in which he carries on business or for any 
other reason, the certificate of registration granted to him requires to be amended.  
(5) No dealer shall carry on business in taxable goods without, or otherwise than in accordance , with 
the terms of, a certificate of registration.  
6. Cancellation of registration certificate .—(1) The Commissioner may cancel any certificate of 
registration granted to a dealer, if — 
(a) he has ceased to carry on business; or  
(b) any tax payable under section 3 is not duly paid by him; or  4 
 (c) there is any breach of any of the provisions of this Act, the rules made thereunder or the 
conditions subject to which the registration certificate has  been granted; or  
(d) he has been convicted under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided, that no order shall be passed — 
(i) under clause ( a) unless the dealer was served with a notice, or  
(ii) under clause ( b), clause ( c) or clause ( d), unless the dealer wa s given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard:  
Provided further, that such cancellation shall not absolve the dealer from his liability to pay tax and 
other dues under this Act, nor bar other action as may be taken against him under this Act.  
(2) The dea ler shall not be entitled to any compensation for any loss or damage directly or indirectly 
suffered by him by reason of cancellation of the certificate under sub -section ( 1). 
7. Returns .—Every  person registered under this Act shall submit such return or returns at such 
intervals and to such authority as may be prescribed.  
8. Assessment .—(1) If the Commissioner is satisfied that a return furnished under section 7 in respect 
of any period is corr ect and complete, he shall, by an order in writing, assess the tax payable by the dealer 
on the basis of such return.  
(2) If the Commissioner is not so satisfied he shall serve on the dealer a notice requiring him on the 
date, and at the hour and place spe cified therein, either to attend in person or to produce or cause to be 
produced any evidence on which he may rely in support of his return.  
(3) On the day specified in the notice under sub -section ( 2) or as soon thereafter as may be, the 
Commissioner, aft er hearing such evidence as he may require, shall, by an order in writing, assess the tax 
payable by the dealer.  
(4) If a dealer fails to make a return as required by section 7 or having made the return fails to comply 
with any of the terms of the notice u nder sub -section ( 2), the Commissioner shall, by order in writing 
assess to the best of his judgment the tax payable by the dealer:  
Provided that before making assessment the Commissioner may allow the dealer such further time as 
he thinks fit to make the return or comply with the terms of the notice issued under sub -section ( 2). 
9. Cancellation of assessment .—Where a dealer, in the case of an assessment completed under      
sub-section ( 4) of section 8 satisfies the Commissioner, within one month from the date of service of a 
notice of demand as hereinafter provided, that he was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
return required by section 7 or that he had not been served with the notice under sub -section ( 2) of     
section 8 or that he had not h ad a reasonable opportunity to comply, or was prevented by sufficient cause 
from complying with the terms of the notice, the Commissioner shall cancel the assessment and make a 
fresh assessment in accordance with the provisions of section 8.  
10. Assessment  and penalty in case of evasion by unregistered persons .—If on information or 
otherwise, the Commissioner is satisfied that any person while being liable to pay tax under this Act has 
failed to apply for registration and to pay the tax, he shall, after giv ing the person a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, assess, to the best of his judgment, the amount of tax, if any, due from him 
and the Commissioner may also direct that, in addition to the amount so assessed, a sum not exceeding 
that amount shall be recovered from the defaulter by way of penalty.  
11. Assessment and penalty in case of evasion by registered persons .—If on information or 
otherwise, the Commissioner is satisfied that any person registered under this Act has not paid the amount 
of tax due from him or a part thereof for any period, he may proceed against such person in the manner 
laid down in section 10.  
  5 
 12. Power to grant exemption from tax .—(1) If the Chief Commissioner is satisfied that it is 
necessary in the public interest so to do, he may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt generally 
either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, any class of dealers 
from the payment of the whole or any part of tax, in respect of any taxable good s. 
(2) If the Chief Commissioner is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, he may, 
by special order in each case, exempt any dealer from the payment of tax under circumstances of 
exceptional nature to be stated in such order, in re spect of any taxable goods.  
13. Penalties .—(1) If the Commissioner, in the course of any proceedings under this Act, is satisfied 
that any dealer — 
(a) has, without reasonable cause, failed to furnish the return which he was required to furnish 
under section 7 or has, without reasonable cause, failed to furnish it within the time allowed and in 
the manner required, or  
(b) has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply with a notice under sub -section ( 2) of      
section 8, or  
(c) has concealed the part iculars of his sales or deliberately furnished incorrect particulars of such 
sales, or  
(d) has evaded the liability to pay tax,  
the Commissioner may direct that such dealer shall, in addition to any tax payable by him, pay, by way of 
penalty, — 
(i) in a cas e referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b), a sum not exceeding one and a half times the 
tax; 
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( c), a sum not exceeding one and a half times the amount of the 
tax which would have been avoided if the particulars of his sa les had been accepted as correct;  
(iii) in a case referred to in clause ( d), a sum not exceeding one and a half times the amount of the 
tax sought to be evaded by him.  
(2) No order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made unless the dealer was given a reasonabl e opportunity 
of being heard.  
14. Appeal .—(1) Any dealer objecting to an order of assessment or penalty passed under this Act, 
may within thirty days from the date on which the order was served on him, appeal to the prescribed 
authority against such assessment or penalty:  
Provided that the authority may admit the appeal after the expiration of thirty days, if such authority 
is satisfied that for reasons beyond the control of the appellant or for any other sufficient cause, the appeal 
could not be file d within time.  
(2) Any person desirous of appealing against an order of assessment or penalty passed under this Act 
shall, pending the appeal, deposit with the Commissioner the tax demanded or the penalty levied:  
Provided that where in any particular case,  the prescribed authority is of opinion that the deposit of 
tax demanded or penalty levied will cause undue hardship to the appellant, it may in its discretion 
dispense with such deposit either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may deem f it. 
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be presented in the prescribed form and shall be verified 
in the prescribed manner.  
(4) The prescribed authority shall fix a day and place for hearing of the appeal, and may from time to 
time adjourn the hea ring and make or cause to be made, such further inquiry as it may deem necessary.  
(5) In disposing of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the prescribed authority may: — 
(a) confirm, reduce, enhance or annul the assessment, or  
(b) set aside the assessment and direct a fresh assessment after such inquiry as may be ordered, or  6 
 (c) confirm, reduce or annul the order imposing a penalty.  
(6) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall, subject to the provisions of section 16, be 
final.  
15. Powers of revision of Commissioner .—The Commissioner may, of his own motion or on 
application, call for and examine the records of any proceedings under this Act before any person 
appointed under section 4 to assist the Commissioner and revise a fter such inquiry as he may deem 
necessary any order passed in such proceedings:  
Provided that no order prejudicial to a dealer shall be passed 1[under this section ] without giving him 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard:  
Provided further that the Comm issioner shall not revise any order under this section in any case — 
(a) where an appeal against the order lies to the prescribed authority, the time within which such 
appeal can be made has not expired or the dealer has not waived his right to appeal to th e prescribed 
authority;  
(b) where the order is the subject of an appeal before the prescribed authority;  
(c) where  the application is made by an aggrieved dealer for such revision unless the application 
is made within ninety days from the date on which the order was served on the applicant;  
(d) where the order is sought to be revised by the Commissioner of his own mot ion, if such order 
was made more than two years previously.  
16. Revision by the Chief Commissioner .—(1) The Chief Commissioner may, on the application of 
a dealer aggrieved by any order passed under section 14 or section 15, annul or modify such order:  
Provided that no order enhancing any tax or penalty shall be passed under this section.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made within ninety days from the date on which the 
order was served on the applicant:  
Provided that the Chief Commissione r may admit the application after the expiration of ninety days if 
he is satisfied that for reasons beyond the control of the applicant or for any other sufficient cause, the 
application could not be filed within time.  
17. Payment of tax, etc. —(1) Any sum due under this Act shall be payable within thirty days of the 
date of service of the notice demanding the same.  
(2) If any person fails to pay the sum due within the time specified in sub -section ( 1), the 
Commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding fif ty per cent. of the sum demanded from him.  
18. Recoveries .—Any sum due under this Act shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.  
19. Refunds .—The Commissioner shall, in the prescribed manner, refund to a dealer any sum paid by 
such dealer in excess  of the sum due from him under this Act, either by cash payment or at the discretion 
of the Commissioner by set off against any other sum due from him.  
20. Maintenance of accounts .—Every registered dealer on whom a notice has been served to furnish 
return under the provisions of this Act, shall keep a true account of taxable goods produced, made or 
processed by him or brought by him into the Union territory from any place outside that territory for the 
purpose of sale in that territory, and of sales.  
21. Powers to order production of accounts, etc. —Subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
may be prescribed, the Commissioner may, for the purposes of this Act, require any dealer to produce 
before him any accounts, registers, vouchers or other documents r elating to the production, making, 
processing, purchase or sale of taxable goods or matters connected therewith.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 2 and the First Schedule , for “under this sub -section” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  7 
 22. Power for entry, inspection, search and seizure .—The Commissioner may — 
(a) inspect at all reasonable time all accounts and vouchers relating to  the stock, purchases, sales 
and deliveries of taxable goods kept by manufacturers, and dealers and the stock of taxable goods 
with them;  
(b) enter and search, at any time, by day or by night any building, vessel, vehicle or place in 
which he ha s reason to believe that any taxable goods liable to confiscation under this Act are kept or 
concealed;  
(c) seize any taxable goods or any other article which he has reason to believe is liable to 
confiscation under this Act.  
23. Offences and penalties .—Whoever — 
(a) carries on business as a dealer and acts in contravention of any of the provisions of this      
Act; or  
(b) fails, without reasonable cause, to submit in due time any return as required by or under the 
provisions of this Act, or submits false re turn; or  
(c) fails, when required by or under the provisions of this Act, to keep accounts or records of 
sales; or  
(d) fails, when required by or under the provisions of this Act, to produce any accounts, evidence 
or documents or to furnish any information; or  
(e) fails or neglects to comply with any requirement under the provisions of this Act; or  
(f) knowingly produces false accounts, registers or documents, or knowingly furnishes incorrect 
information; or  
(g) fraudulently or wilfully evades th e payment of any tax due under this Act, or conceals his 
liability to such tax; or  
(h) fails to pay within the time allowed any tax or penalty due from him; or  
(i) prevents or obstructs inspection or entry by any officer acting under the provisions of this    
Act; or  
(j) demands or charges from any purchaser sales -tax as such at a rate higher than that payable 
under this Act;  
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding one 
thousand rupees or with both and when the offence is a continuing one, with a daily fine not exceeding 
fifty rupees during the period of the continuance of the offence.  
24. False statement in declaration .—Whoever makes a statement in a verification or declaration in 
connection with any pr oceedings under this Act which is false and which he either knows or believes to 
be false or does not believe to be true, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to 
six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or wi th both.  
25. Search and seizure how made .—The provisions of the Code of Criminal                                      
Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898 ), shall apply to any search or seizure made under this Act.  
26. Power of investigation .—(1) Every officer, not below such rank as may be prescribed, shall 
within the area for which he is appointed, have power to investigate all offences punishable under this 
Act. 
(2) Every such officer shall in the conduct of such investigation exercise the powers conferred by the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898), upon an officer in charge of a police station for the 
investigation of a cognizable offence.  
27. Punishment for vexatious search, etc. —Any officer or person exercising powers under this Act, 
who— 
(a) without re asonable ground of suspicion, enters or searches, or causes to be entered or 
searched, any building, vessel, vehicle or place; or  8 
 (b) vexatiously or unnecessarily seizes the property of any person on the pretence of seizing or 
searching for anything liable  to confiscation under this Act; or  
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily detains or searches any person;  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
28. Things liable to confiscation .—Whenever  an offence punishable under this Act is committed, 
the taxable goods or any other article in respect of which the offence has been committed shall be liable to 
confiscation.  
29. Power to compound offences .—(1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescrib ed, the 
Commissioner may, either before or after the institution of criminal proceedings under this Act, accept 
from the person who has committed or is reasonably suspected of having committed an offence under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder, by way of composition of such offence — 
(a) where the offence consists of the failure to pay, or the evasion of, any tax recoverable under 
this Act, in addition to the tax so recoverable, a sum of money not exceeding one thousand rupees or 
double the amount of the  tax recoverable, whichever is greater, and  
(b) in any other case a sum of money not exceeding one thousand rupees in addition to the tax 
recoverable,  
(2) On the payment of such sum of money and the tax, if any, payable under section 3 to the 
Commissioner,  such person shall be discharged, the property seized, if any, shall be released and no 
further proceedings shall be taken against such person or property in respect of such offence.  
30. Cognizance of offence .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, or under 
the rules made thereunder except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner, and no court inferior to 
that of a Magistrate of the first class shall try any such offence.  
31. Protection of persons acting in good faith and limitation of suits and proceedings .—(1) No 
suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall be instituted against any officer of the Government for 
anything done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) No suit shall be instituted against the Government and no suit, prosecution or other proceeding 
shall be instituted against any officer of the Government in respect of anything done or intended to be 
done, under t his Act unless the suit, prosecution or other proceeding is instituted within four months from 
the date of the act complained of.  
32. Delegation of Commissioner ’s powers .—Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be 
prescribed, the Commissioner ma y, by notification in the Official Gazette, delegate any of his powers 
under this Act to any person appointed under section 4 to assist him.  
33. Computation of the period of limitation .—In computing the period of limitation prescribed for 
an appeal or revi sion, the day on which the order complained of was served and the time requisite for 
obtaining a certified copy of such order, shall be excluded.  
34. Information to be furnished regarding change of business .—If any dealer — 
(a) sells or otherwise disposes of his business or any part of his business or any place of business 
or effects or comes to know of any other change in the ownership of the business, or  
(b) discontinues his business or changes his place of business or opens a new place of business, or  
(c) changes the name or nature of his business,  
he shall within the prescribed time inform the Commissioner accordingly, and if any such dealer dies, his 
legal representative shall in like manner inform the Commissioner.  
35. Services of order, notices, etc. —Any order passed or notice issued under this Act, shall              
be served — 
(a) by tendering the order or notice or sending it by registered post to the dealer for whom it is 
intended or to his agent; or  
(b) if the order or notice cannot be served in the manner provided in clause ( a), by affixing it on 
the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the last known premises of the dealer.  9 
 36. Power to make rules .—(1) The Chief Commissioner may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) all matters  expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed;  
(b) the recovery of the tax leviable under this Act;  
(c) the circumstances and the manner in and the conditions under which refunds may be made and 
for the cancellation of erroneous refunds;  
(d) the maintenance o f records and books and the sub mission of returns and the form of such 
records, books and returns;  
(e) the authority to which appeals against any order under this Act may be preferred and the fees 
to be charged in connection therewith;  
(f) applications for revisions under this Act and the fees to be charged in connection therewith;  
(g) the issue of notices under this Act;  
(h) the fees, if any, for certificates granted under this Act.  
(3) Rules made under this Act may provide that a breach o f any of them shall be punishable with fine 
not exceeding one thousand rupees or with imprisonment not exceeding three months or with both, and 
when the offence is a continuing offence, with a daily fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for 
every day  during which the offence continues.  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the ru le shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
37. Repeal of Assam Act 4 of 1939 as extended to Manipur .—The Assam Sales of Motor Spirit 
and Lubricants Taxation Act, 1939, as extended to Manipur shall stand repealed:  
Provided that such repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of the said Act or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said Act; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any  offence co mmitted against the 
said Act; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,  
obligation, liability, penalty , forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid:  
Provided further that anything done or any action taken (including any appointment or delegation 
made, notification, instruction or direction issued, certificate of registration granted) under the Act hereby 
repealed shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act and 
shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken 
under this Act.  
--------------------------The National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962--------------------------
 
1 
 THE NATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions . 
 2A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not existence in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  
3. Establishment of the National Co -operative Development Corporation . 
4. Disqualifications for being a member of Corporation . 
5. Term of office of members of Corporation . 
6. Removal from office of member, etc . 
7. Meetings, et c., of Corporation . 
8. Officers and other employees of Corporation . 
9. Functions of Corporation . 
10. Board of Management of the Corporation . 
11. Other committees . 
12. Grants by the Central Government to Corporation . 
12A. Power of Corporation to borrow money.  
12B. Grants, donations, etc.  
13. Corporation to maintain fund . 
14. Returns and reports.  
15. Directions by Central Government.  
16. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates.  
17. Accounts of Board and audit.  
18. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of the Corporation.  
19. Delegation . 
20. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy.  
21. Dissolution of Corporation.  
22. Power to make rules.  
23. Power of Corporation to make regulations . 
24. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
   
2 
 THE NATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 26 OF 1962  
[31st August , 1962.]  
1[An Act to provide for the incorporation and regulation of a corporation for the purpose of 
planning and promoting programmes for the production, processing, marketing, storage, 
export and import of agricultural produce, foodstuffs 2[industrial goods, live stock, certain 
other commodities and services on co -operative principles and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto] .] 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Co -operative 
Development Corporation Act, 1962.  
(2) It ext ends to the whole of India 3***. 
(3) It shall  come into force on such date4as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
5[(a) “agricultural produce ” includes the following: — 
(i) edible and non -edible oil seeds;  
(ii) cattle feed, including oilcakes and other ingredients;  
(iii) produce  of horticulture and animal husbandry;  
(iv) produce of forestry;  
(v) produce of poultry farming;  
(vi) produce of pisciculture; and  
(vii) produce of other allied activities, whether or not undertaken jointly with agriculture;]  
6[(aa) “bank ” means a nationalised bank an d includes a scheduled bank;  
(ab) “Board ” means the Board of Management of the Corporation  constituted under section 10;]  
7[(aba) “Central financing institution ” means Industrial Development Bank of India established 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964  (18 of 1964)  
or the Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited, a company formed and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India 
Limited, a Company formed and registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1913  (7 of 1913) ;] 
8[(b) “Central Warehousing Corporation” means the Central Warehousing Corporation 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962  (58 of 
1962) ;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 2, for “ and certain other commodities on co -operative principles and for matters connected 
therewith” (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 32 of 1973, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1973).  
4. 14th March, 1963, vide notification No. G.S.R. 456, dated 14th March, 1963, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part II, sec. 3( i). 
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 3, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
6. Ins. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
7. Ins. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
8. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for  clauses ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).   
3 
 (c) “co -operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be registered under the  
Co-operative Societies Act, 1912  (2 of 1912)  or under the Multi -State Co -operative Societies Act, 
1984  (51 of 1984)  or under any other law with respect to co operative societies for the time being in 
force in any State, which is engaged in any of the activities specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 9 
and includes a Co -operative Land Development Bank, by whatever name called;]  
(d) “Corporation ” means the National Co -operative Development Corporation established under 
1[sub-section ( 1) of section 3];  
2[(da) “foodstuffs ”, include — 
(i) coconuts  and areca -nuts;  
(ii) eggs and egg products;  
(iii) fish, whether fre sh, frozen, dried or preserved;  
(iv) fruits, whet her fresh, dried or dehydrated;  
(v) honey;  
(vi) meat, whether fre sh, frozen, dried or preserved;  
(vii) milk and milk products;  
(viii) vegetables;  
(db) “General Council ” means the General Council of the Corporation constituted under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 3;  
3[(dba) “industrial goods ” means the products of industrial co -operatives or cottage and village 
industries or products of allied industries in the rural area and includes any handicrafts or rural crafts;  
(dbb) “livestock ” includes all animals to be raised for milk, meat, fleece, s kin, wool and other by -
products; ] 
(dc) “Managing director ” means the managi ng director of the Corporation;  
4[(dd) “nationalised bank ” means a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970)  or under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 
1980);]] 
(e) “notified commodity ” means any commodity (ot her than agricultural produce 2[and 
foodstuffs]) which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be 
a notified commodity for the purposes of this Act, being a commodity with respect to which 
Parliament has power to make laws by virtue of entry 33 in List III in the Sevent h Schedule to the 
Constitution;  
3[(ea) “notified services ” means any service which the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, declare to be notified services for the purposes of this Act;]  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
2[(ga) “scheduled bank ” means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of  India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934 );]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 3, for “section 3” (w.e.f. 7-4-1975).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( dd) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).   
4 
 1[(h) “State Bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 
1955  (23 of 1955) or any of the subsidiary banks of the State Bank of India;  
(ha) “State Co -operative Bank ” has the same meaning as in the National Bank for Agriculture  
and Rural Development Act, 1981 (61 of 1981) ;] 
(i) “year” means the financial year.  
2[2A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not existence in the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir .—Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force, or any 
functionary not in existence, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall, in relation to  that State, be 
construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to the corresponding functionary in 
existence, in that State.]  
3. Establishment of the National Co -operative Development Corporatio n.—(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette, establis h with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the notification, a Corporation by the name of the National Co -operative Development 
Corporation which shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power 
to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to  contract, and may, in the said name, sue and be sued.  
(2) The head -office of the Cor poration shall be in New Delhi.  
3[(3) The Corporation shall carry on its functions through th e General Council and the Board . 
 (4) The General Council shall consist of the  followi ng members, namely: — 
(i) a President and a Vice -President, both to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(ii) eight members, ex officio , to be nominated by the Central Government from such of its 
Ministries dealing with economic matters as it may think fit; 
4[(iii) Chairman of the National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development constituted under 
the National Bank for Agriculture and Ru ral Development Act, 1981  (61 of 1981) , ex officio ;] 
(iv) Managing Director of the State Bank, ex officio ; 
(v) Managing Director of the Food Corporation of India, constituted under the Food Corporations 
Act, 1964, (37 of 19 64) ex officio ; 
(vi) Managing  Director of the Central Warehousing Corporation, constituted under the 
Warehousing Corporations Act,  1962 (59 of 1962), ex officio ; 
5[(vii) one  member to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the chairmen of 
one of the Central financing institutions, ex officio ;] 
(viii) a member representing banks, to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(ix) Chairman of the National Co -operat ive Union of India, ex officio ; 
(x) Chairman of the National Agricultural Co -operative Ma rketing Federation, ex officio ; 
(xi) Chairman of the National Federation of Co -operative Sugar Factories, ex officio ; 
(xii) Chairman of the All India Federation of Co -operative Spinning Mills, ex officio ; 
(xiii) Chairman of the All India State Co -operative Banks ,Federation, ex officio ; 
(xiv) eleven members, other than those nominated under clause ( xv), representing the States  and 
the Union territories, to be nominated by the Central Government, provided that not more than one 
person shall be so nominated from  each State or Union territory;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 3, for clause ( h) (w.e.f.  16-9-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1973).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 4, for sub -sections ( 3), (4) and ( 5) (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 4, for clause s (iii) and ( iv) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( vii) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).   
5 
 (xv) eleven members to be nominated by the Central Government from among the Chairmen of  
the State level co -operative federations from the States and Union territories, provided that not more 
than one person shall be so nominated from ea ch State or Union territory;  
(xvi) four members representing persons having special knowledge of, or practi cal experience in, 
agricultural co -operative development, to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(xvii) 1[four members ] representing national level organisations engaged or interested in the 
promotion and development of co -operative programmes, to be no minated by the Central 
Government;  
(xviii) the managing director.  
(5) The powers and functions of the Corporation shall be exercised or discharged, as the case may be, 
by the General Council, and references elsewhere in this Act to the Corporation shall, u nless the context 
otherwise requires, be construed as ref erences to the General Council.  
(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of the prescribed term of his office, every member of the General 
Council shall continue to hold office as such, until his successor in such office has  assumed charge of 
such office.  
(7) Members of the General Council, other than the managing director, shall be entitled to receive 
such sitting fees as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act, for attending 
any meeting of the General Council, Board or an y committee of the Corporation:  
Provided that no official member shall be entitled to receive any sitting fee.]  
4. Disqualifications for  being a member of Corporation .—A person shall be disqualified for being 
chosen as, and for being , a member of the Corporation — 
(i) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts 
or has co mpounded with his creditors; or  
(ii) if he is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in 
respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months, unless a period of five years has elapsed 
from the dat e of expiry of the sentence; or  
(iii) 2[except  in the case of managing director,] if he is a salaried official of the Corporation . 
5. Term of of fice of members of Corporation .—(1) The term of office of members of the 
Corporation and the manner of filling vacancies among members shal l be such as may be  prescribed.  
(2) Any member of the Corporation other than an ex officio  member may resign his office by giving 
notice in writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed 
to have vacated his office.  
6. Remo val from office of member, etc .—The Central Government may, at any time, remove from 
office any member other than an ex officio  member of the Corporation after giving him a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal.  
7. Meetings, etc. , of Corporation .—(1) The Corporation 3[shall ordinarily meet twice a year at such 
times] and places and shall, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), observe such procedure 
in regard to transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided 
by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.  
(2) The 4[Presi dent] or, in his absence, the 5[Vice -President] or, in the absence of both the 4[President] 
4[President] and the 5[Vice -President], any member chosen by the members present from amongst 
themselves, shall preside a t a meeting of the Corporation.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 4, for “three members” (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “shall meet at such times” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).   
6 
 (3) All questions at a meeting of the Corporation shall be decided by a majority of votes of the 
members present and voting, and in the case  of an equality of votes, the 1[Presi dent] or, in his absence, the 
2[Vice -President] o r, in the absence of both the 1[President] and the 2[Vice -President], the person 
presiding shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
8. Officers and other employees of Corporation .—(1) The Central Government shall, in 
consultation with the Corporation, appoint a person t o be the 3[managing director].  
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Corporation 
may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient perfo rmance of 
its functions.  
(3) The methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of th e officers and 
other employees of the Corporation shall ,— 
(a) as respects the 4[managing director], be  such as may be prescribed; and  
(b) as respects the other officers and employees, be such as may be determined by regulations 
made by the Corporation under this Act.  
5[(4) The managing director shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as the Board may 
entrust or delegate to him.]  
9. Functions of Corporation .—6[(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the 
Corporation shall be to 7[plan, promote  and finance] programmes, through co -operative societies , for— 
(a) the  production, processing, marketing, storage, export and import of agricultural produce, 
foodstuffs, poultry  feed and notified commodities;  
(b) the collection, processing, marketing, storage and e xport of minor forest produce ;] 
8[(c)development of notified service s.] 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing p rovision, the Corporation 
may— 
(a) advance  loans or grant subsidies to State Governments for financing co -operative societies 
and for employment of staff for implementing programmes of co -opera tive development;  
(b) provide funds to Stat e Governments for financing co -operative societies for the pur chase o f 
9[agricultural produce, foodstuffs] 10[livestock, poultry feed, industrial goods, notified commodities 
and notified services ] on behalf of the Central Government;  
(c) plan and promote programmes through co -operative societies for the supply of seed s, 
manures, fertilizers, agricultural implements and other articles  for the development of agricultural 
produce;  
11[(d) provide loans and grants directly to the national level co -operative societies and other co -
operative societies having obje cts extending beyond one State;  
(e) provide loans to co -operative societies on the guarantee of State Governments or in the case of 
co-operative societies in the Union territories, on the g uarantee of Central Government :  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 6, for “Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Secretary of the Corporation” ( w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Secretary” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
5. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
6. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
7. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 5, for “plan and promote” (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
8. Ins. by  s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
9. Subs. by  Act 3 of 1974, s. 8, for “agricultural produce” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
10. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 5, for “and notified commodities” (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
11. Ins. by  Act 3 of 1974, s. 8. (w.e.f.  1-4-1974).   
7 
 1[Providedthat no such guarantee shall be required in cases in which security to thesatisfaction of 
the Corporation is furnished by the borrowing co -operativesociety;]  
(f) participate in the share capital of the national level co -operative societies and other  
co-operative societies having objects  extending beyond o ne State.]  
(3) The Corporation shall so exercise its functions under this section as not to interfere with the 
activities of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission established under the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission Act, 1 956 (61 of 1956).  
2[10. Board of  Management of the Corporation .—(1) There shall be a Board of Management of the 
the Corporation which shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -President of the General Coun cil, who shall be the Chairman;  
(ii) three members of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among the members referred to in clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(iii) the member of the General Council, referred to in clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(iv) one member of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from among 
the members referred to in clauses ( ix), (x), (xi), (xii) and ( xiii) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3;  
(v) two  members of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among the members referred to in clause ( xiv) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(vi) two members of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among the  members referred to in clause ( xv) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(vii) one member of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among the members referred to in clauses ( xvi) and ( xvii) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(viii) the managing director . 
(2) The Vice -Chairman of the Board shall be nomin ated by the Central Government.  
(3) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence of the General Council, the Board 
shall be competent to deal with any matter within the  competence of the Corporation.  
(4) The Board shall meet at such times and at such places and shall observe such procedure in regard 
to transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by 
regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.  
(5) The confirmed minutes of every meeting of the Board shall be laid before the General Council at 
its next following meeting.]  
11. Other committees .—The Corporation may constitute such other committees for general or 
special purposes as it deems necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Act.  
12. Grants by the Cen tral Government to Corporation .—The Central Government shall, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this b ehalf, pay to the Co rporation — 
(a) by way of grant each year, such sum of money as is required by the Corporation for giving 
subsidies to State Governments and for meeting its administrative expens es;3*** 
(b) by way of loan, such sum of money on such terms and conditions as the Central Go vernment 
may determine; 4[and]  
4[(c) such additional grants, if any, for the purposes of this Act.]  
                                                           
1. The proviso i ns. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 9, for section 10 (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
3. The word “and” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
4. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).   
8 
 1[12A. Power of Corporation to borrow money .—(1) The Corporation may, for the purposes of 
carrying out its functions under this Act, and with the previous approval of, and subject to the directions 
of the Central Government, borrow money from — 
(a) the public by the issue  or sale of bonds or debentures,  or both, carrying interest at such rat es 
as may be specified therein;  
(b) any bank or other financial institution;  
(c) any other authority, organisation or institution as may be specially approved by the Cen tral 
Government in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government may guarantee the repayment of the moneys borrowed by the 
Corporation under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) and the payment of interest 
thereon and other incidental charges.]  
2[12B. Grants, donations, etc. —(1) The Corporation may receive gifts, grants, donations or 
benefactions from Government or any other agency in or outside India.  
(2) The Corporation shall not receive any gifts, grants, donations or benefac tions from a foreign 
government or, any other agency out side India except with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.]  
13. Corporation to maintain fund .—(1) The Corporation shall maintain a fund called the National 
Co-operative Development Fund (hereinafter referred to as the Fun d) to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys and other securities transferred to it under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 
24; 
(b) the grants and other sums of money by way of loans paid to the Corporation by the Centr al 
Government under section 12;  
3[(bb) all moneys received under section 12B;  
  (bbb) all moneys received for services rendered;]  
4[(ba) all mone ys borrowed under section 12A;]  
(c) such additional grants, if any, as the Central Government may make to the Corporation fo r the 
purposes of this Act; and  
(d) such sums of money as may, from time to time, be realised out of repayment of loans made 
from the Fund or from i nterest on loans or dividends 4[or other realisations] on investments made 
from the Fund.  
(2) The moneys in the Fund shall be applied for — 
(a) advancing loans and granting subsidies to State Governments on such terms and conditions as 
the Corporation may deem fit for the purpose of enabling State Governments to subscribe to the share 
capital of co -operative societies or for otherwise financing c o-operative societies;  
(b) meeting the pay and allowances of the 5[managing director, the officers] and other employees 
of the Corporation and other administrative e xpenses of the Corporation; and  
(c) carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
6[(3) All moneys in  the Fund shall be deposited in the Reserve Bank or the State Bank or a 
nationalised bank or a scheduled bank or a State Co -operative Bank.]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -8-2002).  
4. Ins. by  Act 3 of 1974, s. 12(w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
5. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “officers” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
6. Subs.  by Act 45 of 2002, s. 7, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).   
9 
 14. Returns and reports .—(1) The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government at such 
times and in such for m and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such 
returns and statements and such particulars in regard to the discharge of its functions under this Act as the 
Central Government m ay, from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Corporation shall, as soon as possible, 
after the end of each year, submit to the Central Government a report, in such form and manner and 
before such date as may be prescribed, giving a true and full acc ount of its activities, policy and 
programme during the pr evious year.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
15. Di rections by Central Government .—In all matters including matters of policy,  the Corporation 
shall be guided by such directions as may be given to it by the Central Government.  
16. Submission of programme of acti vities and financial estimates .—(1) The Corporation shall 
prepare before the commencement of each year a statement of programme of its activities during the 
forthcoming year as well as a financi al estimate in respect thereof.  
(2) A statement prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall, not later than three months before the 
commencement of each year, be submitted to the Central Government for approval.  
17. Accounts of Board and audit .—(1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The account of the Corporation shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India or any person authorised by him in this behalf and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall  be payabl e by the Corporation.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person authorised by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Corporation shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Audito r-General has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and in particular, shall have the right to demand the pro duction of books, 
accounnts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect  any office of the 
Corporation.  
(4) The accounts of the Corporation certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person authorised by him in this behalf together with an audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall  cause the same to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament.  
18. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of the Corporation .—No act or 
procee ding of 1[the General Council, the Board or any of the committees of the Corporation] shall be 
invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy among its members or any defect in the 
constitution thereof.  
19. Delegation .—The Corporation may, by general or special orde r in writing, delegate to the 
2[President or the Vice -President] or any other  member or any officer of the Corporation subject to such 
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order such of its powers and functions under 
this Act as it may deem necessary.  
20. Decla ration of fidelity and secrecy .—Every member, auditor, officer or other employee of the 
Corporation shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form 
set out in the Schedule.  
21. Dissolution of Corporation .—(1) The Central Government, if it is of opinion th at the 
Corporation has failed to carry out its functions under this Act or that for any other reason it is not 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 13, for “the Corporation” (w.e.f. 7-4-1975). 
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “Chairman or the Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).   
10 
 necessary to continue the Corporation, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, dissolve the 
Corporation from such date as may be  specified in the notification.  
(2) When the Corporation is dis solved under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all members of the Corporation shall, from the date of dissolution, vacate  their offices as such 
members;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Corporation shall, as from the  date of dissolution, be exercised 
and performed by the Central Government or such person or persons as the Central Governm ent may 
appoint in this behalf;  
(c) all moneys and other properties of the Corporation shall vest in the Central Government.  
22. Pow er to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may provide for — 
1*    *    *    *   * 
(d) the term of office of members of the Corporation and the manner o f filling vacancies among 
them;  
(e) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scale of pa y of the 2[managing 
director];  
3*   *    *   *   * 
(g) the  returns, statements and other particulars in regard to the discharge of its functions to be 
furnished by the Corpora tion to the Central Government;  
(h) the form and the manner in which, and the time within which, the Corporation shall furnish to 
the Centr al Government returns, statements and other particulars with regard to the discharge of its 
functions;  
(i) the form and the manner in which, and the time within which, the Corporation shall furnish to 
the Central Government a report of its ac tivities, poli cy and programme;  
(j) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days  which ma y be comprised in one 
session 4[or in two or m ore successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or bot h Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyth ing p reviously done under that rule.  
23. Power of Corporat ion to make regulations .—(1) The Corporation may, with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) omitted by Act 3 of 1974, s. 15 (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “Secretary to the Corporation” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
3. Clause ( f) omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 1973, s. 4 , for certain words  (w.e.f. 21 -8-1973).   
11 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, suc h regulations may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which meetings of 1[the General Council, the Board and other committees of 
the Corporation] shall be convened, the fees for attending such meetings and the pr ocedure to be 
followed thereat;  
(b) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of  the officers 
(other than the 2[managing director]) and other  employees of the Corporations;  
(c) the duties and conduct of officers and other em ployees of the Corporation; and  
(d) any  other matter in respect of which the Corporation is empowered or required to m ake 
regulations under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, rescind any regulation 
which it has sanctioned and thereupon the regulat ion shall cease to have effect.  
24. Repeal and saving .—(1) With effect from the date on which the Corporation is established under 
section 3, the Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehousing) Corporations Act, 1956 (28 of 
1956), shall, in so far as it  relates to the National Co -operative Development and Warehousing Boa rd, 
stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) all moneys and other securities belonging to the National Co -operative Development Fund 
which, immediately before the said date, was maintained by the National Co -operative Development 
and Warehousing Board established under the repealed Act (hereinafter referred to as the said Board), 
shall stand transferred to, and be maintained by, the Corporation establish ed under section 3 of t his 
Act; 
(b) all moneys and other securities belonging to the National Warehousing Deve lopment Fund 
which, immediately before the said date, was maintained by the said Board under the repealed Act, 
shall stand transferred to and be maintained by the C entra l Warehousing Corporation;  
(c) all shares in the capital of the Central Warehousing Corporation held by the said Board shall 
stand transferred to the Central Government subject to the same liabilities as to payment of unpaid 
calls on such shares as  the sai d Board was subject to;  
(d) anything done or any action taken (including any loan advanced, subsidy granted and 
appointment, delegation, rule or regulation made) under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act; and  
(e) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the said Board, whether arising out of any contract or 
otherwise, shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations respectively of the Corporation established 
under section 3 of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 16, for “the Corporation, the Executive Committee and other committees thereof” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “Secretary” (w.e.f. 1-4-1975).   
12 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 20)  
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I...............declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my judgment, skill and ability execute 
and perform the duties which are required of me as a member, officer, employee or auditor (as the case 
may be) of the National Co -operative Development Corporation and which properly relate to the office or 
position in t he said Corporation held by me.  
I further declare that I will not com municate or allow to be communicated to any persons not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the said Corporation nor will I allow any such 
persons to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to, or in the p ossession of, the 
Corporation and relating to t he business of the Corporation.  
Signature  
Signature  
Signature  
Signed before me  
Date  
--------------------------The Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE PERSONAL INJURIES (EMERGENCY PROVISIONS) ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1962  
[19th December, 1962.]  
An Act to make provision for the grant of relief in respect of certain personal injuries sustained 
during the period of the emergency.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follow: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Personal Injuries 
(Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of October, 1962.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires ,— 
(1) “civil defence organisation ” means any organisation established for civil defence purposes 
which is declared by a scheme to be a civil defence organisation for the purposes of this Act and the 
scheme;  
(2) “civil defence volunteer ”, in relation to an injury, means a person certified,  by an officer of a 
civil defence organisation authorised by the Central Government to grant such certificates, to have 
been a member of that organisation at the time when the injury was sustained;  
(3) “enemy” means— 
(i) any person or country committing external aggression against India;   
(ii) any person belonging to a country committing such aggression;  
(iii) such other country as may be declared by the Central Government to be assisting the 
country committing such ag gression;  
(iv) any person belonging to such other country;  
(4) “gainfully occupied person ” means a person who is engaged in any trade, business, 
profession, office, employment or vocation and is wholly or substantially dependent thereon for a 
livelihood, or a person who, though temporarily unemployed, is normally so engaged and dependent;  
1[(5) “period of emergency ” means, in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency issued under               
clause ( 1) of article 352 of the Constitution, —  
(i) on the 26th day of October, 1962, the period beginning with the 26th day of October, 
1962, and ending  with the 10th day of January, 1968, that is to say, the date on which the said 
Emergency was declared, by notification of the Government of India in the Ministr y of Home 
Affairs, No. G.S.R. 9 3, dated the 10th January, 1968, to have come to an end;  
(ii) on the 3rd day of December, 1971, the period beginning with the 3rd day of December, 
1971, and ending with such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare to be the date on which the emergency shall come to an end;]   
(6) “personal injury ” means a physical or mental injury or a disease whether manifesting itself 
immediately or subsequently —  
(a) caused by — 
(i) the discharge of any missile (including liquid or gas or both), or  
(ii) the use of any weapon, explosive or other noxious thing, or  
(iii) the doing of any other injurious act,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 74 of 1971, s.  2, for clause ( 5) (w.e.f. 25 -12-1971).   
 2 
 either by the enemy or in combating the enemy or in repelling an imagined attack by the enemy; or  
(b) caused by the impact, on any person or property, of any enemy aircraft or any aircraft 
belonging to or held by any person on behalf of or for the benefit of the Government of India or 
any allied power, or any part of, or anything d ropped from, any such aircraft : or  
(c) caused by any explosion or fire which involves any explosives or munitions or other 
dangerous things, required for the purposes of defence against the enemy and which happens or is 
caused by, through, or in connection with the manufacture, storage or transportation of any such 
explosive, munition or other dangerous things;  
(7) “personal service injury ”, in relation to a civil defence volunteer, means any physical or 
mental injury, or a disease whether manifesting itself immediately or subsequently, shown to the 
satisfaction of th e Central Government or other authority authorised to make payments under a 
scheme, to have arisen out of and in the course of the performance by the volunteer of his duties as a 
member of the civil defence organisation to which he belonged at the time whe n the injury was 
sustained or the disease was contracted, and (except in the case of a personal injury) not to have 
arisen out of, and in the course of, his employment in any other capacity:  
Provided that before being so satisfied, the Central Government or other authority authorised to 
make payments under a scheme shall have received from the civil defence organisation of which the 
volunteer concerned was a member at the time when the injury was sustained or the disease was 
contracted, a report, by an off icer of the organisation authorised by the Central Government to make 
such reports, about the injury or the disease in question;  
(8) “scheme” means a scheme made under this Act.  
3. Power to make schemes for relief in respect of personal injuries and personal service 
injuries.—(1) The Central Government may make a scheme or schemes in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act providing for the grant of relief in respect of the following injuries sustained during 
the period of the emergency, namely: — 
(a) personal injuries sustained by gainfully occupied persons (with such exceptions, if any, as 
may be specified in the scheme) and by persons of such other classes as may be so specified; and  
(b) personal service injuries sustained by civil defence volunt eers.  
1[Provided that different Schemes may be made in relation to different periods of emergency.]  
(2) A scheme may authorise the Central Government or any authority authorised by the Central 
Government to make payments under the scheme, in such circums tances and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified in t he scheme, to make to or in  respect of persons injured, diseased or disabled due to 
injuries or any desease —  
(a) payments by way of temporary allowance, which shall be payable only so long as t he person 
injured or diseased is incapacitated for work by the injury or disease and has not received any such 
payment as is mentioned in clause  (b);  
(b) payments otherwise th an by way of temporary allowance, which shall be payable only where 
the injury or disease causes serious and prolonged or permanent disablement or death; and  
(c) payments for the purchase of or the grant at the cost of Government of artificial limbs or 
surgical or other appliances and payments for medical and surgical treatment.  
(3) A scheme may empower the  Central Government to make re gulations for giving effect to the 
purposes of the scheme.  
(4) A scheme may provide that it shall come into operation or shall be deemed to have come into 
operation on such date as may be specified therein.  
                                                           
1. The proviso a dded by Act 74 of 1971, s.  3 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1971).  
 3 
 (5) A scheme may be amended or rescinded at any time by the Central Government.  
(6) Any decision of the Central Government or other authority empowered to make payments under a 
scheme as to the making, refusal of amount, or as to the continuance or discontinuance, of a payment 
under a scheme may be varied from time to time, by a subsequent decision of the Central Government or 
such authority, as the case may be, but save in so far as it is so varied shall be final and conclusive.  
(7) Every scheme and every regulation made under a scheme, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty d ays which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session 
in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the scheme or the regulati on or both Houses agree that the scheme or the regulation should not be 
made, the scheme or the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so however that any suck modification or annulment sh all be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that scheme or the regulation.  
4. Relief from liability to pay compensation or damages. —(1) In respect of a personal injury 
sustained during the period of the emergency by any other  person, and in respect of a personal service 
injury sustained during that period by a civil defence volunteer, no such compensation or damages shall 
be payable, whether to the person injured or to any other person, as part from the provisions of this                   
sub-section—  
(a) would be payable under —  
(i) the Workm en’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923) , or  
(ii) the Employees ’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948) ; or  
(b) would, whether by virtue of any enactment or by virtue of any contract or  any custom or 
usage having the force of law, be payable —  
(i) in the case of a personal injury, by any person, or  
(ii) in the case of a personal service injury sustained by a civil defence volunteer, by the 
employer of the volunteer, or by any person who  has any responsibility in connection with the 
volunteer ’s duties as such or by any other civil defence volunteer,  
on the ground that the injury in question was attributable to some negligence, nuisance or breach of duty 
for which the person by whom the c ompensation or damages would be payable is responsible.  
(2) The failure to give a notice or make a claim or commence proceedings within the time required by 
any enactment shall not be a bar to the maintenance of proceedings in respect of any personal injury  or 
personal service injury, if —  
(a) an application for a payment under a scheme has been duly made to the Central Government 
or other authority empowered to make payments under the scheme in respect of the injury; and  
(b) the court or other authority before which the proceedings, are brought, is satisfied that the said 
application was made in the reasonable belief that the injury was such that a payment could be made 
under the scheme; and  
(c) the Central Government or ot her authority empowered to make payments under the scheme 
certifies that the application was rejected, or that payments made in pursuance of the application were 
discontinued, on the ground that the injury was not such an injury; and  
(d) the proceedings a re commenced within one month from the date of the said certificate.  
5. Information as to earnings. —(1) Where it is necessary, in order to determine the amount of any 
payment to be awarded under a scheme in respect of any personal injury or personal servic e injury, to 
ascertain the earnings of the person injured in respect of any period before he sustained the personal 
injury or the personal service injury, the Central Government or other authority authorised to make 
payments under the scheme may, by notice  in writing, require — 
(a) any person who was an employer of the injured person during that, period; or  4 
 (b) any other person having any knowledge with respect to the financial circumstances of the 
injured person during that period,  
to furnish in accordanc e with the notice any information in his possession relating to those earnings or 
circumstances, and to produce to any person specified in the notice any wage books, records or other 
documents in his possession containing entries with respect to those earn ings.  
(2) If any person —  
(a) fails to comply with the requirements of any such notice, or  
(b) in purported compliance with any such notice, knowingly or recklessly makes any untrue 
statement or untrue representation, or produces any document which is false in a material particular or 
calculated to deceive,  
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
6. Medical attention  in dispensaries and hospitals. —(1) The person managing any dispensary or 
hospital shall, if so required by the Central or a State Government by general or special order, —  
(a) provide at the dispensar y or hospital medical and surgical treatment for persons who have 
sustained injuries of the nature specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3, and  
(b) keep such records and make such returns relating to the persons treated for such injuries as 
may be requi red by or under a scheme.  
(2) If any person fails to comply, when so required, with the provisions of this section, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
7. Penalty for false statement. —Any person who, for the purpose o f obtaining a payment or grant 
under a scheme either for himself or for any other person, knowingly makes any untrue statement or 
untrue representation shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to                          
three mont hs.  
8. Assignments or charges to be void. —Any assignment of, or charge on, and any agreement to 
assign or charge, any payment awarded or to be awarded under a scheme shall be void, and, on the 
insolvency of any person to whom such a payment has been award ed, the payment shall not pass to any 
trustee or other person acting on behalf of the creditors.  
--------------------------The Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES                                              
(ACQUISITION OF RIGHT OF USER IN LAND) ACT, 1962  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
 _________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and application . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Publication of notification for acquisition . 
4. Power to enter, survey, etc.  
5. Hearing of Objections . 
6. Declaration of acquisition of right of user . 
7. Central Government or State Government or corporation to lay pipelines . 
8. Power to enter land for inspection, etc . 
9. Restrictions reg arding the use of land . 
10. Compensation . 
11. Deposit and payment of compensation . 
12. Competent authority to have certain powers of civil courts.  
13. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
14. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts . 
15. Penalty . 
16. Certain offences to be cognizable . 
16A. Burden of proof in certain cases.  
16B. Presumption regarding property.  
16C. Provisions as to bail.  
16D. Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not to apply.  
17. Power to make rules . 
18. Application of other laws not barred.  
 
  2 
 THE   PETROLEUM AND MINERALS PIPELINES                                              
(ACQUISITION OF RIGHT OF USER IN LAND) ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 50 OF 1962  
[7th December,  1962 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition of right of user in land 1[for laying pipelines fo r the 
transport of petroleum and minerals]  and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and application .—(1) This Act may be called the  2[Petroleum and Mineral s 
Pipelines] (Acquisition of R ight of User in Land) Act , 1962 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except  the State of Jammu and Kashmir . 
(3) It applies in the first instance to the who le of the States of West Bengal , Bihar , Uttar -Pradesh and 
Gujarat and the Union terr itory of Delhi, and the Central  Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that this Act shall also apply to such other State of Union territory and with effect from 
such date as may be specified in that noti fication and thereupon the provisions of this Act shall apply to 
that State  or Union territory accordingly . 
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “competent  authority ” means any person or authority authorised by the Centr al Government , 
by notification in the Official Gazette, to perform the functions of  the compe tent authority under this 
Act 3[and different persons or authorities may be authorised to perform all or any of the  functions of 
the competent authority under this  Act in the same area or  different areas specified in the 
notification;]  
 (b) “corporation ” means any  body corporate  established under a ny Central , Provincial  or State   
Act, and includes — 
(i) a company formed and registered under the Companies  Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; and 
(ii) a company formed and registered under any law  relating to companies formerly in force in 
any part of India;  
3[(ba) “minerals ” have the meanings assigned to them in the Mines Act, 1952  (35 of 1952 ), and 
include  mineral oils and stowi ng sand but do not include petroleum;]  
(c) “petroleum ” has the same meaning as in  the Petroleum Act, 1934 (30 of 1934), and includes 
natural gas and refinery gas;  
(d) “prescribed means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
 3. Publication of notification for acquisition. —(1) Whenever it appears to the Central Government 
that it is necessary in the public interest that for the transport of petroleum 4[or any mineral] from one 
locality to another locality pipelines may be laid by that Government  or by any State Government or a 
corporation and that for the purpose of laying such pipelines it is necessary to acquire the right of user in 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 1977, s. 2,  for “for laying petroleum pipelines” ( w.e.f. 3 -2-1977 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “Petroleum Pipelines ” ( w.e.f. 3 -2-1977 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 1977 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 3-2-1977 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  3 
 any land under which such pipelines may be laid, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare 
its int ention to ac quire the right of user therein . 
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall give a brief description of the land . 
(3) The competent authority shall cause the substance of the notification to be published at such 
places and in s uch manne r as may be prescribed . 
4. Power to enter, survey , etc.—On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, it 
shall be lawful for any person authorised by the Central Government or by the State Government or the 
corporation which proposes to lay pipelines 1[or any mineral] , and his servants and workmen.  
(a) to enter upon and survey and take leve ls of any land specified in the notification;  
(b) to dig or bore into the sub -soil; 
(c) to set out the intended line of work;  
(d) to mark such levels, boundaries and line by placing marks and cutting trenches;  
(e) where otherwise survey cannot be completed  and levels taken and the boundaries and line 
marked , to cut down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle ; and 
(f) to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether pipelines can be laid under the land:           
Provided that where exercising any power under this section , such person or any servant or workmen 
of such person shall cause as little damage or injury as possible to such land.  
5. Hearing of Objections .—(1) Any person interested in the land may, within twenty -one days from 
the date of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, object to the laying of the pipelines under 
the land.  
(2) Every objection under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the competent authority in writing and 
shall set out the grounds thereof and t he competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity of 
being heard either in person of by a legal practitioner and may, after hearing all such objections and after 
making such further inquiry, if any , as that authority thinks necessary , by order either allow or disallow 
the objections.  
(3) Any order made by the competent  authority under sub -section ( 2) shall be final.  
6. Declaration of acquisition of right of use r.—(1) Where no objection s under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5 have been made  to the competent authority within the period specified therein or where the 
competent authority ha s disallowed the objections under sub -section ( 2) of that section, that authority 
shall, as soon as may be 2[either make a report in respect of the land desc ribed in the notification under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 3, or make different reports in respect of different parcels of such land, to the 
Central Government containing his recommendations on the objections, together with the record of the 
proceedings he ld by him, for the decision of that Government] and upon receipt of such report the Central 
Government shall 3[, if satisfied that such land is required for laying any pipeline for the transport of 
petroleum or any mineral ,] declare, by notification in the  Official Gazette, that the right of use r in the land 
for laying the pipelines should be acquired . 3[and different declarations may be made from time to time in 
respect of different parcels of the land described in the notification issued under sub -section  (1) of section 
3, irrespective of whether one report or different reports have been made by the competent authority 
under this section] . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 1977, s. 6  (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by  s. 7, ibid., for “submit a report accordingly to the Central Government” (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  4 
 (2) On the publication of the declaration under sub -section ( 1), the right of user 1[in the land specified 
therein] sh all vest absolutely in the Central Government free from all encumbrances.  
(3) Where in respect of any land, a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 but 
2[no declaration in respect of any parcel of land covered by that notification  has been published under this 
section] within a period of one year from the date of that notification , that notification shall cases to have 
effect on the expiration of that period.  
3[(3A) No declaration in respect of any land covered by a notification is sued under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3, published after the commencement of the Petroleum Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in 
Land) Amendment Act, 1977, shall be made after the expiry of three years from the date of such 
publication.]  
(4) Notwithst anding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may, on  such 
terms and condition s as it may think fit to impose , direct by order in writing , that the right of user in the 
land for laying the pipelines shall, instead of vesting in the C entral Government vest, either on the date of 
publication of the declaration or, on such other date as may be specified in the direction , in the State 
Government or the corporation proposing to lay the pipelines and thereupon the right of such user in the 
land shall, subject to the terms and conditions so imposed, vest in that State Government or corporation, 
as the case may be, free from all encumbrances.  
7. Central Government or State Government or corporation to lay pipelines .—(1) Where the 
right of user in any land has vested in the Central Government or in any State Government  or corporation 
under section 6 — 
(i) it shall be lawful for any person authorised by the Central Government or such State 
Government or corporation as the case may be, and his servants and workmen to enter upon the land 
and lay pipelines o r to do any other act necessary  for the laying of pipelines:  
Provided that no pipeline shall be laid under — 
(a) any land which, immediately before the date of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of 
section  3, wa s used for residential purposes;  
(b) any land on which there stands any permanent structure which was in existence 
immediately before the said date;  
(c) any land which is appurtenant to a dwelling house; o r 
(d) any land at a depth which is less than one metre from the surface;  4*** 
5[(ia) for laying pipelines for the transport of petroleum, it shall be lawful for any person 
authorised by the Central Government or such State Government or corporation to use such 
land for laying pipelines for transporting any mineral and where the right of user in any land 
has so vested for laying pipelines for transporting any mineral, it shall be lawful for such 
person to use such land for laying pipelines for transporting p etroleum or any other mineral; 
and.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 3 of 1977, s. 7, for “ in the land” (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “no declaration under this section has been published”, (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid.  (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  
4. The word  “and” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-2-1977).  
5. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  
 
 
 5 
 (ii) such land shall be used only for laying the pipelines and for maintaining,  examining, 
repairing, altering or removing any such pipelines or for doing any other act necessary for 
any of the aforesaid purposes or for  the utilisation of such pipelines.  
(2) If any dispute arises with regard to any matter referred to in paragraph ( b) or paragraph ( c) of the 
proviso to clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1), the dispute shall be referred to the competent authority whose 
decision t hereon shall be final.  
8. Power to enter land for inspection, etc .—For maintaining , examining, repairing, altering or 
removing any pipelines, or for doing any other act necessary for the utilisation of the pipelines or for the 
making of any inspection or measurement for any of the aforesaid purposes, any person authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government , the Stat e Government or the corporation , as the case may be, may, 
after giving reasonable notice to the occupier of the land under which the pipelines has been laid, enter 
therein with such workmen and assistants as may be necess ary: 
Provided that, where such person is satisfied that an emergency exists no such notice shall be 
necessary:  
Provided further that, while exercising any power s under this section, such person or any workmen or 
assistant of such person, shall cause as lit tle damage or injury as possible to such land.  
 9. Restrictions regarding the use of land .—(1) The owner or occupier of theland with respect to 
which a declaration has been made under sub -section  (1) of section 6, shall be entitled to use the land for 
the purpose for which  such land was put to use immediately before the date of the notification under      
sub-section ( 1) of section 3:  
Provided that, such owner or occupier shall not after  the declaration un der sub -section ( 1) of       
section 6— 
(i) construct  any building or any other structure;  
(ii) construct or excavate any tank, well, reservoir or  dam; or  
(iii) plant any tree,   
on that land.  
(2) The owner or occupier of the land under which any  pipelines has been laid shall not do any act or 
permit any act to be done which  will or is likely to cause any damage in any manner whatsoever to the 
pipeline.  
1[(3) Where the owner or occupier of the land with respect to which a declaration has  been made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, — 
(a) constructs any building or any other structure, or  
(b) constructs or excavates any well, tank, reservoir or dam, or  
(c) plants any tree,   
on that land, the Court of the District Judge within  the local  limits of whose jurisdiction such land is 
situate may, on an  application made to it by the competent authority and after holding such inquiry  as it 
may deem fit, cause the building, structure, reservoir, dam or tree to be  removed or the well or tank to be 
filled up, and the costs of such removal or  filling up shall be recoverable from such owner or occupier in 
the same manner  as if the order for the recovery of such costs were a decree made by that Court.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 1977, s. 9 (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  6 
 10. Compensation .—(1) Where in the exercise of the power s conferred by section 4, section 7 or 
section 8 by any person, any damage, loss or injury is sustained by any person interested in the land under 
which the pipeline is proposed to be, or is being, or has been laid, the Central Government, the State 
Government or the corporation , as the case may be , shall be liable to pay compensation to such person 
for such damage, loss or injury , the amount of which shall be determined by the competent authority in 
the first instance.  
(2) If the amount of compensation determined by the competent authority under sub -section (1) is not 
acceptable to either of the parties, the amount of compensation shall, on application by either of the 
parties to the District Judge within the limits of whose jurisdiction the land or any part thereof is situated, 
be determined by that District  Judge.  
(3) The competent authority or the District Judge while determining the compensation under         
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be, shall have due regard to the damage or loss 
sustained by any person inte rested in the land by  reason of— 
(i) the removal of trees of standing crops, if any, on the land while exercising the power under 
section 4, section 7 or section 8;  
(ii) the temporary severance of the land under which the pipeline has been laid from other lands 
belong ing to, or in the occupation of, such person; or  
(iii) any injury to any other property, whether movable or immovable , or the earnings of such 
persons caused in any other manner:  
Provided that in determining the compensation no account shall be taken of any stru cture or other 
improvement made in the land after the date of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3.  
(4) Where the right of user of any land has vested in the Central Government, the State Government 
or the corporation , the Central Governmen t, the State Government or the corporatio n , as the case may 
be, shall , in addition to the compensation, if any, payable under sub -section ( 1), be liable to pay to the 
owner and to any other person whose right of enjoyment in that land has been affected in  any manner 
whatsoever by reason of such vesting, compensation calculated at ten per cent.  of the market value of that 
land on the date of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3.  
(5) The market value of the land on the said date shall be determined by the competent authority and 
if the value so determined by that authority is not accept able to either of the parties , it shall, on 
application by either of the parties to the District Judge referred to in sub -section ( 2), be determined by 
that District Judge.  
(6) The decision of the District Judge under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 5) shall be final.  
11. Deposit and payment of compensation .—(1) The amount of compensation determined under 
section 10 shall be deposited by the Central Govern ment , the State Government or the corporation, as the 
case may be, with the competent authority within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) If the amount of compensation is not deposited within the time prescribed under sub -section ( 1), 
the Central Government , the State Government or the corporation , as the case may be , shall be liable to 
pay interest thereon at the rate of six per cent.  per annum from the date on which the compensation had to 
be deposited till the date of the actual depo sit. 
(3) As soon as may be after the compensation has been deposited under sub -section ( 1) the competent 
authority shall, on behalf of the Central Government the State Government or the corporation, as the case 
may be, pay the compensation to the persons e ntitled thereto.  7 
 (4) Where several persons claim to be interested in the amount of compensation deposited under    
sub-section ( 1), the competent authority shall determined the persons who in its opinion are entitled to 
receive the compensation and the amount payable to each of them.  
(5) If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the c ompensation or any part thereof  or as to the 
person s to whom the same  or any part thereon is payable , the competent authority shall refer the dispute 
to the decision of the District Judge with in the limits of whose jurisdiction the land or any part thereof is 
situated and the decision of the District Judge thereon shall be final.  
12. Competent authority to have certain powers of civil courts. —The competent authority sh all 
have, for the purposes of this Act, all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commission for examination of witnesses.  
13. Protection o f action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or  other legal proceeding 
shall lie  against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or any rule or no tification made or issued there under.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government , the competent 
authority or any State Government , or corporation for any damage , loss or injury caused or likely to be 
caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended t o be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule 
or notification made or issued there under.  
14. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts. —Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no civil 
court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the competent authority is empowered by or 
under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of 
any action taken or proposed to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
1[15. Penalty.—(1) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in doing any of the acts authorised by 
section 4 or section 7 or section 8 or wilfully fills up, destroys, damages or displaces any trench or mark 
made under section 4 or wilfully does any act prohibited under section 9, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both.  
(2) Whoever wilfully makes or causes to make any unauthorised connection with or removes, 
destroys, damages or displaces any pipelin e laid under section 7, or wilfully inserts any device to extract 
petroleum product or minerals from such pipeline, or wilfully disrupts supplies being made through the 
pipeline, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to  ten years and 
shall also be liable to fine.  
 (3) If any person convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 2) is again convicted of an offence under 
the same provision, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for the second and for every 
subseque nt offence for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to ten years:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than t hree years.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2012, s. 2, for sections 15 and 16 (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  8 
 (4) Whoever, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely to cause damage to or destruction of 
any pipeline laid under section 7, causes by fire, explosive substance or otherwise damage to the pipeline 
being used for transportation of petroleum products, crude oil or gas with the intent to commit sabotage or 
with the knowledge that such act is so imminently dangerous that it may in all probability cause death of 
any person or such bodily injury likely to cause death of any person, shall  be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but may extend to imprisonment for life or death.  
16. Certain offence s to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , an offence falling under sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 15 
shall be deemed to be cognizable and non -bailable within the meaning of that Code.  
16A. Burden of proof in certain cases .—Where any petroleum product together with any tool, 
vehicle or any item used in committing any such offence under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) of 
section 15 are seized under this Act in the reasonable belief that such petroleum product has been stolen 
from the pipeline laid under section 7, the burden of proving  that they are not stolen property shall be, in 
case where such seizure is made fr om the possession of any person, — 
(i) on the person from whose possession the property was seized, and  
(ii) on the person who claims to be the owner thereof, if any person ot her than the person from 
whose possession the stolen property was seized.  
16B. Presumption regarding property .—When any proceeding taken under this Act, or in 
consequence of anything done under this Act, a question arises as to whether any petroleum produc t is the 
property of the corporation, the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is shown, that such petroleum 
product belongs to the corporation.  
16C. Provisions as to bail .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person accused of an offence punishable under sub -section ( 4) of section 
15 shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless — 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such 
release; and  
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to 
commit any offence while on bail.  
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub -section ( 1) are in addition to the limitations 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force on 
granting of bail.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section s hall be deemed to affect the special powers of the High Court 
regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974).  
16D. Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not to apply .—Nothing in section 438 
of the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) shall apply in relation to any case involving the 
arrest of any person on an accusation of having committed an offence punishable under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 15.]  
17. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Governmen t may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the 1[provisions] of this Act . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 1977, s. 10 , for “purpose s” (w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  9 
 (2) In particulars and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, na mely:— 
(a) the places at which and the manner in which the substance of the notification may be 
published under sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(b) the time within which and the manner in which the amount of compensation may be deposited 
unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 11. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each Houses 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successi ve sessions, and if 1[before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both House s agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall t hereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule .  
18. Application of other la ws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force relating to acquisition of land.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 1977, s. 10 , for “before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid” 
(w.e.f. 3 -2-1977).  
 
--------------------------The Pondicherry (Administration) Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE PONDICHERRY (ADMINISTRATION) ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1962  
[5th December, 1962 .] 
An Act to provide for the administration of Pondicherry and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of t he Republic of India as  follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Pondicherry 
(Administration) Act, 1962.  
(2) It extends to the whole of Pondicherry.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of August, 1962.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of Pondicherry appointed by the President under 
article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “appointed day ” means the 16th day of August, 1962, being th e date of entry into force of the 
Treaty of Cession;  
(c) “former French Establishments ” mean the territories which immediately before the appointed 
day were comprised in the French Establishments in India known as Pondicherry, Karikal, Mah e and 
Yanam;  
(d) “High Court ” means the High Court at Madras;  
(e) “law” means any Act, Ordinance, Regulation, rule, order, bye -law, decree or other provision 
(by whatever name called) having the force of law;  
(f) “Pondicherry ” means the Union territory comprising the terri tories of the former French 
Establishments;  
(g) “Treaty of Cession ” means the treaty concluded between France and India on the 28th day of 
May, 1956 , establishing the cession of the French Establishments by France to India in full 
sovereignty.  
3. Officers and functionaries in relation to Pondicherry .—Without prejudice to the powers of the 
Central Government to appoint from time to time such officers and authorities as may be necessary for 
the administration of Pondicherry , all courts, tribunals, a uthorities and officers, whether in India or in the 
former French Establishments, who immediately before the appointed day, were exercising lawful 
functions in connection with the administration of those Establishments or any part thereof, including the 
Council of Government and the Representative Assembly, shall, unless otherwise directed at any time by 
the Central Government or the Administrator in relation to any such court, tribunal, authority or officer, 
or until other provision is made by law, continu e to exercise in connection with the administration of 
Pondicherry their respective powers and jurisdiction and perform their respective duties and functions in 
the same manner and to the same extent as before the appointed day with such altered designatio n, if any, 
as that Government may determine.  
4. Continu ance of existing laws and their -adaptation .—(1) All laws in force immediately before 
the appointed day in the former French Establishments or any part thereof shall continue to be in force in 
Pondicher ry until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or ot her competent authority : 
Provided that reference s in any such law to the President or Government of the French Republic shall 
be construed as references to the Central Government, references to the Governor of the French 
Establishments in India, to the Commissioner of the Republic for the French Establishments in India, to 
the Chief Commissioner for the French Establishments, to the Chief Commissioner of the State of 
Pondicherry or to the Chief C ommissioner, Pondicherry, shall be construed as references to the 
Administrator of Pondicherry and references to the State of Pondicherry shall be construed as references 
to Pondicherry.  2 
 (2) For the purpose of facilitating the application of any such law i n relation to the administration of 
Pondicherry and for the purpose of bringing the provisions of any such law into accord with the 
provisions of the Constitution, the Central Government may, within three years from the appointed day, 
by order, make such a daptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be 
necessary or expedient and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and 
modifications so made.  
5. Property and assets .—For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that all property and assets 
within Pondicherry which, immediately before the appointed day, vested in the Government of the French 
Republic shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in the Treaty of Cession, vest in the Union.  
6. Rights and obligations .—Subject to the provisions of the Treaty of Cession, all rights, liabilities 
and obligations of the Government of the French Republic in relation to or arising out of the 
administration of the former French Establishments shall, as fr om the appointed day, be the rights, 
liabilities and obligations of the Central Government.  
7. Continuance of existing taxes .—All taxes, duties, cesses and fees which, immediately before the 
appointed day, were being lawfully levied in the former French Es tablishments or any part thereof shall 
continue to be levied in Pondicherry and to be applied to the same purposes, until other provision is made 
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.  
8. Power to extend enactments to Pondicherry .—The Cen tral Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, extend with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, to Pondicherry and 
enactment which is in force in a State at the date of the notification.  
9. Extension of the jurisdiction of Madras High Court to Pondicherry .—As from the 6th day of 
November, 1962, the jurisdiction of the High Court shall extend to Pondicherry.  
10. Jurisdiction of High Court .—(1) Without prejudice to the generality of the provis ions of     
section 9, the High Court shall have, in respect of Pondicherry, all such jurisdiction as under the law in 
force immediately before the appointed day was exercisable in respect of the former French 
Establishments by the Cour de Cassation, the C our Superieur  d’ Arbitrage and the Counseil d ’ Etat of 
France : 
Provided that while determining appeals from decisions of courts and tribunals in Pondicherry, the 
High Court shall, as far as may be, follow the same procedure and have the same power to pass any 
judgment, decree or order thereon, as it follows and has while determining appeals from decisions of 
courts in the State of  1[Tamil Nadu].  
(2) All appeals and other proceedings from or in respect of any judgment, decree or order of any court 
or tribunal in the former French Establishments pending immediately before the appointed day before the 
Cour de Cassation or the Cour Superieur d ’ Arbitrag e or the Counseil d ’ Etat of France and all original 
proceedings in relation to those Establishments pending immediately before the appointed day before the 
Counseil d ’ Etat shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to the High Court and shall be dis posed of 
by the High Court in the exercise of jurisdiction conferred on it by this Act, as if such appeals and other 
proceedings had be en filed before the High Court.  
Explanation. —All appeals and other proceedings filed before the appointed day but not tra nsmitted to 
the Cour de Cassation or the Cour Superieur d ’ Arbitrage or the Counseil d ’ Etat shall be deemed to be 
appeals or proceedings, as the case may be, pending before the Court for the purposes of this sub -section.  
11. Advocates entitled to practi se before High Court .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Advocates Act, 1961  (25 of 1961) , but subject to such rules as may be framed by the High Court, any 
person who is entitled to practi se before the Tribunal Superieur d ’ Appeal at Pondicherry shal l be 
recognised as an advocate entitled to practi se in the High Court in relation to cases coming before the 
High Court from Pondicherry.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Madras State (Alteration of Name) A.L.O ., 1970 (G.S.R. 112 of 1970)  for “Madras”. 3 
 12. Power of High Court to make rules .—The High Court may, from time to time, make rules, 
consistent with this Act, to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the translation of any papers filed in the High Court and the preparation of paper  books for 
hearing all appeals and the copying, typing or printing of any such papers or translation and the 
recovery from the persons at whose instance or on whose behalf papers are filed of the expenses 
thereby incurred ; 
(b) the court -fees payable for instituting proceedings in the High Court, the fees to be charged for 
processes issued by the High Court or by any officer of the court and the amount payable in any 
proceeding in the High Court in respect of fees of the advocate of any party to such proceedings;  
(c) the procedure to be followed in the High Court;  
(d) the approval, admission, enrolment, removal and  suspension of advocates from Pondicherry.  
13. Validation of certain orders and decrees .—(1) Every order or decree purported to have been 
made by the Cour de Cassation, the Cour Superieur d ’ Arbitrage or the Counseil d ’ Etat of France during 
the period commencing on the first day of November, 1954 , and ending on the appointed day, in any 
appeal or other proceeding from, or in respect of any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority in the former Fren ch Establishments shall be deemed to have been validly made, in 
accordance with law; and shall for all purposes have effect as if it were an order or a decree made by the 
High Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred by this Act.  
(2) Notwithstan ding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any decision has been rendered 
after the 17th March, 1960, by any court in France in any case in which the respondent had no 
opportunity to appear for want of service of summons transmitted through the Admi nistration of the 
former French Establishments, such decision shall be deemed never to have been rendered and shall be 
deemed to be pending before the court by which such decision was rendered and accordingly stand 
transferred to the High Court or, as the case may be, to the court in Pondicherry corresponding to the 
court in France in which the case shall be deemed to be pending.  
(3) As soon as may be after the 6th day of November, 1962, the Administrator shall transmit to the 
High Court or, as the case may  be, to the corresponding court, the record of every such case as is referred 
to in sub -section ( 2), together with a certificate that the summons in that case was not served on the 
respondent.  
14. Limitation for appeals .—(1) The period s of limitation for a ppeals to the High Court shall be as 
set out below :— 
 
S. 
No. Description of appeal.  Period of 
limitation.  Time from which period begins to 
run. 
1. Civil Appeal against any judgment or order.  90 days  The date of the judgment or order.  
2. Criminal Appeal against a sentence of death.  7 days  The date of sentence.  
3. Criminal Appeal against any sentence or order 
other than a sentence of death.  30 days  The date of the sentence or order.  
4. Criminal Appeal against an order of acquittal.  90 days  The date of the order of acquittal.  
5. Labour Appeal under section 207 of the French 
Labour Code, 1952.  30 days  The date of the judgment or order.  
6. Labour Appeal under section 216 of the French 
Labour Code, 1952.  30 days  The date on which the report and 
the recommendation of the 
expert are communicated to the 
party appealing.  
7. Appeal against a judgment or order of the 
Administrative Tribunal at Pondicherry.  90 days  The date of the judgment or order.  4 
  
(2) Except in the case of a Criminal Appeal against a sentence of death, in computing the period of 
limitation, the time taken for obtaining a certified copy of the judgment, order, report and 
recommendation, appealed against, as the case may be, shall be excluded.  
(3) In the case of an appeal preferred by an  accused person under sentence and in custody, the date on 
which he lodges the memorandum of appeal with the Superintendent of the Jail in which he is detained 
shall be deemed to be the date of presentation of the appeal in the High Court.  
(4) Any appeal m ay be admitted after the period of limitation prescribed therefor when the appellant 
satisfies the Court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within such period.  
15. Saving of limitation in certain cases .—In computing the period of limitation under section 14 or 
under any other law, any period during which an appeal could not be filed or a proceeding could not be 
instituted because the jurisdiction of the High Court did not extend to Pondicherry shall be excluded.  
16. Rule of constru ction .—Reference s in any law in force in Pondicherry to the Cour de Cassation, 
the Cour t Superieur d ’ Arbitrage or the Counsel d ’ Etat shall be construed as references to the High Court.  
17. Power to construe laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the appli cation of any law in relation to 
Pondicherry, any court or other authority may construe any such law in such manner not affecting the 
substance, as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the court or other authority.  
18. Effect of othe r laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law in force in Pondicherry.  
19. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make any such 
provisions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.  
(2) Any order under sub -section ( 1) may be made so as to be restrospective to any date not earlier 
than the appointed day.  
20. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Pondicherry (Administration) Ordinance, 1962  (8 of 1962) , is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall b e 
deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.  
 
--------------------------The State of Nagaland Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE OF NAGALAND ACT, 196 2                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
FORMATION OF THE STATE OF NAGALAND  
3. Formation of State of Nagaland.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution.  
5. Amendment of Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
6. Representation in Council o f States.  
7. Election to fill vaca ncy. 
8. Term of office.  
The House of the People  
9. Representation in House of the People.  
10. Provision as to sitting member.  
The Legislative Assembly  
11. Strength of Legislative Assembly.  
12. Rules of procedure.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
13. Common High Court for Assam and Nagaland.  
14. Provision as to Advocates.  
15. Practice and procedure in common High Court.  
16. Custody of Seal of common High Court.  
17. Form of writs and other processes.  
18. Powers of Judges.  
19. Principal seat of common High Court.  
20. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.  
21. Pending suits, appeals and proceedings.  
  2 
 PART V  
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS  
SECTIONS  
22. Authori sation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislature.  
22A. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Nagaland.  
23. Distribution of revenues.  
24. Property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations.  
25. Arrears of taxes.  
PART VI  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
26. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptation.  
27. Power to construe laws.  
28. Provisions as to co ntinuance of courts and of officers, etc.  
29. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.  
30. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws.  
31. Power to remove difficulties.  
32. Power to make rules.  
33. [Repealed .] 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE STATE OF NAGALAND ACT, 1962  
ACT NO.  27 OF 1962  
[4th September, 1962 .] 
An Act to provide for the formation of the State of Nagaland and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the day which the Central Government may, by notifiation in the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(b) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) “assembly constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the same meanings as in the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) ; 
(d) “law” includes any enactment, ordinan ce, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument or custom or usage having the force of law;  
(e) “Naga Hills -Tuensang Area ” means the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area specified in Part B of the 
Table appended to paragraph 20 of the Si xth Schedule to the Constitution, comprising the areas which 
at the commencement of the Constitution were known as the Naga -Hills District and the Naga Tribal 
Area;  
(f) “regional council ” means the regional council referred to in article  371A. 
PART II  
FORMATION OF THE STATE OF NAGALAND  
3. Formation of State of Nagaland .—(1) As from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new 
State to be known as the State of Nagaland comprising the territories which immediately before that day 
were comprised in the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form 
part of the State of Assam.  
(2) Without prejudice to the power of the State Government to alter after the appointed day, the name, 
extent or boundaries of any district, the Sta te of Nagaland shall consist of three districts to be called the 
Kohima district, Moko kchung district and Tuensang district, each comprising the areas respectively set 
out in the Schedule.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the app ointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “I. THE STATES ”— 
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Assam, the following sh all be added 
at the end, namely :— 
“and the territories specified in sub -sectio n (1) of section 3 of the State of Nagaland            
Act, 1962 ”; 
(b) after entry 15, the following entry shall be i nserted, namely :— 
“16. Nagaland  . . . . . The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the State of 
Nagaland Act, 1962 ”. 
  4 
 5. Amendment of Sixth Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution — 
(a) in paragraph 20 — 
(i) sub -paragraph ( 2B) shall be omitted ; 
(ii) in sub -paragraph ( 3), the brackets and words “(other than the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area) ” 
shall be omitted;  
(b) in the Table appended to paragraph 20, in Part B, the item “2. The Naga Hills -Tuensang Area ” 
shall be omitted.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
6. Representation in Council o f State s.—As from the appointed day — 
(a) there shall be allotted one seat to the State of Nagaland in the Council of States;  
(b) in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table — 
(i) entries 16 to 19 shall be renumbered as entries 17 to 20;  
(ii) after entry 15 , the following entry shall be inserted, namely :— 
“16. Nagaland.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1”, 
(iii) at the end, for the figures “224”, the figures “225” shall be substituted.  
7. Election to fill vacancy .—As soon as may be after the appointed day, there shall be held an 
election to fill the seat allotted to the State of Nagaland in the Council of States.  
8. Term of office .—The term of office of the member for the first time elected to fill the seat allotted 
to the State of Nagaland in the Council of States shall expire on the 2nd day of April, 1968.  
The House of the People  
9. Representation in House of the People .—(1) As from t he appointed day — 
(a) there shall be allotted one seat to the State of Nagaland in the House of the People;  
(b) in the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) ,— 
(i) the entry “25. Naga Hills -Tuensang Area.  . . . . . . . .1” shall be omitted;  
(ii) entries 16 to 24 shall be renumbered as entries 17 to 25;  
(iii) after entry 15, the following entry shall be inserted, namely :— 
“16. Nagaland.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1”. 
(2) The whole of the State of Nagaland shall form one parliamentary consituency to be called the 
parliamentary constituency of Nagaland for the purpose of filling the seat allotted to that State in the 
House of the People.  
(3) For the period referred to in c lause (2) of article 371A, section 13D of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) , shall apply in relation to the parliamentary constituency of Nagaland with 
the modification that it shall be necessary to prepare and revise separately the e lectoral roll for that part of 
the said parliamentary constituency which comprises the Tuensang district and the provisions of Part III 
of that Act shall apply in relation to the said part as they apply in relation to an assembly constituency.  
  5 
 10. Provision as to sitting member .—The sitting member of the House of the People representing, 
immediately before the appointed day, the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area shall, as from that day, repre sent 
the State of Nagaland in that House and shall continue to do so until a person is elected in accordance 
with law to fill the seat allotted to the parliamentary constituency of Nagaland.  
The Legislative Assembly  
11. Strength of Legislative Assembly .—(1) The total number of seats to  be filled by persons chosen 
by dire ct election in the Legislative A ssembly of Nagaland shall be 60 : 
Provided that for the period referred to in clause (2) of article 371A, the total number of seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of Nagaiand shall be  1[52], of which — 
(a) 2[twelve seats] shall be allocated to the Tuensang district and shall be filled by persons chosen 
by the members of the regional council from amongst themselves in such manner as the Gov ernor, 
after consulting that council, may by notification in the Offic ial Gazette specify, and  
(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by person s chosen by direct election from assembly 
constituencies in the rest of the State of Nagaland.  
(2) In the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) ,— 
(a) in section 7 , the following proviso shall  be inserted at the end, namely: — 
“Provided that for the period referred to in clause (2) of article 371A, the total number of 
seats allotted to the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland shall be 46, of which — 
(a) six seats shall be allocated to the Tuensang district and shall be filled by persons 
chosen by the members of the regional council referred to in that article from amongst 
themselves in such manner as the Governor, after consulting that council, may by n otification 
in the Official Gazette specify, and  
(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from 
assembly constituencies in the rest of the State of Nagaland. ”; 
(b) in the Second Schedule, after entry 14, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
15. Nagaland..... 60 [for the period referred to in clause (2) of articles 371A, 46 ].”. 
(3) In the Representation of the People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) , in section 5, in c lause ( c), the 
following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely: — 
“Provided that for the period referred to in clause (2) of article 371A, a person shall not be 
qualified to be chosen to fill any seat allocated to the Tuensang district in the Legisla tive Assembly of 
Nagaland unless he is a member of the regional council referred to in that article. ”. 
(4) The Election Commission shall delimit the assembly constituencies in accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution on the basis of the latest ce nsus figures, and in doing so the Commission 
shall have regard to t he following provisions, namely :— 
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, consist of geographically compact  areas, and in 
delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communication, public convenience and linguistic affinities of the people,  
(b) all constituencies shall be single -member constituencies, and  
(c) the population of each constituency shall not, as far as practicable, be more than six thousand.  
(5) For the purpose of assisting the Election Commission in the performance of its functions under 
this section, the Commission shall associate with itself five p ersons of whom three shall be elected by the 
members of the Interim Body established under section 3 of the Nagaland (Transitional Provisions) 
Regulation, 1961  (Regulation 2 of 1961) , from among themselves and two shall be nomi nated by the 
Central Governme nt: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1968, s. 3,  for “46” (w.e.f. 31 -12-1968).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “six seats” (w.e.f. 31 -12-1968).  6 
 Provided that none of the said associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any decision of 
the Election Commission.  
(6) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) formulate its proposals in regard to the matters mentioned in sub -section ( 4) and pub lish them 
in the Official Gazette of the State of Assam and in such other manner as the Commission may 
consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the pro posals and 
specifying a date on or after which the propos als will be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified, and for the purpose of such consideration hold one or more public sittings at such place or 
places as it may think fit;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified , determine the matters mentioned in sub -section ( 4) by one or more final orders and 
cause such order or orders to be published i n the Official Gazette of the State of Assam; and upon 
such publication the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question 
in any court;  
(d) amend the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 19 61, so as to 
include therein the parliamentary constituency of Nagaland and the assembly constituencies delimited 
under this section.  
12. Rules of procedure .—The rules as to procedure and conduct of business in force immedi ately 
before the appointed day with respect to the Legislative Assembly of Assam shall, until rules are made 
under clause (1) of article 208, have effect in relation to the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland, subject to 
such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Spea ker thereof.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
13. Common High Court for Assam and Nagaland .—(1) As from the appointed day, — 
(a) there shall be a common High Court for the State of Assam and the State of Nagaland to be 
called the High Court of Assam and Nagaland (hereinafter referred to as the common High Court);  
(b) the  Judges of the High Court of Assam holding office immediately before that day shall, 
unless they have elected otherwise, become on that day the Judges of the common High Court.  
(2) Expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the Judges of the common High Court 
shall be allocated between the Sta te of Assam and the State of Nagaland in such proportion as the 
President may by order determine.  
14. Provision as to Advocates .—(1) As from the appointed day, — 
(a) in the Advocates Act, 1961  (25 of 1961) , in section 3, in sub -section ( 1), for clause ( b), the 
following clau se shall be substituted, namely :— 
“(b) for the States of Assam and Nagaland and the Union Territory of Manipur, to be known 
as the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland; ”; 
(b) the Bar Council of Assam shall be deemed to be the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland.  
(2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the 
High Court of Assam shall be entitled to practise as an advocate in the co mmon High Court.  
(3) All persons who immediately before the appointed day are advocates on the roll of the Bar 
Council of Assam shall as from that day become advocates on the roll of the Bar Council of Assam and 
Nagaland.  7 
 (4) The right of audience in the c ommon High Court shall be regulated in accordance with the like 
principles as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audience in 
the High Court of Assam : 
Provided that as between the Advocate -General of Assam and t he Advocate -General of Nagaland the 
right of audience shall be determined with reference to their respective dates of enrolment as advocates.  
15. Practice and procedure in common High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the 
law in force immediat ely before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High 
Court of Assam shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common High Cou rt. 
16. Custody of Seal of common High Court .—The law in force immediately before the ap pointed 
day with respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court of Assam shall, with necessary 
modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the Seal of th e common High Court.  
17. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Assam 
shall, with necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes use d, 
issued or awarded by the common High Court.  
18. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court of Assam and with 
respect to all  matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with necessary modifications, apply 
in relation to the common High Court.  
19. Principal seat of common High Court .—The principal seat of the common High Court shall, 
unless otherwise determined by t he Chief Justice after consultation with the Governors of Assam and 
Nagaland, be at the same place as the principal seat of the High Court of Assam immediately before the 
appointed day.  
20. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immedia tely before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Assam and the Judges and 
division courts thereof shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common High Court.  
21. Pending suits, appeals and p roceedings .—All suits, appeals and proceedings, civil, crimi nal or 
otherwise, pending in the High Court of Assam immediately before the appointed day shall, on that day, 
stand removed to the common High Court and the common High Court shall have jurisdict ion to hear and 
determine the same, and the judgments, decrees, sentences and orders of the High Court of Assam 
delivered, passed or made before the appointed day shall have the same force and effect as if they had 
been delivered, passed or made by the com mon High Court.  
PART V  
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS  
22. Authori sation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislature .—The President may , at any 
time before the appointed day, authorise  such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of 
Nagaland as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the ap pointed 
day, pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legis lature of the State of Nagaland : 
Provided that the Governor of Nagaland may, after the appointed day, authorise such further            
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Nagaland for any period 
not extending beyond the said period of six months.  
1[22A. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Nagaland .—The allowances and privileges of the 
Governor of Nagaland shall, until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under clause ( 3) 
of article 158, be such as the President may, by order, d etermine.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1981, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26 -7-1981).  8 
  
23. Distribution of revenues .—The President shall by order determine the grants -in-aid of the 
revenues of the State of Nagaland and the share of that State in the Union duties of excise, estate duty and 
taxes on income and for that purpose amend thereby the relevant provisions of the Union Duties of Excise 
(Distribution) Act, 1962  (3 of 1962) , the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance)    
Act, 1957  (58 of 1957) , the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962  (9 of 1962) , and the  Constitution 
(Distribution of Revenues) Order , 1962  (C.O. 63) , in such manner as he thinks fit.  
24. Property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations .—(1) All property and assets situated in, or 
used for, or in connection with the administration of , the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area and vested in the 
Union immediately before the appointed day (other than any property or assets so vested for purposes of 
the Union) shall, as from that day , vest in the State of Nagaland : 
Provided that the cash balances in the treasuries in the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area immediately before 
the appointed day shall, as from that day, vest in the State of Nagaland.  
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Government, whether arising out of any 
contract or otherwise,  which are, immediately before the appointed day, the rights, liabilities and         
obliga tions of the Central Government arising out of or in connection with the administration of the Naga 
Hills -Tuensang Area shall, as from that day, be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of 
the State of Nagaland.  
25. Arrears of taxes .—The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty (being a tax or duty              
enumerated in the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution) which  have fallen due in the 
Naga Hills -Tuensang Area shall pass to the State of Nagaland.  
PART VI  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
26. Continuance of existing law s and their adaptation .—(1) All laws in force, immediately before 
the appointed day, in the Naga  Hills -Tuensang Area shall continue to be in force in the State of Nagaland 
until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.  
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of Nagaland  of any law made 
before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, within two years from that day, by order 
make such adaptations and modifications of the law , whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be 
necessary or expedient, and thereupon e very such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and 
modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means, as  respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central 
Government; and as respects any other law, the Government of Nagaland.  
27. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provisio n or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 26 for the adap tation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in 
relatio n to the S tate of Nagaland, construe the law in such manner not affecting the substance as  may be 
necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as the case may be.  
28. Provisions as to continuance of courts and of officers, etc .—(1) All courts and tribunals and all 
authorities discharging lawful functions throughout the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area or any part thereof 
immediately before the appointed day shall, unless their continuance is inconsistent with the provision s of 
this Act or until other provision is made by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, 
continue to exercise their respective functions.  9 
 (2) Every person who, immediately before the appointed day, is holding or discharging the duties of 
any post or office in connection with the administration of the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area or any part 
thereof shall, except where by virtue or in consequence of the provisions of this Act such post or office 
ceases to exist on that day, continue to hold the sa me post or office in the State of Nagaland, and shall be 
deemed, as from that day, to have been duly appointed to such post or office by the Government of, or 
other appropriate authority in, such State.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to pre vent a competent authority, after the ap pointed 
day, from passing in relation to any such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or office.  
29. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 .—As from the appointed day , in section 15 of the States 
Reorgani sation Act, 1956, in clause ( c), for the words, “and Assam ”, the words “Assam and Nagaland ” 
shall be substituted.  
30. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws .—The Provisions of this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent  therewith contained in any other law.  
31. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this A ct, the President may, by order,  do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
32. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official  Gazette , 
make  rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in  one 
session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session  1[immediately 
following the session] or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule  should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under th at rule.  
33. [Regulation 2 of 1961 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974  (56 of 1978), s. 2 and the 
First Schedule (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
 
______  
 
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 2)] 
District  Areas  
1. Kohima           .  . The areas which immediately before the 1st day of December , 1957, were 
comprised in the Naga Hills District excluding th e areas in Mokokchung 
district a s specified in item No. 2.  
2. Mokokchung    .  . The areas which immediately before the 1st day of December, 1957, were 
comprised in the Mokokchung sub -division of the Naga Hills District.  
3. Tuensang         .  . The areas which immediately before the 1st day of December, 1957, were 
comprised in the Tue nsang Frontier Division of the North East Front ier 
Agency.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1981, s. 3, for “in which it is so laid” (w.e.f. 26 -7-1981).  
--------------------------The State-Associated Banks (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE -ASSOCIATED BANKS (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT, 1962  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. Provisions in respect of the State Bank Dholpur.  
6. [Repealed .] 
 
  2 
 THE STATE -ASSOCIATED BANKS (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)  ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1962  
[14th December,  1962 .] 
An Act further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955, the State Bank of India       
(Subsidiary  Banks) Act, 1959, and the Bankers ’ Books Evidence Act, 1891, and to provide 
for the winding up of certain minor State -associated banks and for matters                        
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the State -Associated Banks 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1962.  
 (2) Section 3, except clauses ( ii), (iv), and ( vii) thereof, shall come into force on such date1 as the 
Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint ; and the rest of this Act shall 
come into force at once.   
2*                       *                             *                               *                                    *                              * 
5. Provisions in res pect of the State Bank Dholpur. —(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law or in any order or other instrument — 
(a) the Central Government may by order appoint one or more officers to take over the 
management of the Dholpur bank or to wind up its affairs and distribute its assets  and a ny expenditure 
incurred in connection with such appointment, management, winding up or distribution shall be 
payable by that bank;  
(b) the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in the dis trict in which the Dholpur bank’ s 
head office is situated shall have exclusive jurisdiction to entertain and decide any claim made by or 
agains t the Dholpur bank or any question whatever, whether of law or of fact, which may relate to or 
arise in the course of the winding up of that bank, whether such claim or question has accrued or 
arisen before or accrues or arises after the date of the wi nding up order, and any suit or other legal 
proceeding, whether of a civil or criminal nature, relating to any such claim or question and pending 
in any other court at the commencement of this Act shall not be proceeded with except in accordance 
with this sect ion;  
(c) in regard to the admissibility of the entries in the books of account as evidence in the course of 
the proceedings for the winding up of the bank, the settlement of the list of debtors of the bank, the 
passing of orders for the payment of the amo unts due by the said debtors, the execution of the said 
orders or any other orders or decrees of the court, the priority of the claims on the bank, the making of 
preferential payments and the discharge of the other liabilities of the bank and any other inc idental or 
connected matters, the law relating to the winding up of banking companies, as in force for the time 
being , shall apply as if the Dholpur bank were a banking company;  
(d) the period of limitation for any suit or application relating to any paym ent due to the Dholpur 
bank which has accrued before or may accrue on or after the date of the first appointment of the 
officer in change of winding up of the bank shall be twelve years from the date of the accrual of the 
claim or five years from the date of such first appointment of the officer aforesaid, whichever may 
end later; and  
(e) after the repayment of all the deposit liabilities and any other amounts due to be paid by the 
bank including the amounts due to the Government of Rajasthan, the remainin g assets, if any, of  the 
bank shall be utilised, as far as may be, for the purposes and objects specified in the State Bank, 
Dholpur Act , 1915 , and other relevant documents.  
(2) In this section, “Dholpur bank” means the bank known as the Dholpur State Bank  and governed at 
the commencement of this section by the State Bank, Dholpur Act, 1915.  
2*                          *                               *                                  *                                *                        * 
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1963 : vide notification No.G.S.R.1781, dated 18 th December , 1962, see Gazette of India , Extraordinary, Part  II 
sec. 3(i). 
2. Sections 2, 3 and 6 rep . by Act 56 of 1974, s. 2 and First Schedule (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
--------------------------The Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962--------------------------
1 
 THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS ACT, 1962  
_____  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____   
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY   
SECTIONS  
  1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
  2. Definitions.  
2A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not in exist ence in any 
State.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL  WAREHOUSING  CORPORATION  
3. The Central Warehousing Corporation.  
4. Share capital and shareholders.  
5. Shares to be guaranteed by Central Government and to be trust or approved securities.  
6. Management of Central W arehousing Corporation.  
7. Directors.  
8. Disqualification for office of director of the Central Warehousing Corporation.  
9. Removal of directors from office.  
10. Appointment of officers, etc., and their conditions of service.  
11. Functions of Central Wareh ousing Corporation.  
12. Executive Committee.  
13. Meetings of the Corporation.  
14.  Grants and loans by the Central Government.  
15. Corporation to maintain two funds.  
16. Warehousing Fund.  
17. General Fund.  
CHAPTER III  
STATE  WAREHOUSING  CORPORATIONS   
18. State Warehousing Corporations.  
19. Share capital and shareholders.  
20. Management of a State Warehousing Corporation.  
21. Disqualification for office of director of the Corporation.  
22. Removal of directors from office.  
23. Appointment of officers, etc., an d their conditions of service.  
24. Functions of the State Warehousing Corporation.  
25.  Executive Committee.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT   
26. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates.  
27. Borrowing powers of Warehousing Cor poration.  
28. Deposit account.  2 
 SECTIONS  
29. Investment of funds.  
30. Disposal of profits.  
31. Accounts and audit of Warehousing Corporation.  
31A.  Returns and reports . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS   
 
32. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of Warehousing Corporations.  
33. Delegation.  
34. Voting rights of shareholders.  
35.  Disputes between Central Warehousing Corporation and State Warehousing Corporation.  
36.  Declaration of fidelity and secrecy.  
37. Indemnity of directors.  
38. Offences.  
39. Provisions relating to income -tax and super -tax. 
40. Winding up of Warehousing Corporations.  
41.  Power to make rules.  
42. Power of Warehousing Corporations to make regulations.  
43. Repeal and savings.  
THE SCHEDULE.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 THE WAREHOUSING CORPO RATIONS ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 58 OF 1962  
[19th December , 1962.]  
 An Act to provide for the incorporation and regulation of corporations for the purpose of 
warehousing of agricultural produce and certain other commodities and fo r matters  
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Warehousing 
Corporations Act, 1962.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1* * *.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “agricultural produce ” means any of the following cl asses of commodities, namely: ― 
(i) foodstuffs, including edible oil -seeds;  
(ii) cattle fodder, including oil -cakes and other concentrates;  
(iii) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed;  
(iv) raw jute; and  
(v) vegetable oils;  
(b) “appro priate Government ” means in relation to the Central Warehousing Corporation, the 
Central Government, and in relation to a State Warehousing Corporation, the State Government;  
(c) “Central Warehousing Corporation ” means the Central Warehousing Corporation 
established under section 3;  
(d) “co-operative society ” means a society registered or deemed to be registered under the Co -
operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or under any other law with respect to co -operative 
societies for the time being in force in any State, which is engaged in the processing, marketing, 
storage, export or import of agricultural produce or any notified commodity or in insurance 
business and includes a co -operative land mortgage bank;  
3[(dd) “nationalised bank ” means a correspond ing new bank specified in the First Schedule to 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Underta kings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970); 4[or a 
corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Unde rtakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980).]  
                                                           
1 The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 37 of 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -10-1989).   
2. 18th March, 1963; vide notification No. G.S.R. 463, dated 1 6th March, 1963, see Gazette of Ind ia, Extraordinary, Pt. II, 
sec. 3 (i).  
This Act shall, in its application to the States specified in the Schedule to Act 20 of 1965, have effect as if in  
clause ( e) of section 2 the words and figures "being a com modity with respect to which Parliament has power to make 
laws by virtue of entry 33 in List III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution" had been omitted: vide Act 20 of 1965, s. 
2 (w.e.f. 27 -11-1965).  
3. Ins. by Act 42 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976 ). 
4. Added by Act 37 of 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22 -10-1989).  4 
 (e) “notified commodity ” means any commodity (other than agricultural produce) which the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a notified 
commodity for the purposes of this Act, being a commodity with respect to which Parliament has 
power to make laws by virtue of entry 33 in List III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;  
 (f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “recognised association ” means an  association which is for the time being recognised by 
the Central Government under section 6 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (74 of 
1952);  
(h) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of 
India Act,  1934 (2 of 1934);  
(i) “scheduled bank ” means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of  India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934 ) 1[, and includes a nationalised bank];  
(j) “State Bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted u nder the State Bank of India Act, 
1955 (23 of 1955);  
(k) “State Warehousing Corporation ” means a Warehousing Corporation for a State 
established or deemed to be established under this Act;  
(l) “Warehousing Corporation ” means a Warehousing Corporation est ablished or deemed to 
be established under this Act; and  
(m) “year” means the financial year.  
2[2A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not in existence 
in any State. ― Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force, or any functionary not in 
existence, in any State, shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law in force, or the corresponding functionary in existence,  in that State.]  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL  WAREHOUSING  CORPORATION  
3. The Central Warehousing Corporation .―(1) With effect from such dat e as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, the Central 
Government sh all establish a Corporation by the name of the Central Warehousing Corporation which 
shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property and to contract, and may, by the said name, sue  and be sued.  
(2) The head -office of the Central Warehousing Corp oration shall be at New Delhi 3[or at such 
other place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify].  
4. Share capital and shareholders .―(1) The authorised share capital of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation shall be twenty crores of rupees divided into two hundred thousand shares 
of the face value of one thousand rupees each; any shares remaining to be issued may be issued, with 
the sanc tion of the Central Government from time to time, as and when the Central Warehousing 
Corporation may deem fit:  
4[Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, by order notified in the Official 
Gazette, increase the authorised share capital  of the Central Warehousing Corporation to such extent 
and in such manner as that Government may determine.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1989, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -10-1989).  
3. Ins. by Act 34 of 1963, s. 2  (w.e.f. 22 -9-1963).  
4. The proviso i ns. by Act 42 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24-3-1976).  5 
  
(2) 1[The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law for the 
purpose,] subscribe for forty per cent. of the shar e capital issued at any time and the remaining sixty 
per cent. of the share capital may be subscribed for , within such period and in such proportion as may 
be specified by the Central Government, by the following institutions, namely: ― 
(a) the State Bank;  
(b) other scheduled banks;  
(c) co-operative societies;  
(d) insurance companies, investment trusts and other financial institutions;  
(e) recognised associations and companies dealing in agricultural produce or any notified 
commodity.  
(3) If any  portion  of the sixty per cent. of the share capital referred to in sub -section ( 2) remains 
unallotted, it may be subscribed for by the Central Government and the State Bank in such proportion 
as may be agreed upon between them and in default of such agreeme nt, as  may be determined by  the 
Central Government.  
(4) The shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall not be transferable exce pt to the 
Central Government, 2[the State Bank or any other scheduled bank], any insurance company, any 
investment trust or o ther financial institution or any co -operative society or any recognised association 
or company dealing in agricultural produce or any notified commodity, in accordance with the 
regulations made by the Central Warehousing Corporation under this Act.  
5. Sha res to be guaranteed by Central Government and to be trusted or approved 
securities .―(1) The shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be guaranteed by the 
Central Government as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of the annual divi dend at 
such minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central Government, by notification published in the 
Official Gazette, at the time of the issue of the shares.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned in this sub -section, the shares of  
the Central Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed to be included among the securities 
enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), and also to be approved 
securities for the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) and the Banking Companies Act, 
1949 (10 of 1949).  
6. Management of Central Warehousing Corporation .― (1) The general superintendence and 
management of the affairs and business of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall vest in a board 
of directors who, with the assistance of an Executive Committee and a managing director, may 
exercise all the powers and discharge all the functions which may be exercised or discharged by the 
Central Warehousing Corporation under this Act.  
(2) The board of directors shall act on b usiness principles having regard to public interest and 
shall be guided by such instructions on questions of policy as may be given to them by the Central 
Government.  
(3) If any doubt arises as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the 
Central Government shall be final.  
7. Directors .―(1) The board of directors referred to in section 6 shall consist of the following, 
namely: ―  
(a) six directors to be nominated by the Central Government;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1976, s. 3, for “The Central Government shall” (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “the State Bank, any scheduled bank ” (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  6 
 1*  *   *   *   * 
(c) one director to be nominated by the State Bank;  
(d) one director to be elected by other scheduled banks;  
(e) one director to be elected by co -operative societies;  
 (f) one director to be elected by insurance companies, investment trusts and other financial 
institution s, recognised associations and companies dealing in agricultural produce or notified 
commodities;  
2[(ff) three directors to be appointed by the Central Government;]   
(g) a managing director, appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
directors referred to in clauses ( a) to ( f):  
Provided that the three directors to be elected under clauses ( d), (e) and ( f) may, for the first 
constitution of the board of directors, be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as to 
give representat ion to each class of institutions (whether they have become shareholders of the 
Corporation or not) referred to in those clauses, but a director so nominated shall hold office only 
until he is replaced by a director elected as provided in that clause, and the director so elected shall 
hold office only for so long as the director replaced would have held office had he not been replaced.  
(2) The directors referred to in clauses ( d), (e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shall be elected in the 
prescribed manner.  
(3) If, within the period prescribed in this behalf, or within such further period as the Central 
Government may allow, the institutions referred to in clause ( d) or clause ( e) or clause ( f) of            
sub-section ( 1) fail to elect a director, the Centra l Government may nominate a director to fill the 
vacancy.  
(4) The board of directors sh all have a Chairman 3*** who shall be appointed by the Central 
Government from among the directors.  
 2[(4A) The directors appointed under clause ( ff) of sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled to receive such 
salary and allowances as the Central Warehousing Corporation may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, determine.]   
(5) The managing director shall — 
(a) exercise such powers and perform such duties as the board of  directors or the Central 
Warehousing Corporation may entrust or delegate to him; and  
(b) receive such salary and allowances as the Central Warehousing Corporation may, with the 
approval of the Central Government, fix.  
 (6) The directors of the Central Wa rehousing Corporation other than the managing director shall 
be entitled to receive by way of remuneration such sums as the Central Warehousing Corporation 
may, with the approval of the Central Government, fix:  
Provided that no official director shall be e ntitled to receive any remuneration other than the 
allowances, if any, admissible to him under the rules regulating his conditions of service.  
(7) The term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the directors shall be 
such as may b e prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Clause ( b) omitted by Act 45 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2005 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e. f. 15-11-2005 ). 
3. The words “and a Vice -Chairman” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f . 15-11-2005 ). 7 
 8. Disqualification for office of Director of the Central Warehousing Corporation .―A 
person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a director of the Central Warehousing 
Corporation — 
(i) if he is found to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; or  
 (ii) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has s uspended payment of his 
debts or has compounded with his creditors; or  
(iii) if he is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in 
respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months, unless a period of five yea rs has 
elapsed from the date of expiry of the sentence; or  
(iv) if he has been removed or dismissed from the service of Government or a Corporation 
owned and controlled by the Government; or  
 (v) except in the case of 1[the directors appointed under claus e (ff) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 7 and the managing director] , if he is a salaried official of the Central Warehousing 
Corporation or any State Warehousing Corporation; or  
(vi) if he is personally interested in any subsisting contract made with, or in  any work being 
done for the Central Warehousing Corporation except as a shareholder (other than a director) in 
any public company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956):  
Provided that where any such person is a shareholder, he shall disclose t o the Central 
Warehousing Corporation the nature and extent of shares held by him in such company.  
9. Removal of directors from office .―(1) The Central Government may, at any time in 
consultation with the Central Warehousing Corporation, remove the managin g director from office 
after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal.  
(2) The board of directors may remove from office any director who — 
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in s ection 8; or  
(b) is absent without leave of the board of directors for more than three consecutive meetings 
of the board without cause sufficient in the opinion of the board, to exonerate his absence.  
10. Appointment of officers, etc., and their conditions  of service .―(1) The Central 
Warehousing Corporation may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for 
the efficient performance of its functions.  
(2) Every person employed by the Central Warehousing Corporation under this Act sh all be 
subject to such conditions of service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined 
by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.  
11. Functions of Central Warehousing Corporation .―Subject to the provisions of this Act, the  
Central Warehousing Corporation may — 
 (a) acquire and build godowns and warehouses at such suitable places in India 2[ or a board] 
as it thinks fit;  
(b) run warehouses for the storage of agricultural produce, seeds, manures, fertilizers, 
agricultural impl ements and notified commodities offered by individuals, co - operative societies 
and other institutions;  
(c) arrange facilities for the transport of agricultural produce, seeds, manures, fertilizers, 
agricultural implements and notified commodities to and from warehouses;  
(d) subscribe to the share capital of a State Warehousing Corporation;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2005, s. 3, for “the managing director” (w.e.f . 15-11-2005 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).   8 
 (e) act as agent of the Government for the purposes of the purchase, sale, storage and 
distribution of agricultural produce, seeds, manures, fertilizers, agricultural implements and 
notified commodities; 1* * *   
2[(ea) enter into, with the previous approval of the Central Government, joint ventures with 
any corporation established by or under any Central Act or any State Act or with any company 
formed and registered und er the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) including foreign company or 
through its subsidiary companies, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this clause, the expression “foreign c ompany” shall have 
the meaning assigned to it under clause ( 23A) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 
1961).  
(eb) establish subsidiary companies; and]  
(f) carry out such other functions as may be prescribed.  
12. Executive Committee .―(1) There shall be an Executive Committee of the Ce ntral 
Warehousing Corporation which shall consist of — 
(a) the Chairman 3*** of the board of directors;  
(b) the managing director; and  
(c) two other directors chosen by the Corporation in the prescribed manner.  
4[(2) The  Chairman of the board of directors  shall be the Chairman of the Executive Committee. ]  
(3) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence of the board of directors, the 
Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with any matter within the competence of the Central 
Wareho using Corporation.  
13. Meetings of the Corporation .― (1) The annual general meeting of the Central Warehousing 
Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the annual general meeting) shall be held  every year either at 
its head -office or at any other office of the Corporation within six months of the close of the financial 
year, and any other general meeting may be convened by the board of directors at any other time.  
 (2) The shareholders present at the annual general meeting shall be entitled to discuss the an nual 
accounts, the report of the board of directors on the working of the Corporation during the year under 
report, as well as the auditors ’ report on the annual balance -sheet and accounts.  
 (3) The board of directors of the Central Warehousing Corporation  shall, on the requisition of 
one-third of the number of shareholders of the Corporation, call a special meeting of the Corporation.  
(4) The requisition for a special meeting under sub -section ( 3) shall state the object of the 
meeting, and shall be signed  by the requisitionists and deposited at the head -office of the Corporation, 
and may consist of several documents in like form each signed by one or more requisitionists.  
(5) If the board of directors of the Central Warehousing Corporation do not proceed within 
twenty -one days from the date of the requisition being so deposited to cause the special meeting to be 
called, the requisitionists, or a majority of them, may, themselves call the meeting, but in either case, 
the meeting so called shall be held with in three months from the date of the deposit of the requisition.  
(6) The Central Warehousing Corporation shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided b y 
regulations made by the Central Warehousing Corporation under this Act.  
                                                           
1. The word “and” omitted by  Act 23 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).  
3. The word “and the Vice -Chairman” omitted by Act 45 of 2005, s. 4 (w.e.f . 15-11-2005 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f . 15-11-2005 ). 9 
 14. Grants and loans by the Central Government .―(1) The Central Government may, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Central Warehousing 
Corpo ration for the purposes of either fund maintained by the Corporation — 
(a) by way of grants, such sums of money as the Central Government may consider 
necessary; and  
(b) by way of loans, such sums of money on such terms and conditions as the Central 
Govern ment may determine ;  
(2) When making a payment under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall specify the fund 
for the purposes of which the payment is made.  
15. Corporation to maintain two funds. ―The Central Warehousing Corporation shall maintain 
two separate funds, namely: ― 
(a) the Central Warehousing Fund (hereinafter referred to as the Warehousing Fund); and  
(b) the General Fund.  
16. Warehousing Fund .―(1) To the Warehousing Fund shall be credi ted— 
 (a) all moneys and other securities transferred to the Central Warehousing Corporation under 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 43;  
 (b) such grants and loans as the Central Government may make for the purposes of the 
Warehousing Fund; and  
(c) such sums of money as may, from time to time, be realised out of the loans made from the 
Warehousing Fund or from interest on loans or dividends on investments made from that fund.  
(2) The Warehousing Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for advancing loans to Sta te Governments on such terms and conditions as the Central 
Warehousing Corporation may deem fit for the purpose of enabling them to subscribe to the share 
capital of State Warehousing Corporations;  
(b) for advancing loans and granting subsidies to State W arehousing Corporations or to State 
Governments on such terms and conditions as the Central Warehousing Corporation may deem fit 
for the purpose of promoting the warehousing and storage of agricultural produce and notified 
commodit ies, otherwise than throu gh co -operative societies;  
1[(c) for meeting the expenses incurred in relation to the training of personnel, or publicity 
and propaganda, for the purpose of promoting warehousing and storage of agricultural produce 
and notified commodities;  
(d) for meeti ng the expenses, including the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the 
officers and other employees, incurred in relation to the administration of the Warehousing Fund.]  
17. Gene ral Fund .―(1) To the General Fund shall be credited — 
(a) all sums received by the Central Warehousing Corporation other than those referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 16; and  
(b) such grants and loans as the Central Government may make for the purposes of th e 
General Fund.  
(2) The General Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the officers and other 
employees of the Central Warehousing Corporation;  
(b) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Corp oration; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  10 
 (c) for carryin g out the purposes of this Act:  
1[Provided that the General Fund shall not be applied for meeting the expenses referred to in 
clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16.]  
CHAPTER III  
STATE  WAREHOUSING  CORPORATION S 
18. State Warehousing Corporations .―(1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette and with the approval of the Central Warehousing Corporation, establish a 
Warehousing Corporation for the State under such name as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) A State Warehousing Corporation established under sub -section ( 1) shall be a body corporate 
by th e name notified under that sub -section, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with 
power to acquire, hold and dispose of pro perty and to contract , and may, by the said name, sue and be 
sued.  
(3) The head -office of a State Warehousing Corporation shall be at such place within the State as 
may be notified in the Official Gazette.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), it shall not be necessary 
for the State Government to establish a Corporation under sub -section ( 1) where, under clause ( g) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 43, a Corporation is deemed to be established for that State under this Act.  
19. Share capital and shareholders .―(1) The authorised capital of a State Warehousing 
Corporation shall be such sum not exceeding two crores of rupees as may be prescribed, divided into 
shares of the face value of one hundred rupees each, of which such number as may be determined by 
the Cor poration in consultation with the State Government shall be issued in the first instance and the 
remaining shares may be issued, from time to time, as and when the Corporation may deem fit after 
consultation with the Central Warehousing Corporation and wit h the sanction of the State 
Government:  
2[Provided that in respect of any State Warehousing Corporation the Central Government may, 
after consultation with the State Government concerned, from time to time and by order notified in the 
Official Gazette, in crease the maximum limit of the authorised capital aforesaid to such extent and in 
such manner as the Central Government may determine.]  
(2) Of the share capital issued in the first instance and of any subsequent issue of such capital, the 
Central Warehou sing Corporation shall, in any case where the State Government has subscribed for 
fifty per cent. of such capital, subscribe fo r the remaining fifty per cent.  of the capital.  
20. Management of a State Warehousing Corporation .―(1) The general superintendence and 
management of the affairs of a State Warehousing Corporation shall vest in a board of directors which 
shall consist of the following, namely: ― 
(a) five directors nominated by the Central Warehousing Corporation, of whom  one shall be 
nominated in consultation with the State Bank and one at least shall be a non -official;  
(b) five directors nominated by the State Government; and  
(c) a managing director, appointed by the State Government in consultation with the directors 
referred to in clauses ( a) and ( b) and 3[under intimation to] with the previous approval of the 
Central Warehousing Corporation.  
(2) The Chairman of the board of directors shall be appointed by the State Government from 
among the directors of the State Wa rehousing Corporation with the previous approval of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation.  
                                                           
1. The proviso i ns. by  Act 42 of 1976 , s. 5 (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  
2. The proviso i ns. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 23 of 2001, s. 3, for “with the previous appr oval of” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).  11 
  (3) The managing director shall — 
(a) exercise such powers and perform such duties as the board of directors or the State 
Warehousing Corporation may entrust or delega te to him; and  
(b) receive such salary and allowances as the State Warehousing Corporation may, in 
consultation with the Central Warehousing Corporation, and with previous approval of the State 
Government, fix.  
(4) The board of directors shall act on bus iness principles having regard to public interest and 
shall be guided by such instructions on questions of policy as may be given to them by the State 
Government or the Central Warehousing Corporation.  
(5) If any doubt arises as to whether a question is o r is not a question of policy, or, if the State 
Government and the Central Warehousing Corporation give conflicting instructions, the matter shall 
be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(6) The directors of a State Wa rehousing Corporation, other than the managing director, shall be 
entitled to receive by way of remuneration such sums as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no official director shall be entitled to receive any remuneration other than any 
allowances admissi ble to him under the rules regulating his conditions of service.  
(7) The term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, directors shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
21. Disqualification for office of director of the corporation .― A person shall be disqualified 
for being chosen as, and for being, a director of a State Warehousing Corporation — 
(i) if he is found to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; or  
(ii) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has susp ended payment of his 
debts or has compounded with his creditors; or  
(iii) if he is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in 
respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months, unless a period of five years has 
elapsed from the date of expiry of the sentence; or  
(iv) if he has been removed or dismissed from service of Government or a corporation owned 
and controlled by the Government; or  
(v) except in the case of the managing director, if he is a salaried o fficial of 1* * *  a State 
Warehousing Corporation; or  
(vi) if he is personally interested in a subsisting contract made with, or in any work being 
done for, the State Warehousing Corporation except as a shareholder (other than a director) in any 
public co mpany as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956):  
Provided that where any such person is a shareholder, he shall disclose to the Warehousing 
Corporation the nature and extent of the shares held by him in such company.  
22. Removal of directors from  office .― (1) The State Government may, at any time,  2[under 
intimation to]  of the Central Warehousing Corporation, remove the managing director from office 
after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal.  
(2) The b oard of directors may remove from office any director who — 
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 21; or  
                                                           
1. The words  “the Central Warehousing Corporation or”  omitted by Act 23 of 2001, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “with the previous approval of” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).  12 
 (b) is absent without leave of the board of directors for more than three consecutive meetings 
of the board  without cause sufficient, in the opinion of the board, to exonerate his absence.  
23. Appointment of officers, etc., and their conditions of service .― (1) A State Warehousing 
Corporation may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient 
performance of its functions.  
(2) Every person employed by a State Warehousing Corporation under this Act shall be subject to 
such conditions of service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by 
regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.  
24. Functions of the State Warehousing Corporation .― Subject to the provisions of this Act, a 
State Warehousing  Corporation may — 
(a) acquire and build godowns and warehouses at such places within the State as it may,  
1[after consultation with]  the Central Warehousing Corporation, determine;  
(b) run warehouses in the State for the storage of agricultural produce, s eeds, manures, 
fertilizers, agricultural implements and notified commodities;  
(c) arrange facilities for the transport of agricultural produce, seeds, manures, fertilizers, 
agricultural implements and notified commodities to and from warehouses;  
(d) act as an agent of the Central Warehousing Corporation or of the Government for the 
purposes of the purchase, sale, storage and distribution, of agricultural produce, seeds, manures, 
fertilizers, agricultural implements and notified commodities; 2* * *   
3[(da) enter into, with the previous approval of the State Government, joint ventures with the 
Central Warehousing Corporation; and]  
(e) carry out such other functions as may be prescribed.  
25. Executive Committee .―(1) There shall be an Executive Committee of a State Warehousing 
Corporation which shall consist of — 
(a) the Chairman of the board of directors;  
(b) the managing director; and  
(c) three other directors chosen in the prescribed manner, of whom one shall be a director 
referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 20.  
 (2) The Chairman of the board of directors shall be the Chairman of the Executive Committee.  
(3) Subject to any general or special directions as the board of directors may, from ti me to time, 
give, the Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with any matter within the competence of 
the State Warehousing Corporation.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
26. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates .―(1) Every Warehousing 
Corporation shall prepare before the commencement of each year a statement of programme of its 
activities during the forthcoming year as well as a financial estimate in respect thereof.  
(2) A statement prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall, not later than three months before the 
commencement of each year, be submitted for approval — 
(a) in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation, to the Central Government;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2001, s. 6, for “with the previous approval of” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).  
2. The word  “and” omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2001).  13 
 (b) in the case of a State Warehousing Corporation, to the Central Ware housing Corporation 
and the State Government.  
(3) The statement and the financial estimate of a Warehousing Corporation referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) may, with the approval of the Central Government in the case of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation, or  with the approval of the Central Warehousing Corporation and the State 
Government in the case of a State Warehousing Corporation, be revised by the Warehousing 
Corporation.  
27. Borrowing powers of Warehousing Corporation .― (1) A Warehousing Corporation ma y, 
in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, 
issue and sell bonds and debentures carrying interest for the purpose of raising funds:  
Provided that the total amount of bonds and debentures issued and  outstanding and of the other 
borrowings of the Corporation shall not at any time exceed ten times the amount of the paid -up share 
capital and the reserve fund of the Corporation.  
(2) A Warehousing Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out  its func tions under this Act, 
borrow money―  
(i) from the Reserve Bank, or  
(ii) from the State Bank, for such periods for which, and upon any of the securities against 
which, it is authori sed to advance and lend moneys, under the provisions of  1[the State Bank of 
India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955), or] 
2[(iii) from any 3[scheduled bank] , or 
(iv) from such insurance company, investment trust or other financial institution as may be 
approved by the Central Government in this behalf.]  
(3) Subject to the proviso to sub -section (1), the Central Warehousing Corporation may borrow 
money from the Central Government and a State Warehousing Corporation may borrow money from 
the State Government  and the Central Warehousing Corporation on such securities and on such terms 
and conditi ons as may be agreed  upon between the borrowing Corporation and the lender, in each 
case.  
(4) The bonds and debenture s of a Warehousing Corporation may be guaranteed b y the 
appropriate Government as to the repayment of principal and the payment of interes t at such rate as 
may be fixed by the appropriate Government on the recommendation of the board of directors of the 
Corporation at the time the bonds or debentures are issued.  
28. Deposit account .―All moneys belonging to a Warehousing Corporation shall be deposited in 
the R eserve Bank or the State Bank 4[or any nationalised bank] or, subject to any rules made under 
this Act, in 5[any other scheduled bank] or co -operative bank.  
29. Investment of fun ds.― A Warehousing Corporation may invest its funds in the securities of 
the Central or any State Government or in such other manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government.  
30. Disposal of profits .― (1) Every Warehousing Corporation shall estab lish a reserve fund out 
of its annual net profits.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1976, s. 7, for “the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955) ” (w.e.f. 24 -3- 1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 45 of 2005, s. 5, for “nationali sed bank” (w.e.f . 15-11-2005 ). 
4. Ins. by  Act 42 of 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “any scheduled bank ” (w.e.f. 24 -3- 1976).  14 
 (2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation on assets and all other matters 
which are usually provided for by companies registered and incorporated under the Companies Act, 
1956 (1  of 1956), a Warehousing Corporation may, out of its net annual profits, declare a dividend:  
Provided that for so long as the reserve fund is less than the paid -up share capital of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation and until there has been repaid to the  Central Government such sum, if any, 
as that Government may have paid under a guarantee given in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) of  
section 5 or sub -section ( 4) of section 27, the rate of such dividend, in the case of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation, sh all not exceed the rate guaranteed by the Central Government under sub -
section ( 1) of section 5.  
31. Accounts and audit of Warehousing Corporation .― (1) Every Warehousing Corporation 
shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts 
including the profit a nd loss account and the balance  sheet in such form as may be prescribed:  
Provided that, in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation, the accounts relating to the 
Warehousing Fund and the General Fund shall be maintained separately.  
(2) The accounts of a Warehousing Corporation shall be audited by an auditor duly qualified to 
act as an audito r of companies under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
(3) The said auditor shall be appointed by the appropriate Government on the advice of the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(4) The auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance sheet and the profit and loss 
account of the Warehousing Corporation and it shall be his duty to examine them together with the 
accounts and vouchers relating thereto, and he shall have a list delivered to him of all books kept by 
the Co rporation and shall at all reasonable times have access to the books, accounts and other 
documents of the Corporation and may require from any officer of the Corporation such information 
and explanations as the auditor may think necessary for the performan ce of his duties as auditor.  
(5) The auditor shall make a report to the shareholders on the accounts examined by him and on 
the annual balance sheet and the profit and loss account and in every such report, he shall state 
whether in his opinion the accoun ts give a true and fair view — 
(a) in the case of the balance sheet, of the state of the Corporation's affairs at the end of its 
financial year, and  
(b) in the case of the profit and loss account, of the profit or loss for its financial year,  
and in case he has called for any explanation or information from the officers, whether it has been 
given and whether it is satisfactory.  
(6) The appropriate Government may, after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India at any time issue direct ions to the auditor requiring him to report to the appropriate 
Government upon the adequacy of measures taken by a Warehousing Corporation for the protection 
of its shareholders and creditors or upon the sufficiency of his procedure in auditing the account s of 
the Corporation and may enlarge or extend the scope of the audit or direct that a different procedure in 
audit may be adopted or direct that any other examination may be made by the auditor if in the 
opinion of the appropriate Government public intere st so requires.  
(7) A Warehousing Corporation shall send a copy of every report of the auditor to the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India and to the Central Government at least one month before it is placed 
before the shareholders.  
(8) Notwithstandi ng anything hereinbefore contained in this section, the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India may, either of his own motion or on a request received in this behalf from the 
appropriate Government, undertake in respect of a Warehousing Corporation such a udit and at such 
time as he may consider necessary:  15 
 Provided that where the Central Government is required to make any payment on account of the 
guarantee given by it under sub -section ( 1) of section 5, such audit shall be undertaken by the 
Comptroller an d Auditor -General of India or any person authorised by him in this behalf.  
(9) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person authorised by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of a Warehousing Corporation shall have the same righ ts, 
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected voucher s and other documents and papers and to inspect 
the office of the Corporation.  
(10) The annual accounts of a Warehousing Corporation together with the audit report thereon 
shall be placed before the annual general meeting of the Corporation within six mon ths of the close of 
the financial year.  
 (11) Every audit report under this section shall be forwarded to the appropriate Government 
within a month of its being placed before the annual general meeting and that Government shall as 
soon thereafter as may be  cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament or the 
Legislature of the State, as the case may be.  
1[31A. Returns and reports .― A Warehousing Corporation shall furnish to the appropriate 
Government such returns, statistics, accounts and other  information with respect to its property or 
activities as that Government may, from time to time, require.]  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of Warehousing 
Corporations .―No act or proceeding of a Warehous ing Corporation shall be invalid by reason only 
of the existence of any vacancy among its directors or any defect in the constitution thereof.  
33. Delegation .―A Warehousing Corporation may, by general or special order in writing, 
delegate to the Secretary or other officer of the Corporation, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as 
it may deem necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.  
34. Voting r ights of shareholders .―In any meeting of the shareholders of a Warehousing 
Corporation, every member shall have one vote in respect of each share held by him in the 
Corporation.  
35. Disputes between Central Warehousing Corporation and State Warehousing 
Corporation .― If there i s any difference of opinion between the Central Warehousing Corporation 
and a State Warehousing Corporation regarding their respective functions and powers under this Act, 
such difference shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon s hall be final.  
36. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy .―Every director, auditor, officer or other employee of a 
Warehousing Corporation shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and 
secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule.  
37. Indemnity of directors .―(1) Every director of a War ehousing Corporation shall be 
indemnified by the Corporation concerned against all losses and expenses incurred in the discharge of 
his duties except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default.  
(2) A director of a Warehousing Corporation shall no t be responsible for any other director or for 
any officer or other employee of the Corporation or for any loss or expense resulting to the 
Corporation by the insufficiency or deficiency of value of, or title to, any property or security 
acquired or taken on behalf of the Corporation in good faith, or by the wrongful act of any person 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1976, s. 9 (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  16 
 under obligation to the Corporation or by anything done in good faith in the execution of the duties of 
his office or in relation thereto.  
38. Offences .― (1) Whoever, without the consent in writing of a Warehousing Corporation, uses 
the name of that Corporation in any prospectus or advertisement, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with b oth.  
(2) No court shall take cogni zance of any offence under sub -section ( 1) otherwise than on a 
complaint in writing by an officer authorised in this behalf by the Warehousing Corporation 
concerned.  
39. Provisions relating to income -tax and super -tax.―For the purposes of the Income -tax Act, 
1961 (43 of 1961), a Warehousing Corporation shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning 
of that Act and shall be liable to income -tax and super -tax accordingly on its income, profits and 
gains:  
Provided tha t, in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid by the Central 
Government under the guarantee given in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) of section 5 or, in the case of a  
Warehousing Corporation, any sum paid by the Central or a State Gover nment under any guarantee 
given in pursuance of sub -section ( 4) of section 27 shall not be treated as income, profits and gains of 
a Warehousing Corporation, and any interest on the debentures or bonds issued by that Corporation 
out of such sums shall not be treated as expenditure incurred by it:  
Provided further that in the case of any shareholder or debenture -holder, such portion of a 
dividend or interest as has been paid out of any such sum advanced by the Central Government shall 
be deemed to be his in come from interest on securities declared to be income -tax-free within the 
meaning of section 86 of that Act.  
40. Winding up of Warehousing Corporations .―No provision of law relating to the winding 
up of companies or corporations shall apply to a Warehousi ng Corporation and any such Corporation 
shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the appropriate Government and in such manner as 
it may direct.  
41. Power to make rules .―(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette , make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for — 
(a) the additional functions which a Warehousing Corporation may perform;  
(b) the manner of nomination and ele ction of the directors of the Central Warehousing 
Corporation and the period within which such directors shall be nominated or elected;  
(c) the term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, and the 
remuneration payable to, the direc tors of a Warehousing Corporation;  
(d) the manner of choosing directors on the Executive Committee of a Warehousing 
Corporation;  
(e) the authorised capital of a State Warehousing Corporation 1[within the maximum limit 
specified by or under sub -section ( 1) of section 19];  
 (f) the form of the annual statem ent of accounts and the balance sheet to be prepared by a 
Warehousing Corporation;  
(g) the deposit of moneys of a Warehousing Corporation in a scheduled bank or a co -
operative bank;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1976, s. 10, for “within the limit specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 19”  (w.e.f. 24 -3- 1976).  17 
 (h) the manner of is suing shares of a Warehousing Corporation, the calls to be made in 
respect thereof, and all other matters incidental to the issue of shares;  
 1[(i) the form and manner in which returns, statistics, accounts and other information are to 
be furnished, under section 31A, by a Warehousing Corporation;]  
 2[(j)] any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 3[if before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session] or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so however that any such modification or annul ment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule.  
42. Power of Warehousing Corporations to make regulations .―(1) A Warehousing 
Corporation may, with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government, by notific ation in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to 
provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of giving effect 
to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In p articular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for — 
(a) the conditions of service of, and the remuneration payable to, the officers and other 
employees of a Warehousing Corporation;  
(b) the manner i n which, and the conditions subject to which, shares of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation may be transferred;  
(c) the manner in which meetings of a Warehousing Corporation and the Executive 
Committee thereof shall be convened, the fees for attending suc h meetings and the procedure to 
be followed thereat;  
(d) the duties and conduct of officers and employees of a Warehousing Corporation;  
(e) the powers and duties which may be entrusted or delegated to the managing director of a 
Warehousing Corporation;  
(f) generally, the efficient conduct of the affairs of a Warehousing Corporation.  
(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, rescind any 
regulation which it has sanctioned and thereupon the regulation shall cease to have effect.  
43. Repeal and savings .―(1) With effect from the date on which the Central Warehousing 
Corporation is established under section 3, the Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehousing) 
Corporations Act, 1956 (28 of 1956), in so far as it has not b een repealed by the National  
Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 1962 (26  of 1962), shall stand repealed.  
 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, ―  
(a) the shares allotted and the share certificates issued by the Central Warehousing 
Corporation establishe d under the repealed Act (hereinafter referred to as the said Corporation) 
shall be deemed to have been allotted and issued by the Corporation established un der section 3 of 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 42 of 1976, s. 10 (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).   
2. Clause ( i) re-lettered as cl ause ( j) thereof by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid” (w.e.f. 24 -3-1976).  18 
 this Act as  if this Act had been in force on the day on which the shares were all otted and the 
share certificates were issued;  
 (b) every shareholder of the said Corporation shall become the holder of as many shares in 
the Corporation established under section 3 of this Act as are equivalent in number and value to 
the shares held by hi m in the said Corporation;  
(c) all moneys and other securities belonging to the National Warehousing Development Fund 
which, immediately before the said date, was maintained by the said Corporation shall stand 
transferred to and be maintained by the Corpo ration established under section 3 of this Act;  
(d) anything done or any action taken (including any appointment, nomination, delegation, 
rule or regulation made) under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of thi s Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act;  
 (e) every share held by the said Corporation in a State Warehousing Corporation under the 
repealed Act shall be deemed to be a share held by the Corporation established under section 3 of 
this Ac t in the corresponding State Warehousing Corporation deemed to be established under this 
Act; 
 (f) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the said Corporation, whether arising out of any 
contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, liabilities and oblig ations respectively of the Corporation 
established under section 3 of this Act;  
(g) a State Warehousing Corporation established for a State under the repealed Act shall be 
deemed to be the State Warehousing Corporation established for that State under thi s Act.  
 
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 36)  
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
 
 I,………………………………………………….  , declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the 
best of my judgment, skill and ability execute and perform the duties which are required of me as a 
direct or, officer, employee or auditor (as the case may be) of the Warehousing Corporation and which 
properly relate to the office or position in the said Corporation held by me.  
 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not 
legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the said Corporation nor will I allow 
any such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to, or in the 
possession of, the Corporation and relating to the business of the Corporation.  
 
Signature  
 
 Signature  
 
Signature  
 
 
Signed before me  
Date 
