--------------------------The Administrators-General Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE ADMINISTRATORS -GENERAL ACT, 196 3                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE OFFICE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR -GENERAL  
3. Appointment of Administrator -General.  
4. Appointment and powers of Deputy Administrator -General.  
5. Incorporation.  
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR -GENERAL  
(a) Grant of letters of administrati on and probate  
6. Jurisdiction of High Court for the whole State.  
7. Administrator -General entitled to letters of administration, unless granted to next -of-kin. 
8. Administrator -General, entitled to letters of administration in preference to creditors, certain 
legatees or friends . 
9. Right of Administrator -General to apply for administration of estates . 
10. Power of Administrator -General to collect and hold assets where immediate action is required.  
11. Grant of probate or letters of administration to pe rson appearing in the course of proceedings 
taken by Administrator -General . 
12. Grant of administration to Administrator -General in certain cases.  
13. Administrator -General not precluded from applying for letters within one month after death . 
(b) Revocation of grants  
14. Recall of Administrator -General ’s administration and grant of probate , etc., to executor or        
next-of-kin. 
15. Cost of obtaining administration, etc., may, on revocation, be ordered to be paid to     
Administrator -General out  of estate . 
16. After revocation letters granted to Administrator -General to be deemed, as to him, to have been 
voidable only . 
17. Payments made by Administrator -General prior to revocation.  
(c) General  
18. Administrator -General ’s petition for grant of let ters of administration.  
19. Name in which probate or letters to be granted.  
20. Effect of probate or letters granted to Administrator -General.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
21. [Omitted. ] 
22. Transfer by private executor or administrator of interest under probate or letters.  
23. Distribution of assets.  
24. Appointment of Official Trustee as trustee of assets after completion of administration.  
25. Power of High Court to give directions regarding administration of estate.  
26. No security to be required from Administrator -General.  
27. Manner in which petition to be verified by Administrator -General.  
28. Entry of Administrator -General not to constitute notice of a trust.  
CHAPTER IV  
GRANT OF CERTIFICATE  
29. In what cases Administrator -General may grant certifica te. 
30. Grant of certificate to creditors and power to take charge of certain estates.  
31. Administrator -General not bound to grant certificate unless satisfied of claimant’s title, etc.  
32. Effect of certificate.  
33. Revocation of certificate.  
34. Surrend er of revoked certificate . 
35. Payment to holder of certificate before it is revoked.  
36. Administrator -General not bound to take out administration on account of assets for which he has 
granted certificate.  
37. Transfer of certain assets to executor or ad ministrator in country of domicile for distribution.  
CHAPTER V  
LIABILITY  
38. Liability of Government.  
39. Creditor’s suit against Administrator -General.  
40. Notice of suit not required in certain cases.  
CHAPTER VI  
FEES 
41. Fees.  
42. Disposal of fees.  
CHAPT ER VII  
AUDIT OF THE ADMINISTRATOR -GENERAL’S ACCOUNTS  
43. Audit.  
44. Auditors to examine accounts and report to Government.  
45. Power of auditors to summon and examine witnesses, and to call for documents.  
46. Costs of audit, etc.  
  3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
47. General powers of administration.  
48. Power to summon and examine witnesses.  
49. Power of person beneficially interested to inspect Administrator -General’s account, etc., and take 
copies.  
50. False evidence.  
51. Assets unclaimed f or twelve years to be transferred to Government.  
52. Mode of proceeding by claimant to recover principal money so transferred.  
53. Succession Act or Companies Act not to affect Administrator -General.  
54. Savings of provisions of Police Acts for presidency -towns.  
55. Order of court to be equivalent to decree.  
56. Provision for administration by Consular Officer in case of death in certain circumstances of 
foreign subject.  
57. Letters of administration not necessary in respect s of small estates administered b y    
Administrator -General in accordance with certain Acts.  
58. Powers to grant Administrator -General letters limited for purpose of dealing with assets in 
accordance with the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950, or the Navy 
Act, 19 57. 
59. Act not to affect Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950, or the Navy      
Act, 1957.  
60. Saving of provisions of Indian Registration Act, 1908.  
61. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
62. Power of State Government to make rules.  
63. Laying of rules made by Central Government before Parliament.  
64. Repeal and savings.  
  4 
 THE ADMINISTRATORS -GENERAL ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 45 OF 1963  
[11th December, 1963.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law re lating to the office and duties  of          
Administrators -General.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Administrators -General 
Act, 1963.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “assets ” means all the property, movable and immovable, of a decease d person, which is 
chargeable with and applicable to the payment of his debts and legacies, or available for distri bution 
among his heirs and next -of-kin; 
(b) “letters of administration ” includes any letters of administration whether general or with a 
copy of the will annexed or limited in time or otherwise;  
(c) “next-of-kin” includes a widower or widow of a deceased person, or an y other person who by 
law would be entitled to letters of administrat ion in preference to a creditor or legatee o f the deceased; 
and 
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE OFFICE OF THE ADMINISTRATOR -GENERAL  
3. Appointment of Administrator -General .—(1) The State Government shall appoint an 
Administrator -General for the State:  
Provided  that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar the appointment of the same person as 
Administrator -General for two or more States.  
(2) No person shall be appointed to the office of Administrato r-General unless he has been for at 
least— 
(a) seven years an advocate; or  
(b) seven years an attorney of a High Court; or  
(c) ten years a member of the judicial service of a State; or  
(d) five years a Deputy Administrator -General.  
4. Appointment and power s of Deputy Administrator -General .—(1) The State Government may 
appoint a Deputy or Deputies to assist the Administrator -General; and any Deputy so appointed shall, 
subject to the control of the State Government and the general or special orders of the           
Administrator -General, be competent to discharge any of the duties and to ex ercise any of the powers of 
the Administrator -General, and when discharging such duties or exercising such powers shall have the 
same privileges and be subject to the same l iabilities as the Administrator -General.  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15-8-1968).  
2. 1st March, 1964, vide notification No. S.O. 588, dated 11th February, 1964, see Gazette of  India, Extraordinary, Part II,        
sec. 3( ii). 5 
 (2) No person shall be appointed as a Deputy under this section unless he has been for at least three 
years — 
(a) an advocate; or  
(b) an attorney of a High Court; or  
(c) a member of the judicial service of a State.  
5. Incorporation .—The Administrator -General shall be a corporation sole by the name of 
Administrator -General of the State for which he is appointed, and, as such Administrator -General, shall 
have perpetual succession and an official seal, and may sue and be  sued in his corporate name.  
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR -GENERAL  
(a) Grant of letters of administration and probate  
6. Jurisdiction of High Court for the whole State .—So far as regards the Administrator -General of 
any State, the High Court shall be deemed to be a Court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of 
granting probate or letters of administration under any law for the time being in force, wheresoever within 
the State the estate to be administered is situate:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting the jurisdiction of any district 
court.  
7. Administrator -General entitled to letters of administration, unless granted to                    
next-of-kin.—Any letters of administration gra nted by the High Court shall be granted to the 
Administrator -General of the State unless they are granted to the next -of-kin of the deceased.  
8. Administrator -General, entitled to letters of administration in preference to creditors, certain 
legatees or fr iends .—The Administrator -General of the State shall be deemed by all the court s in          
the State to have a right to letters of administrat ion other than letters pendent e lite in preference to          
that of — 
(a) a creditor; or  
(b) a legatee, other than a universal legatee or a residuary legatee or the representative of a 
residuary legatee; or  
(c) a friend of the deceased.  
9. Right of Administrator -General to apply for administration of estates .—(1) If— 
(a) any person has died leaving  within any State assets exceeding rupees  1[ten lakhs] in value, and  
(b) (whether the obtaining of probate of his will or letters of administration to his estate is or is 
not obligatory), no person to whom any court would have jurisdiction to commit admini stration of 
such assets has, within one month after his death, applied in such State for such probate, or letters of 
administration , and 
(c) (in cases where the obtaining of such probate or letters of administration is not obligatory 
under the provisions o f the Indian Succession Act, 1925  [39 of 1925 ]), no person has taken other 
proceedings for the protection of the estate,  
the Administrator -General of the State in which such assets are, may, subject to any rules made by the 
State Government, within a reasonable time after he has had notice of the death of such person, and of his 
having left such assets, take such proceedings as may be necessary to obtain from the High Court letters 
of administration of the estate of such person.  
(2) The Administrator -General shall not take proceedings under this section unless he is satisfied, that 
there is apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration or waste of such assets if such proceedings are 
not taken by him or that such proceedings are otherwise necessary for  the protection of the assets.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2012, s. 2, for “t wo lakhs” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2012).  6 
 10. Power of Administrator -General to collect and hold assets where immediate action                
is required .—(1) Whenever any person has died leaving assets within any State exceeding                
rupees 1[ten lakhs] in  value, and the High Court for that State is satisfied that there is imminent danger of 
misappropriation, deterioration or waste of such assets, requiring immediate action, the High Court may, 
upon the application of the Administrator -General or of any per son interested in such assets or in the due 
administration thereof, forthwith direct the Administrator -General — 
(a) to collect and take possession of such assets, and  
(b) to hold, deposit, realise, sell or invest the same according to the directions of the  High Court, 
and, in default of any such directions, according to the provisions of this Act so far as the same are 
applicable to such assets.  
(2) Any order of the High Court under sub -section ( 1) shall entitle the Administrator -General — 
(a) to maintain any suit or proceeding for the recovery of such assets;  
(b) if he thinks fit, to apply for letters of administration of the estate of such deceased person;  
(c) to retain out of the assets of the estate any fees chargeable under rules made under t his Act; and  
(d) to reimburse himself for all payments made by him in respect of such assets which a private 
administrator might lawfully have made.  
11. Grant of probate or letters of administration to person appearing in the course of 
proceedings taken by  Administrator -General .—If, in the course of proceedings to obtain letters of 
administration under the provisi ons of section 9 or section 10, — 
(a) any person appears and establishes his claim — 
(i) to probate of the will of the deceased; or  
(ii) to letters of administration as next -of-kin of the deceased, and gives such security as may 
be required of him by law; or  
(b) any person satisfies the High Court that he has taken and is prosecuting with due diligence 
other proceedings for the protection of the estate, the case being one in which the obtaining of such 
probate or letters of administration is not obligatory under the provisions of the Indian Succession 
Act, 1925 (39 of 1925); or  
(c) the High Court is satisfied that there is no apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration, or 
waste of the assets and that the grant of letters of administration in such proceedings is not otherwise 
necessary f or the protection of the assets , 
 the High Court shall — 
(1) in the case mentioned in clause ( a), grant p robate of the will or letters of administration 
accordingly;  
(2) in the case mentioned in clause ( b) or clause ( c), drop the proceedings; and  
(3) in all the cases award to the Administrator -General the costs of any proceedings taken by him 
under those sect ions to be paid out of the estate as part of the testamentary or interstate expenses 
thereof.  
12. Grant of administration to Administrator -General in certain cases .—If, in the course of 
proceedings to obtain letters of administration under the provisions o f section 9  or section 10, and within 
such period as to the High Court seems reasonable, no person appears and establishes his claim to probate 
of a will, or to a grant of letters of administration as next -of-kin of the deceased, or satisfies the High 
Cour t that he has taken and is prosecuting with due diligence other proceedings for the protection of the 
estate, the case being one in which the obtaining of such probate or letters of administration is not 
obligatory under the provisions of the Indian Succes sion Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), and the High Court is 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2012, s. 2, for “two lakhs” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2012).  7 
 satisfied that there is apprehension of misappropriation, deterioration, or waste of the assets or that the 
grant of letters of administration in such proceedings is other  wise necessary for the protection  of the 
assets;  
or if a person who has established his claim to a grant of letters of administration as next -of-kin of the 
deceased fails to give such security as may be required of him by law;  
the High Court may grant letters of administration to the Admi nistrator -General.  
13. Administrator -General not precluded from applying for letters within one month after 
death .—Nothing  in this Act shall be deemed to preclude the Administrator -General from applying to the 
High Court for letters of administration in any case within the period of one month from the death of the 
deceased.  
(b) Revocation of grants  
14. Recall of Administrator -General’s administration and grant of probate , etc., to executor or 
next-of-kin.—If an executor or next -of-kin of the deceased, who has not been personally served with a 
citation or who has not had notice thereof in time to appear pursuant thereto, establishes to the satisfaction 
of the High Court a claim to probate of will or to letters of administration in preference to the 
Administrator -General, any letters of administration granted in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
to the Administrator -General— 
(a) shall be revoked, if a will of the deceased is proved in the State;  
(b) may be revoked, in other cases, if an application for that purpose is made within six months 
after the grant to the Administrator -General and the High Court is satisfied that there has been no 
unreasonable delay in making the application, or in transmitting the authority under which the 
application is made;  
and probate or letters of administration may be granted to such executor or next -of-kin, as the ca se may 
be. 
15. Cost of obtaining administration, etc., may, on revocation, be ordered to be paid to 
Administrator -General out of estate .—If any letters of administration granted to the          
Administrator -General in accordance with the provisions of this Act are revoked, the High Court          
may order the costs of obtaining such letters of administration, and the whole or any part of any fees 
which would otherwise have been payable under th is Act, together with the costs of the        
Administrator -General in any proceedings taken to obtain such revocation, to be paid to or retained by the 
Administrator -General out of the estate:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall affect the provisi ons of clauses ( c) and ( d) of                        
sub-section ( 2) of section 10.  
16. After revocation letters granted to Administrator -General to be deemed, as to him, to have 
been voidable only .—If any letters of administration granted to the Administr ator-General in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act are revoked, the same shall, so far as regards the Administrator -General 
and all persons acting under his authority in pursuance thereof, be deemed to have been only voidable, 
except as to any act done by any such Administrator -General or other person as aforesaid, after notice of a 
will or of any other fact which would render such letters void:  
Provided  that no notice of a will or of any other fact which would render any such letters void shall 
affect the Administrator -General or any person acting under his authority in pursuance of such letters 
unless, within the period of one month from the time of giving such notice, proceedings are commenced 
to prove the will, or to cause the letters to be revok ed, and such proceedings are prosecuted without 
unreasonable delay.  
17. Payments made by Administrator -General prior to revocation .—If any letters of 
administration granted to the Administrator -General in accordance with the provisions of this Act are 
revoked, upon the grant of probate of a will, or upon the grant of letters of administration with a copy of 
the will annexed, all paymen ts made or acts done by or under the authority of the Administrator -General 
in pursuance of such letters of administration, prior to the revocation, which would have been valid under 8 
 any letters of administration lawfully granted to him with a copy of such  will annexed, shall be deemed 
valid notwithstanding such revocation.  
(c) General  
18. Administrator -General’s petition for grant of letters of administration .—Whenever any 
Administrator -General applies for letters of administration in accordance with the p rovisions of this Act, 
it shall be sufficient if the petition required to be presented for the grant of such letters states, — 
(i) the time and place of the death of the deceased to the best of the knowledge and belief of the 
petitioner;  
(ii) the names and addresses of the surviving next -of-kin of the deceased, if known;  
(iii) the particulars and value of the assets likely to come into the hands of the petitioner;  
(iv) particulars of the liabilities of the estate, if known.  
19. Name in which probate or letters to be granted .—All probates or letters of administration 
granted to any Administrator -General shall be granted to him by that name.  
20. Effect of probate or letters granted to Administrator -General .—(1) Probate or letters of 
administration granted by the High Court to the Administrator -General of any State shall have effect over 
all the assets of the deceased throughout 1[India ] and shall be conclusive as to the representative title 
against all debtors of the deceased and all persons holding such assets, and shall afford full indemnity to 
all debtors paying their debts and all persons delivering up such assets to such Administrat or-General.  
(2) Whenever a grant of probate or letters of administration is made by a High Court to the 
Administrator -General, the High Court shall send to the High Courts for the other States a certificate that 
such grant has been made, and such certifica te shall be filed by the High Court receiving the same.  
2[(3) Any probate or letters of administration granted by the High Court for the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir before the commencement of the Central Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968 
shall , after such commencement, be as effective as if such probate or letters of administration had been 
granted under this section. ] 
21. [Effect of grant by the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir. ] Omitted by the Central Laws 
(Extension to Jammu and Kashmir ) Act 1968  (25 of 1968 ), s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15-8-1968 ). 
22. Transfer by private executor or administrator of interest under probate or letters .—(1) Any 
private executor or administrator may, with the previous consent of the Administrator -General of th e 
State in which any of the assets of the estate, in respect of which such executor or administrator has 
obtained probate or letters of administration, are situate , by an instrument in writing under his hand 
notified in the Official Gazette, transfer the assets of the estate, vested in him by virtue of such probate or 
letters to the Administrator -General by that name or any other sufficient description.  
(2) As from t he date of such transfer, the transferor shall be exempt from all liability as such executor 
or administrator, as the case may be, except in respect of acts done before the date of such transfer, and 
the Administrator -General shall have the rights which he  would have had, and be subject to the liabilities 
to which he would have been subject, if the probate or letters of administration, as the case may be, had 
been granted to him by that name at the date of such transfer.  
23. Distribution of assets .—(1) When  the Administrator -General has given the prescribed notice to 
creditors and others to send in to him their claims against the estate of the deceased, he shall, at the 
expiration of the time therein named for sending in claims, be at liberty to distribute t he assets or any part 
thereof in discharge of such lawful claims as he has notice of.  
(2) The Administrator -General shall not be liable for the assets so distributed to any person of whose 
claims he had no notice at the time of such distribution.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the territories to which this Act extends” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
2. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  9 
 (3) No no tice of any claim which has been sent in and has been rejected or disallowed in part by the 
Administrator -General shall affect him, unless proceedings to enforce such claim are commenced within 
one month after notice of the rejection or disallowance of suc h claim has been given in the prescribed 
manner and unless such proceedings are prosecuted without unreasonable delay.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any creditor or other claimant to follow the 
assets or any part thereof in the h ands of the persons who may have received the same respectively.  
(5) In computing the period of limitation for any suit, appeal or application under the provisions        
of any law for the time being in force, the period between the date of submission of the claim of a creditor 
or other claimant to the Administrator -General and the date of the final decision of the               
Administrator -General on such claim shall be excluded.  
24. Appointment of Official Trustee as trustee of assets after completion of administration .—(1) 
When the Administrator -General has, so far as may be, discharged all the liabilities of an estate 
administered by him, he shall notify the fact in the Official Gazette, and he may, by an instrument in 
writing , with the consent of the  Official Trustee and subject to any rules made by the State Government, 
appoint the Official Trustee to be the trustee of any assets then remaining in his hands.  
(2) Upon such appointment, such assets shall vest in the Official Trustee as if he had been a ppointed 
trustee in accordance with the provisions of the  Official Trustees Act, 1913 (2  of 1913), and shall be held 
by him upon the same trusts as the same were held immediately before such appointment.  
25. Power of High Court to give directions regarding  administration of estate .—The High Court 
may, on application made to it by the Administrator -General or any person interested in the assets or in 
the due administration thereof, give to the Administrator -General of the State any general or special 
directions as to any estate in his charge or in regard to the administration of any such estate.  
26. No security to be required from Administrator -General .—No Administrator -General shall be 
required by any Court to enter into any administration bond, or to  give other security to the Court, on the 
grant of any letters of administration to him by that name.  
27. Manner in which petition to be verified by Administrator -General .—No             
Administrator -General shall be required to verify, otherwise than by his signature, any petition presented 
by him under the provisions of this Act, and, if the facts stated in any such petition are not within his own 
personal knowledge, the petition may be subscribed and verified by any person competent to make 
verification . 
28. Entry of Administrator -General not to constitute notice of a trust .—The entry of the 
Administrator -General by that name in the books of a company shall not constitute notice of a trust, and a 
company shall not be entitled to object to entering the na me of the Administrator -General on its register 
by reason only that the Administrator -General is a corporation, and in dealing with assets the fact that the 
person dealt with is the Administrator -General shall not of itself constitute notice of a trust.  
CHAPTER IV  
GRANT OF CERTIFICATE  
29. In what cases Administrator -General may grant certificate .—(1) Whenever any person has 
died leaving assets within any State and the Administrator -General of such State is satisfied that such 
assets, excluding any sum of mo ney deposited in a Government Savings Bank or in any provident fund to 
which the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), apply, did not at the date of death 
exceed in the whole  1[ten lakhs] rupees in value, he may grant to any person, claiming otherwise than as a 
creditor to be interested in such assets or in the due administration thereof, a certificate under his hand 
entitling the claimant to receive the assets therein mentioned lef t by the deceased within the State, to a 
value not exceeding in the whole  1[ten lakhs] rupees.  
(2) No certificate under this section shall be granted before the lapse of one month from the death 
unless before the lapse of the said one month the Administrator -General is requested so to do by writing 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2012, s. 2, for “two lakhs” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2012) . 10 
 under the hand of the executor or the widow or other person entitled to administer the estate of the 
deceased and he thinks fit to grant it.  
(3) No certificate shall be granted under this section, — 
(i) where probate of the deceased ’s will or letters of administration of his estate has or have been 
granted; o r 
(ii) in respect of any sum of money deposited in a Government Savings Bank or in any provident 
fund to which the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), apply.  
30. Grant of certificate to creditors and power to take charge of certain es tates .—(1) If, in cases 
falling within section 29, no person claiming to be interested otherwise than as a creditor in such assets or 
in the due administration thereof obtains, within three months of the death of the deceased, a certificate 
from the Admini strator -General under that section, or probate of a will or letters of administration of the 
estate of the deceased, the Administrator -General may administer the estate without letters of 
administration, in the same manner as if such letters had been grant ed to him.  
(2) If the Administrator -General neglects or refuses to administer such estate, he shall, upon the 
application of a creditor, grant a certificate to him in the same manner as if he were interested in such 
assets otherwise than as a creditor; and  such certificate shall have the same effect as a certificate granted 
under the provisions of section 29, and shall be subject to all the provisions of this Act which are 
applicable to such certificate.  
(3) The Administrator -General may, if he thinks fit, before granting a certificate under                    
sub-section ( 2), require the creditor to give reasonable security for the due administration of the estate of 
the deceased.  
31. Administrator -General not bound to grant certificate unless satisfied of claimant ’s title, 
etc.—The Administrator -General shall not be bound to grant any certificate under section 29 or section 30 
unless he is satisfied after making such inquiry as he thinks fit of the title of  the claimant and of the value 
of the assets left by the deceased within the State.  
32. Effect of certificate .—The holder of a certificate granted in accordance with the provisions of 
section 29 or section 30 shall have in respect of the assets specified i n such certificate the same powers 
and duties, and be subject to the same liabilities as he would have had or been subject to if letters of 
administration had been granted to him:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall be deemed to require any person holding such certificate, — 
(a) to file accounts or inventories of the assets of the deceased before any court or other    
authority; or  
(b) save as provided in section 30, to give any bond for the due administration of the estate.  
33. Revocation of certificate .—(1) The Administrator -General may revoke a certificate granted 
under the provisions of section 29 or section 30 on any of the following grounds, namely: — 
(i) that the certificate was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation made to him;  
(ii) that the certificate was obtained by means of an untrue allegation of a fact essential in law to 
justify the grant though such allegation was made in ignorance or inadvertently.  
(2) No certificate shall be revoked under this section unless the holder of the c ertificate has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why the certificate should not be so revoked.  
34. Surrender of revoked certificate .—(1) When a certificate is revoked in accordance with the 
provisions of section 33, the holder thereof shall, on the requisition of the Administrator -General, deliver 
it up to such Administrator -General, but shall not be entitled to the refund of any fee paid thereon.  
(2) If such person wilfully and without reasonable cause omits to deliver up the certifica te, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.  11 
 35. Payment to holder of certificate before it is revoked .—When a certificate is revoked in 
accordance with t he provisions of section 33, all payments made in good faith under such certificate to the 
holder thereof before such revocation, shall, notwithstanding such revocation, be a legal discharge to the 
person making the payment and the holder of such certifica te may retain, and reimburse himself in respect 
of, any payments made by him which the person to whom a certificate or probate or letters of 
administration may afterwards be granted might lawfully have made.  
36. Administrator -General not bound to take out administration on account of assets for which 
he has granted certificate .—The Administrator -General shall not be bound to take out letters of 
administration of the estate of any deceased person on account of the assets in respect of which he grants 
any cer tificate under section 29 or section 30, but he may do so if he revokes such certificate under 
section 33, or ascertains that the value of the estate exceeded  1[ten lakhs] rupees.  
37. Transfer of certain assets to executor or administrator in country of do micile for 
distribution .—Where — 
(a) a person not having his domicile in any State 2[in India ] has died leaving assets in any State 
and in the country in which he had his domicile at the time of his death, and  
(b) proceedings for the administration of his estate with respect to assets in any such State have 
been taken under section 29 or section 30, and  
(c) there has been a grant of administration in the country of domicile, with respect to the assets 
in that coun try, 
the holder of the certificate granted under section 29 or section 30, or Administrator -General, as the case 
may be, after having given the prescribed notice for creditors and others to send in to him their claims 
against the estate of the deceased, an d after having discharged, at the expiration of the time there in 
named, such lawful claims as he has notice of, may, instead of himself distributing any surplus or residue 
of the deceased ’s property to persons residing out of India 3*** who are entitled t hereto, transfer, with the 
consent of the executor or administrator, as the case may be, in the country of domicile, the surplus or 
residue to him for distribution to those persons.  
CHAPTER V  
LIABILITY  
38. Liability of Government .—The Government shall be liable to make good all sums required to 
discharge any liability which the Administrator -General, if he were a private administrator, would be 
personally liable to discharge, except when the liability is one to which neither the Administrator -General 
nor a ny of his officers has in any way contributed , or which neither he nor any of his officers could, by 
the exercise of reasonable diligence, have averted, and in either of those cases the Administrator -General 
shall not, nor shall the Government, be subject to any liability.  
39. Creditor’s suit against Administrator -General .—(1) If any suit be brought by a creditor against 
any Administrator -General, such creditor shall be liable to pay the costs of the suit unless he proves that 
not less than one month previo us to the institution of the suit he had applied in writing to the 
Administrator -General, stating the amount and other particulars of his claim, and had given such evidence 
in support thereof as, in the circumstances of the case, the Administrator -General was reasonably entitled 
to require.  
(2) If any such suit is decreed in favour of the creditor, he shall, nevertheless,  unless he is a secured 
creditor, be only entitled to payment of the amount decreed or ordered by the court to be paid out of the 
assets o f the deceased equally and rateable with the other creditors.  
40. Notice of suit not required in certain cases .—Nothing in section 80 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), shall apply to any suit against the Administrator -General in which no relief 
is claimed against him personally.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2012, s. 2, for “two lakhs” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “to which this Act extends” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
3. The words “or in the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  12 
 CHAPTER VI  
FEES 
41. Fees .—(1) There shall be charged in respect of the duties of the Administrator -General such fees, 
whether by way of percentage or otherwise, as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(2) The  fees under this section may be at different rates for different estates or classes of estates or for 
different duties, and shall, so far as may be, be arranged so as produce an amount sufficient to discharge 
the salaries and all other expenses incidental to the working of this Act, (including such sum as the State 
Government may determine to be required to insure the Government against loss under this Act).  
42. Disposal of fees .—(1) Any expenses which might be retained or paid out of any estate in the 
charge of the Administrator -General, if he were a private Administrator of such estate shall be so retained 
or paid and the fees described under section 41 shall be retained or paid in like manner as and in addition 
to such expenses.  
(2) The Administrator -Gene ral shall transfer and pay to such authority in such manner and at such 
time as the State Government may prescribe, all fees received by him under this Act, and the same shall 
be carried to the account and the credit of the Government.  
CHAPTER VII  
AUDIT OF  THE ADMINISTRATOR -GENERAL’S ACCOUNTS  
43. Audit .—The accounts of every Administrator -General shall be audited at least once annually and 
at any other time if the State Government so directs, by the prescribed person and in the prescribed 
manner.  
44. Auditors to examine accounts and report to Government .—The auditors shall examine the 
accounts and forward to the State Government a statement thereof in the prescribed form, together with a 
report thereon and a certificate signed by them showing — 
(a) whet her the accounts have been audited in the prescribed manner;  
(b) whether, so far as can be ascertained by such audit, the accounts contain a full and true 
account of everything which ought to be inserted therein;  
(c) whether the books which by any rules ma de under this Act are directed to be kept by the 
Administrator -General, have been duly and regularly kept; and  
(d) whether the assets and securities have been duly kept and invested and deposited in the 
manner prescribed by this Act, or by any rules made thereunder;  
or (as the case may be) that such accounts are deficient, or that the Administrator -General has failed to 
comply with t his Act or the rules made there under, in such respects as may be specified in such 
certificate.  
45. Power of auditors to summon and examine witnesses, and to call for documents .—(1) Every 
auditor shall have all the powers vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil                             
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in respect of the following ma tters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath;  
(b) discovery and inspection ; 
(c) compell ing the production of documents ; and  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses.  
(2) Any person who when summoned refuses, or, without reasonable cause, neglects to attend or to 
produce any document or thing or attends and refuses to be sworn, or to be examined, shall be deemed to 
have committed an offence within the meaning of, and punishable under, sec tion 188 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), and the auditor shall report every case of such refusal or neglect to the State 
Government.  13 
 46. Costs of audit, etc. —The costs of and incidental of such audit and examination shall be 
determined in accordance  with rules made by the State Government, and shall be defrayed in the 
prescribed manner.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
47. General powers of administration .—The Administrator -General may, in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, any other powers of expenditure lawfully exercisable by him, incur expenditure — 
(a) on such acts as may be necessary for the proper care and management of any property 
belong ing to any estate in his charge ; and  
(b) with the sanction of the High Court, on such religious, chari table and other objects, and on 
such improvements , as may be reasonable and proper in the case of such property.  
48. Power to summon and examine witnesses .—(1) The Administrator -General may, whenever he 
desires, for the purposes of this Act, to satisfy him self regarding any question of fact, exercise all the 
powers vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in 
respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnes ses and examining them on oath;  
(b) discovery and insp ection ; 
(c) compell ing the production of documents ; and  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 45 shall apply in relation to a person summoned by 
the Administrator -General under this section as they apply in relation to a person summoned under that 
section.  
49. Power of person beneficially interested to inspect Administrator -General’s account, etc., 
and take copies .—Any person interested  in the administration of any estate which is in the charge of the      
Administrator -General shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be entitled 
at all reasonable times to inspect the accounts relating to such estate and t he reports and certificates of the 
auditor, and on payment of the prescribed fee, to co pies thereof and extracts there from . 
50. False evidence .—Whoever, during any examination authorised by this Act, makes upon oath a 
statement which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, 
shall be deemed to have intentionally given false evidence in a stage of a judicial proceeding.  
51. Assets unclaimed for twelve years to be transferred to Government .—All assets in the charge 
of the Administrator -General which have been in his custody for a period of twelve years or upwards, 
whether before or after the commencement of this Act, without any application for payment thereof 
having been made and granted by him shall be trans ferred, in the prescribed manner, to the account and 
credit of the Government:  
Provided  that this section shall not authorise the transfer of any such assets as aforesaid, if any suit or 
proceeding is pending in respect thereof in any court.  
52. Mode of pr oceeding by claimant to recover principal money so transferred .—(1) If any claim 
is hereafter made to any part of the assets transferred to the account and credit of the Government under 
the provisions of this Act, or any Act hereby repealed, and if such c laim is established to the satisfaction 
of the prescribed authority, the State Government shall pay to the claimant the amount of the principal so 
transferred to its account and credit or so much thereof as has been found by the said authority to be due 
to the claimant.  
(2) If the claim is not established to the satisfaction of the prescribed authority, the claimant may, 
without prejudice to his right to take any other proceedings for the recovery of such assets, apply by 
petition to the High Court against the State Government and such Court, after taking such evidence as it 14 
 thinks fit, shall make such order in regard to the payment of the whole or any part of the said principal 
sum as it thinks fit, and such order shall be binding on all parties to the proc eedings.  
(3) The High Court may further direct by whom the whole or any part of the costs of each party shall 
be paid.  
53. Succession Act or Companies Act not to affect Administrator -General .—Nothing 
contained  in the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925 ), or the Companies Act,  1956 (1 of 1956), shall 
be taken to supersede or affect the rights, duties and privileges of any Administrator -General.  
54. Savings of provisions of Police Acts for presidency -towns .—Nothing contained in the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925) , or in this Act, shall be deemed to affect, or to have affected, any law 
for the time being in force relating to the movable property under four hundred rupees in value of persons 
dying interstate within any of the presidency -towns which shall be or has been taken charge of by the 
police for the purpose of safe custody.  
55. Order of court to be equivalent to decree .—Any order made under this Act by any court shall 
have the same effect as a decree.  
56. Provision for administration by Consul ar Officer in case of death in certain circumstances 
of foreign subject .—Notwithstanding anything in this Act, or in any other law for the time being in 
force, the Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that, where a subject of a forei gn 
State dies in 1[India ], and it appears that there is no one in 2[India ], other than the Administrator -General, 
entitled to apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for letters of administration of the estate of the 
deceased, letters of administration shall, on the application to such court by any Consular Officer of such 
foreign State, be granted to such Consular Officer on such terms and conditions as the Court may, subject 
to any rules made in this behalf by the Central Government, thinks fit to impo se. 
57. Letters of administration not necessary in respect s of small estates administered by  
Administrator -General in accordance with certain Acts .—It shall not be necessary for the 
Administrator -General to take out letters of administration of the estate  of any deceased person which is 
being administered by him in accordance with the provisions of the Army and Air Force (Disposal of 
Private Property) Act, 1950 (40 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), if the value of such estate 
does not, on the d ate when such administration is committed to him, exceed rupees two thousand, but he 
shall have the same power in regard to such estate as he would have had if letters of administration had 
been granted to him.  
58. Powers to grant Administrator -General let ters limited for purpose of dealing with assets in 
accordance with the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 
1957 .—If the Administrator -General applies in accordance with the provisions of the Army and Air Force 
(Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950 (40 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), for letters of 
administration of the estate of any person subject to the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or the Air Force 
Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957, the  Court may grant to him letters of administration 
limited to the purpose of dealing with such estate in accordance with the provisions of the Army and Air 
Force (Disposal or Private Property) Act, 1950, or, as the case may be, the Navy Act, 1957.  
59. Act not to affect Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950, or the Navy 
Act, 1957 .—Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions of the Army and Air Force 
(Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950 (40 of 1950), or the Navy Act,  1957 (62 of 1957).  
60. Saving of provisions of Indian Registration Act, 1908 .—Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to 
affect the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908).  
61. Power of Central Government to make rules .—The Central Govern ment may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make rules as to the terms and conditions on which letters of administration may  
be granted to Consular Officers under section 56.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “ the territories to which this Act extends ” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
2. Subs. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid.,  for “the said territories” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  15 
 62. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may,  by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act, and for regulating the 
proceedings of the Administrator -General.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules m ay 
provide for — 
(a) the accounts to be kept by the Administrator -General and the audit and inspection thereof;  
(b) the safe custody, deposit and investment of assets and securities which come into the hands of 
the Administr ator-General ; 
(c) the remittance of sums of money in the hands of the Administrator - General in cases in whic h 
such remittances are required ; 
(d) subject to the provisions of this Act, the fees to be paid under this Act and the collection and 
accounting for any such fees ; 
(e) the statements, schedules and other documents to be submitted to the State Government or to 
any other authority by the Administrator -Genera l, and the   publication thereof ; 
(f) the realization of the cost of preparing any such statements, schedules or other  documents;  
(g) the manner in which and the person by whom the costs of and incidental to any audit under 
the provisions of this Act ar e to be determined and defrayed ; 
(h) the manner in which summonses issued under this Act are to be served and the payment  of the 
expenses of any person summoned or examined under the provisions of this Act, and of any 
expenditure incidental to such examination; and  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
1[(3) Every rule made by th e State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made before the State Legislature.]  
63. Laying of rules made by Central Government before Parliament .—Every rule made by the 
Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session 
or 2[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
64. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Administrator -General ’s Act, 1913 (3 of 1913), is hereby 
repeal ed. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of the General Clauses                                        
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), relating to the effect of repeals, the repeal effected by this section shall not     
affect the incorporatio n of any person holding the office of Administrator -General at the commencement 
of this Act.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section , the provisions of section 59B of the 
Administrator -General ’s Act, 1913 (3 of 1913), shall continue to apply  as if that Act had not been 
repealed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1983, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -8-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 26 -8-1983).  
--------------------------The Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963--------------------------
1 THE CENTRAL BOARDS OF REVENUE ACT, 1963  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Constitution of separate Central Boards for Direct Taxes and for Indirect Taxes and Customs . 
4. Procedure of the Board . 
5. Amendment of certain enactments . 
6. Transfer of certain proceedings . 
7. Power to remove difficulties . 
8. Repeal and saving . 
  2 THE CENTRAL BOARDS OF REVENUE ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1963  
[30th December , 1963 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of separate Boards of Revenue for Direct Taxes and for 
1[Indirect Taxes and Customs] and to amend certain enactments for the purpose of conferring 
powers and imposing duties on the said Boards.  
BE it enacted by Parlia ment in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The Central Boards of Revenue 
Act, 1963.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Central Board of Direct Taxes or  3[the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and 
Customs]  constituted under section 3;  
(b) “Central Board of Revenue ” means the Central Board of Revenue constituted under the 
Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924  (4 of 1924).  
(c) “direct tax ” means — 
(1) any duty leviable or tax chargeable under — 
(i) the Estate Duty Act, 1953  (34 of 1953) ; 
(ii) the Wealth -tax Act, 195 7 (27 of 1957) ; 
(iii) the Expenditure -tax Act, 1957  (29 of 1957) ; 
(iv) the Gift -tax Act, 1958  (18 of 1958) ; 
(v) the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 196 1); 
(vi) the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963  (14 of 1963) ; 4*** 
5[(vii) the Interest -tax Act, 1974  (45 of 1974) ; 6***] 
 7[(viii) the Hotel -Receipts Tax Act, 1980  (54 of 1980) ; 8***] 
 9[(ix) the Expenditure -tax Act, 1987  (35 of 1987) ; 10***] 
11[(x) the Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax 
Act, 2015  (22 of 2015) ; and]  
(2) any other duty or tax which, having regard to its nature or incidence, may be declared by the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a direct tax.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s . 160, for “ Excise and Customs”   (w.e.f 29 -3-2018) . 
2. 1st January, 1964, vide notification No. S.O. 3606, dated 30th December 1963, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part II,    
sec. 3 ( ii).  
3.  Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s.160, for “the Central Board of Excise and Customs” (w.e.f 29 -3-2018) . 
4. The  word “and” omitted by Act 45 of 1974, s. 30 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974).  
5. Ins. by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974).  
6. The  word “and” omitted by Act 54 of 1980, s. 37 (w.e.f. 9 -12-1980).  
7. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -12-1980).  
8. The  word “and” omitted by Act 35 of 1987, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1987).  
9. Ins. by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1987).  
10.  The  word “and” omitted by Act 22 of 2015, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2016).  
11. Ins. by s. 87, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2016).  3 3. Constitution of separate Central Boards for Direc t Taxes and for  1[Indirect Taxes and 
Customs] .—(1) The Central Government shall, in place of the Central Board of Revenue, constitute two 
separate Boards of Revenue to be called the Central Board of Direct Taxes and 2[the Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs ], and each such Board shall, subject to the control of the Central 
Government, exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be entrusted to that Board by the 
Central Government or by or under any law.  
(2) Each Board shall consist of suc h number of persons 3[not exceeding seven] as the Central 
Government may think fit to appoint.  
4. Procedure of the Board .—(1) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of 
regulating the transaction of business by each Board and every order made  or act done in accordance with 
such rules shall be deemed to be the order or act, as the case may be, of the Board.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modificatio n in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the v alidity of anything previously done under that rule.  
5. Amendment of certain enactments .—(1) In the Estate Duty Act, 1953  (34 of 1953) , the     
Wealth -tax Act, 1957  (27 of 1957) , the Expenditure -tax Act,1957  (29 of 1957 ) , the Gift -tax Act, 1958  
(18 of 195 8), the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , and the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963  (14 of 1963)  
for the words and figures “Central Board of Revenue constituted under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 
1924  (4 of 1924) ” or “Central Board of Revenue ”, wherever th ey occur, the words and figures “Central 
Board of Direct Taxes constituted under th e Central Boards of Revenue Act,  1963 ” shall be substituted.  
(2) In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944  (1 of 1944) , and the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) , 
for the words and figures “Central Board of Revenue constituted under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 
1924 (4 of 1924) ” or “Central Board of Revenue ” wherever they occur, the words and figures 2[the 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs]  constitut ed under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 
1963 ” shall be substituted.  
(3) The functions entrusted to the Central Board of Revenue by or under any other enactment          
shall, — 
(a) if such functions relate to matters connected with direct taxes, be discharged by the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes; and  
(b) if such functions relate to any other matter, unless they are entrusted by the Central 
Government to the Central Board of Direct Taxe s, be discharged by the 2[the Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs] . 
6. Transfer of certain proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending at the commencement of this 
Act, before the Central Board of Revenue shall — 
(a) if it is a proceeding relating to d irect taxes, stand transferred to the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes; and  
(b) in any other case stand transferred to the  2[the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs] . 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding stands transferred to the Central Board of 
Direct Taxes or to 2[the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs] , it shall be referred to the Central 
Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s . 160, for “Excise and Customs”   (w.e.f 29 -3-2018) . 
2. Subs. by s. 160 , ibid., for “the Central Board of Excise and Customs” (w.e.f 29 -3-2018) . 
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1978, s. 27 for “and not exceeding five” (w. e.f.  21 -6-1978).  4 (3) In any legal proceeding pending at the commencement of this Act to which the Central Board of 
Revenue is a party, — 
(a) if it is a proceeding relating to direct taxes, the Central Board of Direct Taxes shall be deemed 
to be substituted for the Central Boa rd of Revenue in such proceeding; and  
(b) if it is a proceeding relating to any other matter, 1[the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and 
Customs]  shall be deemed to be substituted for the Central Board of Revenue in such proceeding.  
7. Power to remove diffi culties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as appear to it to be necessa ry or expedient for removing the 
difficulty.  
(2) An order under sub -section ( 1) may be made so as to have retrospective effect from a date not 
earlier than the date of the commencement of this Act.  
8. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924  (4 of 1924) , of is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect any appointment, assessment, order (including 
quasi -judicial order) or rule made, or exemption, approval or recognition granted, or any notice, 
notification, direction or instruction issued, or any duty levied, or penalty or fine imposed, or  confiscation 
adjudged, or any form prescribed, or any other thing done or action taken by the Central Board of 
Revenue under any law and any such appointment, assessment, order, rule, exemption, approval, 
recognition, notice, notification, direction, inst ruction, duty, penalty, fine, confiscation, form, thing or 
action shall be deemed to have been made, granted, issued, levied, imposed, adjudged, prescribed, done 
or taken by the Central Board of Direct Taxes, or as the case may be, by 1[the Central Board o f Indirect 
Taxes and Customs] and shall continue to be in force unless and until it is revised, withdrawn or 
superseded by the concerned Board.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s . 160 , for “the Central Board of Excise and Customs” (w.e.f 29 -3-2018) . 
--------------------------The Compulsory Deposit Scheme Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE COMPULSORY DEPOSIT SCHEME ACT,  1963  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Persons to whom Act applies . 
3. Definitions . 
4. Requirement as to compulsory deposit .  
5. Compulsory Deposit Scheme . 
6. Modification of Scheme . 
7. Rounding off . 
8. Power to suspend, reduce or remit the amount of compulsory deposit . 
9. Power to exempt . 
10. Power to delegate . 
11. Protection against attachment . 
12. Penalty for failure to make deposit . 
13. Recovery of arrears of deposit and penalty . 
14. Protectio n of action taken in good faith.  
15. Power to remove difficulties . 
16. Scheme to be laid before the House of Parliament . 
 
   2 
  THE COMPULSORY DEPOSIT SCHEME ACT,  1963  
ACT NO. 21 OF 1963  
[22nd May, 1963 .] 
An Act to provide in the interest of national economic development  for compulsory deposit and 
for the framing of a scheme in relation thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Compulsory Deposit  
Scheme Act, 1963.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Persons to whom Act applies .—This Act shall apply to the followin g categ ories of persons, 
namely:— 
(a) persons liable to payment of land -revenue (whether known as land -revenue, rent, tax or         
by any other name) under any law with respect to land -revenue whether or not such persons are liable 
to pay tax under the Income -tax Act;  
(b) persons liable to payment of tax under the Income -tax Act;  
(c) holders of immovable properties situated in urban areas as sessed to tax (whether known as 
property tax, house tax or by any other name) who are not liable to payment of tax under the    
Income -tax Act;  
(d) employees of — 
(i) the Central and State Governments,  
(ii) local authorities,  
(iii) companies as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , including 
foreign companies within the meaning of section 591 and Government companies as defined in 
section 617 of that Act,  
(iv) any other corporation  (including a co -operative society)  established by or under a 
Central, Provincial or State Act,  
(v) individuals or associations of persons or bodies of individuals liable  to payment of tax 
under the Income -tax Act, and entitled to deduct the salary paid to their employees for the 
purpose of computing their income under that Act,  
whose annual income from salary is one thousand five hundred rupees or more and who are not lia ble 
to payment of tax under the Income -tax Act;  
(e) dealers whose annual turnover, determined in accordance with the provisions of any State Act 
with respect to tax on the sale of goods, is fifteen thousand rupees or more and who are not liable to 
payment of tax under the Income -tax Act:  
Provided that whereby  or under any such State Act any amount higher than fifteen thousand 
rupees has been fixed as the minimum annual turnover for the purpose of registration under that Act 
the reference to fifteen thousand  rupees in this clause shall be construed as a reference to that amount.  
Explanation. —In this clause, — 
                                                           
1. 1st  June, 1963, vide notification No. G.S.R. 887, dated 25 th  May, 1963 , see Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, Sec.  3(i). 3 
 (a) “dealer” has the same meaning as in the respective State Acts with respect to tax on the 
sale of goods;  
(b) “State Act” includes a Provincial Act;  
(f) such other categories of persons [than those referred to in clauses ( a) to ( e)] whose annual 
income is one thousand five hundred rupees or more and who are not liable to payment of tax under 
the Income -tax Act, as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “additional surcharge ” means additional surcharge for the purposes of the Union referred to in 
the annual Finance Act;  
(b) “deposit” means a deposit of money;  
(c) “Income -tax Act” means the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(d) “Person” shall have the same meaning as in clause ( 31) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act;  
(e) “salary” has the same meaning as in section 17 of the Income -tax Act , but in relation to a 
person falling under clause ( d) of section 2 does not include any gratuity or annuity or pension;  
(f) “urban area ” means any area within the local limits of a municipality (by whatever             
name called), a notifi ed area committee, a town area committee, a city and town committee, a small 
town committee, a Cantonment Board or a Panchayat constituted by reorganisation of any of the 
aforesaid local authorities and having a population of ten thousand or more;  
(g) “year” means the financial year.  
4. Requirement as to compulsory deposi t .—(1) As from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, every person to whom this Act applies, other 
than a person falling under clause ( b) of section 2, shall make a compulsory deposit at such rate as may be 
provided for in a scheme framed under this Act:  
Provided that different notifications may be issued under this sub -section on different dates in relation 
to different cat egories of persons:  
Provided further that the rate of compulsory deposit shall not exceed the maximum rate specified in 
sub-section ( 2). 
(2) The maximum rate of deposit shall be — 
(a) in the case of a person falling under clause ( a) of section 2, fifty per cent. of the land -revenue 
(including surcharge thereon, if any,) payable in respect of the land or lands held by him in the year 
for which the deposit is required to be made.  
Explanation. —In this clause “year” means the year with reference to which land -revenue is 
payable under any law with respect to land -revenue;  
(b) in the case of a person falling under clause ( c) of that section, three per  cent. of the annual 
rental value of the property with reference to which the property is assessed to the tax referred to in 
that clause in the year in which the deposit is required to be made:  
Provided that where the property is assessed to such tax not with reference to its annual rental 
value, the maximum rate of deposit under this clause sh all be twelve and a half per cent. of such tax;  
(c) in the case of a person falling under clause ( d) of that section, three per cent. of his annual 
income from salary;  
(d) in the case of a person falling under clause ( e) of that section, one -third of one per cent. of his 
turnover during the year immediately preceding the year in which the deposit is required to be made;  
(e) in the case of a person falling under clause ( f) of that section, a sum of sixty rupees per annum.  4 
 (3) A person falling under clause ( b) of section 2 by who any additional surcharge is payable in 
respect of any assessment year may make a deposit under this Act in respect of that year and if he does so, 
then, he shall, on production of proof before the income -tax officer concerned of the fact of such deposit 
having been made, be entitled to deduction from the additional surcharge of a sum which shall be                
equal to— 
(a) the sum so deposited, or  
(b) (i) where his residual income is six thousand rupees or less, three per cent . of such residual 
income, or  
(ii) where his residual income exceeds six thousand rupees, three per cent . of the first six 
thousand rupees of such residual income and two per cent . of the balance thereof,  
whichever is less.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section “residual income ” has the same meaning as in section 2 of the 
Finance Act, 1963 (13 of 1963).  
(4) Any person falling under clause ( b) of section 2  who is in receipt of any income under the head 
“Salaries” during any financial year may make a deposit under this Act in that year and if he does so, 
then, notwithstanding anything in the Income -tax Act, the person responsible for paying that income 
shall, on production of proof of the fact of such deposit havin g been made, reduce the amount of 
additional surcharge included in the tax to be deducted in accordance with the provisions of section 192 
of that Act by a sum which shall be equal to — 
(a) the sum so deposited, or  
(b) the sum calculated in accordance with clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3), 
whichever is less.  
(5) Any person falling under clause  (b) of section  2 who is liable to pay advance tax under the   
Income -tax Act in any financial year may make a deposit under this Act in that year and if he does so, 
then,  notwithstanding anything contained in the Income -tax Act, he shall, on production of proof before 
the income -tax officer concerned of the fact of such deposit having been made, be entitled to deduction 
from the additional surcharge included in the advan ce tax, of a sum which shall be equal to— 
(a) the sum so deposited, or  
(b) the sum calculated in accordance with clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3), 
whichever is less.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section, “advance tax ” shall have the same meaning as in section 207 of the 
Income -tax Act.  
(6) Where a person falling under clause ( d) of secti on 2 pays in any year any sum, — 
(i) to effect or to keep in force any insurance on the life of such person or on the life of the wife 
or husband of such person; or  
(ii) as a contribution to any provident fund to whic h the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , 
applies or to any “recognised provident fund ” as defined in clause  (38) of section 2 of the Income tax 
Act; or  
(iii) in a ten -year account or a fifteen -year account under the Post Office Savings Bank 
(Cumulative Time Deposit) Rules, 1959, as amended from time to time,  
he shall not be liable to make any compulsory deposit under this section for that year if such sum is not 
less than  eleven per cent. of his annual income from salary.  
(7) Where any person falls under any two or more categories referred to in section 2  other than the 
category referred to in clause ( b) of that section, then, he shall make a compulsory deposit at the rate  
applicable to each of those categories.  5 
 (8) Any deposit made under this section shall bear simple interest at the rate of four  per cent. per 
annum to be calculated from the first day of the month immediately following the month in which the 
deposit is mad e to the last day of the month immediately preceding the month in which it is repaid     
(both days inclusive) and notwithstanding anything in the Income -tax Act, the amount of such interest 
shall be free of any tax under that Act.  
(9) Any deposit made und er this section during any year shall be repayable with interest thereon at 
any time after the expiry of five years from the end of the year in which the deposit has been made:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent earlier repayment of any deposit with interest 
there on in any case in which the authority empowered to make such repayment is satisfied that genuine 
hardship will be caused unless such repayment is made.  
1[(9A) If any person has deposited any amount under the provisions of sub -section ( 3) or                         
sub-section ( 4) which is in excess of the amount of additional surcharge payable by him, such excess 
shall, on an application made by that person, be refunded to him with interest due thereon, in such manner 
as the Cen tral Government thinks fit.  
(9B) If any person who is liable to pay advance tax under the Income -tax Act has made a deposit 
under the provisions of sub -section ( 5) in the financial year commencing on the first day of April, 1963, 
the amount of such deposit , shall, on an application made by that person, be refunded t o him with interest 
due thereon  in such manner as the  Central Government thinks fit. ] 
(10) If any doubt or dispute arises as to the amount to be deposited by any person under this Act or as 
to the date on which such amount is to be deposited or as to any other matter in relation to any deposit to 
be made under this Act, the decision thereon of the Government or any authority empowered by the 
Government in this behalf shall be fi nal. 
5. Compulsor y Deposit Scheme .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, frame one or more scheme or schemes to be called Compulsory Deposit Scheme or Scheme s in 
relation to deposits under this Act.  
(2) A scheme framed under sub-section  (1) may provide for, — 
(a) the rates at which and the period for which compulsory deposits shall be made by the several 
categories of persons to whom this Act applies and the extension of such period;  
(b) the manner (including the deduction of deposit at s ource) in which and the intervals at which 
such deposits shall be made;  
(c) the documents to be issued to persons by whom deposits have been made as evidence of such 
deposits;  
(d) the authority or authorities by or through whom deposits may be collected or  by whom 
penalties for failure to make deposits may be levied;  
(e) the accounts to be maintained with respect to such deposits and the officers by whom such 
accounts shall be maintained;  
(f) the nomination of any person to receive the amount standing to the credit of a depositor in the 
event of his death and the cancellation or change of such nomination;  
(g) the issue of duplicate of any document issued as evidence of any deposit in the event of loss 
or destruction of the original and the fee on the payment of which such duplicate may be  issued;  
(h) the exemptions, if any, to be granted in exercise of the powers under section 9;  
(i) the delegation of powers in pursuance of section 10;  
(j) the repa yment and withdrawal of deposits with interest thereon and the conditions, if any, 
under which such repayment or withdrawal may be made;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1964, s. 65  (w.e.f. 28 -4-1964) . 6 
 (k) any other matter which may be necessary or proper for the effective implementation of the 
Scheme.  
(3) A scheme fram ed under this section may provide that all or any of its provisions shall take effect 
either prospectively or retrospectively on such date as may be specified in this behalf in the Scheme.  
(4) Any scheme framed under this section shall have effect notwiths tanding anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force, other than this Act, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law 
other than this Act.  
6. Modification of Scheme .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gaze tte, 
add to , amend or vary any scheme framed under this Act.  
7. Rounding of f.—Where the amount of any deposit to be made under this Act contains a part of a 
rupee, then, if such part is fifty naye paise  or more, it shall be increased to one complete rupee and if such 
part is less than fifty naye paise, it shall be ignored.  
8. Power to suspend, reduce or remit the amount of compulsory deposit .—Where the State 
Government has suspended payment of land -reven ue, or reduced or remitted the amount of land -revenue, 
payable in any year in respect of any land, then, the Central Government may, by order, suspend payment 
of the compulsory deposit, or reduce or remit the amount of such deposit payable in that year und er 
section 4 by a person falling under clause ( a) of section 2.  
9. Power to exempt .—Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, either in the public interest or having regard to the peculiar circumstances of a ny case, 
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may specify in 
the notification, — 
(a) exempt any person or class of persons from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this 
Act; and  
(b) cancel any such notification and again subject, by a like notification, the person or class of 
persons to the operation of such provisions.  
10. Power to delegate .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that any power wh ich may be exercised by it under attainder this Act, other than the power under                  
section 5 or the power under this section, shall, subject to such restrictions and conditions, if any as it may 
specify in the notification, be exercised also by,— 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to a State Government, or  
(c) such other officer or authority,  
as may be specified in the notification.  
11. Protection against attachment .—(1) The amount standing to the credit of any depositor shall not 
be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any court in respect of any debt or liability incurred 
by the depositor.  
(2) Any amount standing to the cre dit of a depositor at the time of his death and payable to his 
nominee under a scheme shall vest in the nominee and shall be free from any debt or other liability 
incurred by the deceased or incurred by the nominee before the death of the depositor.  
12. Penalty for failure to make deposit .—(1) If any person who is liable to make a deposit under 
this Act fails to make the same within the time specified thereof, he shall be liable to pay by way of 
penalty an amount not exceeding half the amount of deposit whi ch he is liable to make:  
Provided that before levying any such penalty such person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in respect of the same.  
(2) Where any person is responsible for paying any income falling under the head “Salaries” as 
mentioned in the Income -tax Act, then, notwithstanding anything in that Act, in computing the total 7 
 income of that person under that Act for any assessment year commencing on or after the                        
1st day of April, 1964, no deduction shal l be allowed in respect of payment of any income under that head 
which in the case of any employee exceeds one thousand five hundred rupees but from which no tax is 
deductible under the heading “B—Deduction at source ” in Chapter XVII of that Act unless a s um equal to 
the amount which such employee is required to deposit under this Act is deducted from such income at 
source and is deposited in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Scheme framed there under.  
13. Recovery of arrears of deposit and penalty .—Any arrear of deposit and any penalty for failure 
to make such deposit under this Act shall be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land -revenue.  
14. Protection of action taken in good faith  .—No suit,  prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this  Act or 
any scheme framed there under.  
15. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect  to the provisions of this 
Act or of any scheme framed thereunder, the Central Government may, by order, as occasion requires, do 
anything (not inconsistent with this Act) which appears to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty.  
16. Scheme to be la id before the House of Parliament .—Any scheme framed under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be, after it is framed before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in tw o or more successive sessions, 
and if before the expiry of that session in which it is so laid or the session or sessions immediately 
following both Houses agree in asking any modification in any provision of the scheme or both Houses 
agree that any provis ion in the scheme should not be made, the provision of the scheme shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that provision.  
 
 
 
--------------------------The Dramatic Performances (Delhi Repeal) Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE DRAMATIC PERFORMANCES (DELHI REPEAL) ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 35 OF 1963  
[26th September,  1963 .] 
An Act to provide for the repeal of the Dramatic Performances Act, 1876, in force in the Union 
territory of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Dramatic Performances (Delhi Repeal) Act, 1963.  
2. Repeal of Dramatic Performances Act, 1876 .—On and from the date on which th e Madras 
Dramatic Performances Ac t, 1954 (Madras Act XXXIII of  1954) , is extended by notification under 
section 2 of the Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1950 (30 of 1950) , to the Union territory of Delhi, the 
Dramatic Performances Act, 1876  (19 of 1876) , as in force  in the Union territory, shall  stand repealed.  
3. Saving .—The repeal of the Dramatic Performances Act, 1876 (19 of 1876) , by section  2 shall     
not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of the said Act or anything duly done or suffered thereunder ; or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or   liability acquired, accrued or   incurred under the said      
Act; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the 
said Act; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of   any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or   remedy may be   instituted,   continued or   enforced 
and  any such penalty,  forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if the said Act had not been repealed.  
 
--------------------------The Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE EXPORT (QUALITY CONTROL AND INSPECTION) ACT, 1963  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of Export Inspection Council . 
4. Director of Inspection and Quality Control . 
5. Functions of the Council . 
6. Powers of the Central Government in regard to quality control and inspection . 
7. Machinery for quality control and inspection . 
8. Power to recognise or establish marks to denote conformity with standard specifications . 
9. Power to obtain i nformation from exporters, etc . 
10. Finance, accounts and audit.  
10A. Power to enter and inspect . 
10B. Power to search . 
10C. Power to seize commodities, etc . 
10D. Power to stop and seize conveyances . 
10E. Search and seizure to be made in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 . 
10F. Confiscation . 
10G. Confiscation of conveyance . 
10H. Option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation . 
10-I. Liability to penalty . 
10J. Confiscation or penalty not to interfere with other punishments . 
10K. Adjudication . 
10L. Giving of opportunity to the owner of goods etc . 
10M. Appeal . 
10N. Powers of revision . 
10-O. Powers of adjudicating and other authorities . 
10P. Continuance of proceedings in the event of death or insolvency . 
11. Penalty . 
11A. Penalty for contravention of orde r made by adjudicating authority or Appellate authority . 
11B. Offences by officers and employees of agency, etc . 
11C. Correction of clerical or arithmetical mistakes . 
12. Offences by companies . 
13. Delegation of powers . 
14. Procedure for prosecution . 
15. Officers and employees of agency to be public servants . 
16. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
16A. Suspension, etc., of operation of the provisions of the Act . 
17. Power to make rules .  
18. Act to over -ride other enactments . 
  2 
 THE EXPORT (QUALITY CONTROL AND INSPECTION) ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 22 OF 1963  
[24th August,  1963 .] 
An Act to provide for the sound development of the export trade of India through quality control 
and inspection and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Export                  
(Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by Notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “adjudicating authority ” means the authority specified in, or under, section 10K;  
(ab) “Appellate authority ” means the appellate author ity referred to in section 10M; ] 
3[(ac)] “Council ” means the Export Inspection Counc il established under section 3;  
(b) “export ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means taking out of India 
to a place outside India;  
(c) “inspection ”, in relation to a commodity, means the process of determining whether a batch of 
goods in that commodity complies with the standard specifi cations applicable to it or any other 
specifications stipulated in the export contract generally by inspecting either the whole batch or a 
selected sample or samples which purport to represent the whole batch;  
(d) “notified commodity ” means any commodity n otified under clause ( a) of section 6;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “quality control ” means any activity having for its object the determination of the quality of a 
commodity (whether during the process of manufacture or production or subsequently) in order to 
ascertain whether it satisfies the standard specifications applicable to it or a ny other specifications 
stipulated in the export contract and whether it may be accepted for purposes of export.  
3. Establishment of Export Inspection Council .—(1) The Central Government may by n otification 
in the Official Gazette, establish, with effect from such d ate as may be specified in the n otification, a 
Council to be known as the Export Inspection Council, which shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) the Director of Inspection and Quality Control, ex officio , who shall be the Secretary;  
(c) the Honorary Adviser on Standardization to the Government of India and Director of Indian 
Standards Institution, ex officio ; 
(d) the Agricultural Marketing Advisor to the Government of India, ex officio ; 
(e) the Director General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics, ex officio ; 
(f) 4[fifteen ] other members nominated by the Central Government three of whom shall be 
persons representing the agencies referred to in section 7.  
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1964, vide notification  No. S.O. 3604(E), dated the 30th December, 1963, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, Sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  
3. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( ac) by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 3,  ibid., for “eleven” (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  3 
 (2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall by the said 
name sue and be sued.  
(3) The term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among,  the members of the 
Council referred to in clauses ( a) and ( f) of sub -section ( 1) and the travel ling and daily allowances 
payable to the members of the Council and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of its functions 
by the Council shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalidated merely by reason of any vacancy in, or 
any defect in the Constitution of, the Council.  
(5) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the  Council may 
appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the purpose of discharging its 
functions under this Act.  
 4. Director of Inspection and Quality Control .—The Central Government shall appoint a Director 
of Inspection and Quality Control to exercise such powers and perform such duties under this Act as may 
be prescribed.  
 5. Functions of the Council .—(1) The functions of the Council shall generally be to advise the 
Central Government regarding measures for the enforcement of quality control and inspection in relation 
to commodities intended for export and to draw up programmes therefore, to make, with the concurrence 
of the Central Government, grants -in-aid to th e agencies established or recognised under section 7 and to 
perform such other functions as maybe assigned to it by or under this Act.  
(2) For the purpose of performing its functions, the Council may co -opt as members such number of 
persons as it thinks fi t who have special knowledge and practical experience in matters relating to any 
commodity or trade therein and any such person shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the 
Council but shall not have the right to vote and shall not be a memb er for any other purpose.  
(3) The Council may also constitute specialist committees for conducting investigations on special 
problems connected with its functions.  
(4) In the performance of its functions under this Act, the Council shall be bound by such d irections 
as the Central Government may give to it in writing from time to time.  
6. Powers of the Central Government in regard to quality control and inspection .—If the Central 
Government, after consulting the Council, is of opinion that it is necessary or  expedient so to do for the 
development of the export trade of India, it may, by order publishe d in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) notify commodities which shall be subject to quality control or inspection or both prior          
to export;  
(b) specify  the type of quality control or inspection which will be applied to a                     
notified commodity;  
(c) establish, adopt or recognise one or more standard specifications for a notified commodity;  
(d) prohibit the export in the course of internati onal trade of a notified commodity unless it is 
accompanied by a certificate issued under section 7 that the commodity satisfies the conditions 
relating to quality control or inspection, or it has affixed or applied to it a mark or seal recognised by 
the C entral Government as indicating that it conforms to the standard specifications applicable to it 
under clause ( c). 
7. Machinery for quality control and inspection .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, establish, or recognise subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, 
agencies for quality control or inspection or both:  
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that any recognition granted to any agency 
under this sub -section should, in the public inter est, be withdrawn, the Central Government may after 
giving a reasonable opportunity to that agency to make representations in the matter, withdraw, by like 
notification, the recognition granted to it.  4 
 (2) Any agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) may, on a pplication made to it or otherwise, hold or 
cause to be held such examination as it thinks fit relating to quality control or inspection of notified 
commodities, either at the time of export or earlier, in such testing houses or by such surveyors or 
sample rs as are approved by the Central Government in this behalf and may charge such fees as may be 
prescribed for the purpose of such examination.  
(3) If, after the examination, the agency is of opinion that the commodity satisfies the standard 
specifications laid down in respect of it under section 6 or, as the case may be, any other specifications 
stipulated in the export contract, it may issue a certificate that the commodity satisfies the conditions 
relating to quality control and inspection.  
1[(3A) Where t he agency has reason to believe that a certificate issued under sub -section ( 3) has been 
obtained fraudulently or by misrepresentation, or the commodity in relation to , which the certificate is 
issued has been chan ged or has deteriorated in quali ty, the ag ency may, by order, amend, suspend or 
cancel the certificate in such manner and subject to such  procedure as may be prescribed:  
Provided  that before amending, a suspending or cance lling any such certificate the holder thereof 
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.]  
(4) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of any agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) to issue a 
certificate,  1[or by the amendment, suspension or cancellation of a certificate under sub -section ( 3A)] may 
prefer an appeal within  such time as may be prescribed to such authority as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the purpose of hearing appeals.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), the decision of the agency where no a ppeal is filed, 
and the decision of the appellate authority where an appeal is filed, shall be final and shall not be 
questioned in any Court of law.  
(6) The Central Government may, at any time, call for and examine the record of any proceeding 
relating to  any decision of an agency or appellate authority under this section for the purpose of satisfying 
itself as to the legality or propriety of such decision and may pass such order thereon as it thinks fit.  
8. Power to recognise or establish marks to denote conformity with standard      
specifications  .—(1) The Central Government may, by n otification in the Official Gazette, recognise  or 
establish any mark or seal in relation to a notified commodity for the purpose of denoting that such 
commodity conforms to a standard specification applicable to it.  
(2) Any such mark or seal affixed or applied to a notified commodity or to any coverin g containing, 
or label attached to, such commodity shall be deemed to be evidence of the commodity being in 
conformity with the standard specifications applicable to it under this Act:  
Provided  that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent any officer of customs from examining any 
consignment of a notified commodity intended for export if he has reason to believe that the seal or mark 
is not genuine or has been affixed or applied fraudulently or if such an examination is necessary for the 
purpose of any ot her law for the time being in force.  
9. Power to obtain information from exporters, etc. —The Central Government or any officer or 
authority authorised by it in this behalf may, by notice published in the Official Gazette, requi re— 
(i) persons  manufacturing, dealing in or exporting notified commodities; and  
(ii) such other persons as may be prescribed;  
to furnish any information, return or report which the Central Government or such officer or authority 
may consider necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
10. Finance, accounts and audit .—(1) For the purpose of enabling the Council to discharge  its 
functions under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, pay to the Council such sums of money as that Government considers necessary by 
way of grants, loans or otherwise.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  5 
 (2) For the purp ose of discharging its functions under this Act, the Council may receive grants or 
donations from bodies and institutions approved by the Central Government in this behalf.  
(3) The Council shall have its own fund to which shall be credited the sums of mone y referred to in 
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) and the moneys i n the fund shall be applied for — 
(a) meeting the pay and allowances of the officers and other emp loyees of the Council and other 
administrative expenses of the Council;  
(b) carrying out the function s of the Council under this Act.  
(4) The Council shall prepare, before the commencement of each financial year, a statement of 
programme of its activities during that year as well as a financial estimate in respect thereof.  
(5) A statement prepared under s ub-section ( 4) shall, not later than three months before the 
commencement of each financial year, be submitted for approval to the Central Government.  
(6) The Council shall maintain such a ccounts and prepare the balance -sheet in such form as may, in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
(7) The accounts of the Council shall be audited in such manner and at such times as may, in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
1[10A. Power to enter and inspect .—The Director of Inspection and Quality Control or any officer 
of the Central Government authorised by him in writing in this behalf (hereinafter referred to as              
the “authorised officer ”) may enter at any reasonable  time, any premises  which— 
(a) any commodity which has been changed after inspection by any agency referred to in         
sub-section ( 1) of section 7; or  
(b) any  books of account or other documents or things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or 
relevant to, any proceeding under this Act ,  
are suspected to have been kept or concealed, and inspect such commodity, books of account, other 
documents or things and may take such notes or extracts from such books of account or, other documents 
as he may think fit.  
10B.  Power to search .—If the authorised officer  has any reason to believe that — 
(a) any commodity which has been changed after inspection b y any agency referred to            
sub-section ( 1) of section 7; or  
(b) any books of account or other documents or things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or 
relevant to, any proceeding under this Act,  
are secreted in any place, he may enter into and search  such place or premises for such commodity, books 
of account, other documents or things.  
10C. Power to seize commodities, etc. —(1) If the authorised officer has any reason to believe that 
any commodity is liable to confiscation under this Act, he may seize  such commodity together with the 
package, covering or receptacle, if any, in which such commodity is found and where such commodity is 
found to have been mixed with any other goods or materials, he may seize such commodity together with 
the goods or mater ials with which it is so mixed:  
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such commodity, the authorised officer may 
serve on the owner of the commodity an order that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with, 
the commodity except  with the previous permission of such authorised officer.  
(2) Where any commodity is seized under sub -section ( 1) and no notice in respect thereof is given 
under section 10L within six months of the seizure of such commodity, it shall be returned to the pe rson 
from whose possession it was seized:  
                                                           
1. Ins by Act 40 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984 ).  
 6 
 Provided  that the aforesaid period of six months may, on sufficient cause being shown, be extended 
by the Director of Inspection and Quality Control by a further period not exceeding six months.  
(3) The authorised  officer may seize any documents or things which, in his opinion will be useful for, 
or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act.  
(4) The person from whose custody any documents are seized under sub -section ( 3) shall be entitled 
to make copies thereof or  take extracts there from in the presence of the authorised officer.  
(5) If any person legally entitled to the documents or things seized under sub -section ( 3) objects, for 
any reason, to the retention by the authorised officer of the documents or things, he may make an 
application to the Central Government staling therein the reasons for such objection and requesting for the 
return of the documents or things.  
(6) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 5), the Central Government may, after giving t he 
applicant an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it may think fit.  
(7) Where any document — 
(a) is produced or furnished by any person or has been seized from the custody or control of any 
person under this Act or any other law for the time be ing in force; or  
(b) has  been received from any place outside India (duly authenticated by such authority or 
person and in such manner as may be prescribed) in the course of the investigation of any offence 
alleged to have been committed by any person against this Act ,  
and such document is tendered in evidence against the person by whom it is produced or from whom it 
was seized or against such person and any other person who is jointly tried, or proceeded against, with 
him, the Court, or, as the case may be, the adjudicating auth ority shall, notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other l aw for the time being in force, — 
(i) presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the signature and every other part of such 
document which purports to be in the handwriting of a ny parti cular person or which the c ourt or 
the adjudicating authority may reasonably assume to have been signed by, or to be in the 
handwriting of, any particul ar person, is under that person’ s handwriting, and, in the case of a 
document executed or attested, it was executed or attested by the person by whom it purports to 
have been so executed or attested;  
(ii) admit the document in evidence notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such 
document is otherwise admissible in evidence.  
10D.  Power to stop and seize conveyances .—Any authorised officer may, if he has any reason to 
suspect that any conveyance or animal is being, or is about to be, used for the transportation of any 
commodity which is liable to confiscation under this Act and that by su ch transportation any provision of 
this Act has been, is being or is about to be, contravened at anytime, stop such conveyance or animal or, 
in the case of an aircraft, compel it to land, and  
(a) rummage and search the conveyance or any part thereof,  
(b) examine and search any goods or materials in the conveyance or on the animal,  
(c) if it becomes necessary to stop any conveyance or animal, he may use all lawful means for 
stopping it and where such means fail, the conveyance or animal may be fired upon,  
and where he is satisfied that it is necessary so to do prevent the contravention of any provision of this 
Act, he may seize such conveyance or animal.  
Explanation. —Any reference in this section to a conveyance shall, unless the context otherwise 
requires, be construed as including a reference to an aircraft, vehicle or vessel.   
10E. Search and seizure to be made in accor dance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 .—The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this Act.  7 
 10F. Confiscation .—Any commodity in respect of which — 
(a) a certificate has been obtained from an agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 7 
fraudulently or  by misrepresentation, or  
(b) any provision of this Act has been, is being, or is attempted to be, contravened, shall, together 
with any package, covering or receptacle in which such commodity is found, be liable to confiscation 
and, where such commodity i s so mixed with any other goods or materials that it cannot be readily 
separated, such other goods or materials shall also be liable to confiscation:  
Provided  that where it is established to the satisfaction of the adjudicating authority that any 
commodity , which is liable to confiscation under this Act, belongs to a person other than the person who 
has, by any act or omission, rendered it liable to confiscation, and such act or omission was without the 
knowledge or connivance of the person to whom it belon gs, such commodity shall not be ordered to be 
confiscated; but such other action as is authorised by this Act may be taken against the person who has, 
by such act or omission, rendered such commodity liable to confiscation.  
10G. Confiscation of conveyance .—Any conveyance or animal which has been, is being, or is 
attempted to be, used for the transport of any commodity which is liable to confiscation under this Act, 
shall be liable to confiscation unless the owner of the conveyance or animal proves that it w as, is being, or 
is about to be, so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and 
the person in charge of the conveyance or animal and that each of them had taken all reasonab le 
precautions against such use : 
Provided  that in the case of a conveyance or animal used for the transport of goods or passengers for 
hire, the owner of the conveyance or animal shall be given an option to pay, in lieu of confiscation of the 
conveyance or animal, a fine not exceeding the value o f the commodity which has been, is being, or is 
attempted to be, transported by such conveyance or animal . 
10H. Option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation .—Whenever confiscation of any commodity is 
authorised by this Act, the officer adjudging it shall, wi thout prejudice to the provisions of the proviso to 
section 10G, give to the owner of the commodity an option to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine not 
exceeding the value of the commodity.  
10-I. Liability to penalty .—Any person, — 
(a) who, in relation to any commodity, does or omits to do any act which act or omission would 
render such commodity liable to confiscation under this Act, or abets the doing or omission of such 
an act; or  
(b) who acquires possession of or is in any way concerned in carrying, removing, depositing, 
keeping, concealing, selling or purchasing, or in any manner dealing with, any commodity which he 
knows or has reason to believe is liable to confiscation under this Act,  
shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five times the valu e of the commodity or five thousand rupees, 
whichever is more, whether or not such commodity has been confiscated or is available for confiscation.  
10J. Confiscation or penalty not to interfere with other punishments .—No confiscation made or 
penalty impose d under the foregoing provisions of this Act shall prevent the infliction of any other 
punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under the provisions of this Act or under any 
other law for the time being in force.  
10K. Adjudication .—Any confiscation may be adjudged or penalty may be imposed under this Act 
by the Director of Inspection and Quality Control, or, where he so directs, by a general or special order, 
by any officer subordinate to him.  
10L. Giving of opportunity to the owner of goods etc. —No order of adjudication of confiscation or 
imposing a penalty shall be made unless the owner of the commodity, conveyance or animal or other 
person concern ed is given a notice in writing — 
(a) informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed  to confiscate such commodity, 
conveyance or animal or to impose a penalty ; 8 
 (b) giving him a reasonable opportunity of making a representation in writing within such 
reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the confiscation or imposition o f penalty 
mentioned therein, and, if he so desires, of being heard in the matter.  
10M . Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order made under this Act may prefer 
an appeal, — 
(a) where  the decision or order has been made by the Director of Inspection and Quality Control, 
to the Central Government;  
(b) where  the decision or order has been made by any officer subordinate to the Director of 
Inspection and Quality Control, to the Director of Inspection and Quality Control.  
within a period of forty -five days from the date on which the decision or order is served  on such person:  
Provided that the appellate authority may if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the aforesaid period of forty -five days, allow such 
appeal to be preferred within a fu rther period of forty -five days:   
Provided further that in the case of an appeal against an order imposing a penalty, no such appeal 
shall be entertained unless the amount of the penalty has b een deposited by the appellant:  
Provided also that where the appella te authority is of the opinion that the deposit to be made will 
cause undue hardship to the appellant, it may at its discretion, dispense with such deposit either 
unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may impose.  
(2) The appellate authority m ay, after giving to the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
if he so desires, and after making such further inquiries, if any, as it may consider necessary, pass such 
orders as it thinks fit, confirming modifying or reversing the decision or  order appealed against or may 
send back the case, with such directions as it may think fit, for afresh adjudication or decision, as the case 
may be, after taking ad ditional evidence, if necessary:  
Provided  that an order enhancing or imposing a penalty or confiscating commodity of a greater value 
shall not be made under this section unless the appellant has had an opportunity of making a 
representation and, if he so desires, of being heard, in his defence.  
10N.  Powers of revision .—The Central Government may , on its own motion or otherwise, call for 
and examine the records of any proceeding in which an order of adjudication of confiscation or imposing 
any penalty has been made by any officer under this Act and against which no appeal has been preferred, 
for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such order or decision and 
pass such orders thereon as it may think fit:  
Provided  that no decision or order shall be varied under this section so as to prejudicially affect  any 
person unless such person — 
(a) has, within a period of two years from the date of such decision or order, received a notice to 
show cause why such decision or order shall not be varied, and  
(b) has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a represent ation and, if he so desires, of 
being heard in his defence.  
10-O. Powers of adjudicating and other authorities .—(1) Every authority making any adjudication 
or hearing any appeal or exercising any powers of revision under this Act shall have all the powers of a 
civil c ourt under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) a summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  9 
 (2) Every authority making any adjudication or hearing any appeal or exercising any powers of 
revision under this Act shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of sections 345  and 346 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(3) Every authority making any adjudication or hearing any appeal o r exercising any powers of 
revision under this Act shall have the power to make such orders of an interim nature as it may think fit 
and may also, for sufficient cause, order the stay of operation of any decision or order.  
10P. Continuance of proceedings i n the event of death or insolvency .—(1) Where a penalty has 
been imposed by the adjudicating authority and —  
(a) no appeal against the order imposing such penalty has been preferred to the Appellate 
authority and the person entitled to file such appeal die s or is adjudicated an insolvent before the 
expiry of the period within which the appeal can be preferred; or  
(b) an appeal has been preferred to the Appellate Authority against the order imposing such 
penalty but the appellant dies or is adjudicated an in solvent during the pendency of the appeal,  
then, it shall be lawful for the legal representatives, of such person or the Official Assignee or the Official 
Receiver, as the case may be, to prefer an appeal to the appellate authority or, as the case may be,  to 
continue the appeal before the Appellate authority, in place of such person and the provisions of section 
10M shall, so far as may be, apply or continue to apply to such appeal.  
(2) The powers of the Official Assignee or the Official Receiver under sub-section ( 1) shall be 
exercised by him subject to the provisions of the Presidency -towns Insolvency Act, 1909  (3 of 1909) , or 
the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920  (5 of 1920) , as the case may be. ] 
11. Penalty .—(1) If any person contravenes any order unde r clause ( d) of section 6, or fraudulently 
obtains a certificate under section 7, or fraudulently affixes or applies any such mark or seal as is referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) of section 8, he shall, on conviction, be punishable — 
(i) for the first offence,  with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both;  
(ii) for the second or subsequent three offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to 1[three years] and also with  fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and in the absence of 
special and adequate reasons to be me ntioned in the judgment of the c ourt, such imprisonment shall 
not be less than three months.  
(2) Any person who attempts to commit or abets the commission of an offence punishable under     
sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to have committed such offence.  
(3) If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of any other 
provision of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder, he shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees.  
2[11A. Penalty for contravention of order made by adjudicating authority or Appellate 
authority .—If any person fails to pay  the penalty imposed by the adjudicating or the Appellate authority 
or fails to comply with any direction or order made, or deemed to have been made, under this Act, he 
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to tw o years, or with 
fine, or with both.  
11B. Offences by officers and employees of agency, etc. —(1) If any officer or employee of the 
Council or of any agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 7, or any surveyor, sampler or employee 
of any testing hou se, referred to in sub -section ( 2) of that section enters into, or acquiesces in, any 
agreement to do, abstains from doing, permits, conceals or connives at, any act or thing whereby any 
provision of this Act is or may. be contravened, he shall, on convict ion, be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,              
or with both.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 1984, s. 6, for “two year” (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 7,  ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  10 
 (2) If any officer searches or authorises  any other officer of the Central Government to search any 
place without having reason to believe that any commodity, books of account or documents or things of 
the nature referred to in section 10B  are secreted in that place, he shall, on conviction, be p unishable with  
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
(3) If any officer or employee of the Council or of any agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 
7, or any su rveyor, sampler or employee of any testing house, referred to sub -section ( 2) of that section, 
except in the discharge in good faith of his duty as such officer or employee or in compliance with any 
requisition made under any law for the time being in forc e, discloses any particulars learnt by him in his 
official capacity in respect of any commodity, he shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
11C. Correction of clerical or arithmetical mistakes .—Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any 
decision or order, or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be 
corrected by the authority by which the decision or order was made either on its own motion or on the 
application of the aggrieved person:  
Provided  that where any correction proposed to be made under this section will have the effect of 
prejudicially affecting any person, no such correction shall be made  except after giving to that person a 
reasonable opportunity of making a representation in the matter and no such correction shall be made 
after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on which s uch decision or order was made. ] 
12. Offences by co mpanies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and                      
punished accordingly : 
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that th e offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and i t is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer sha ll also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of         
individuals;   and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
13. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the dir ection, be exercisable also by — 
(a) the Council;  
(b) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or such State Government or 
such officer or authority s ubordinate to a State Government as may be specified in the direction.  
14. Procedure for prosecution .—No prosecution for an offence punishable under this Act shall be 
instituted except by or with the consent of an officer authorised by the Central Governme nt by general or 
special order in this behalf.  11 
 15. Officers and employees of agency to be public servants .—All officers and employees of the 
Council or of any agency established or recognised under sub -section ( 1) of section 7  and all surveyors, 
samplers and employees of testing houses, referred to in sub -section ( 2) of that section shall, while acting 
or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any rule or order made there under, be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of  section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
16. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Council or any officer or employee of the Government or the Council or any agency 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 7 for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government for any damage cau sed or likely 
to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or 
any rule or order made there under.  
1[16A.  Suspension, etc., of operation of the provisions of the Act .—(1) If the Central Government 
is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, 
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to a specified extent, the operation of all or 
any of the provisions of this Act in  respect of such notified commodity or commodities generally or in 
respect of any area and for such period as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has, under sub -section ( 1), been suspended or 
relaxed, such suspension or relaxation may, at any time be removed by the Central Government by a      
like notification.  
(3) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued , 
before each House of Parliament, while it  is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree  in making any 
modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued, the 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such mod ification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that notification.]  
17. Power to make rule s .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in t he Official Gazette, 
make rules  to carry out the purposes of this Act . 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the trave lling and daily allowances payable to members of the Council, persons co -opted 
under sub-section ( 2) of section 5, and members of specialist committees referred to in sub -section ( 3) 
of that section;  
(b) the functions of the Council and the procedure to be followed by it;  
(c) the appointment of officers and other employees of the Council;  
(d) the procedure to be followed for various types of quality control and inspection;  
(e) the conditions which a testing house, surveyor or sampl er should satisfy for purposes of 
approval by the Central Government;  
(f) the fees chargeable for purposes of e xamination and issue of certificates under  section  7; 
2[(ff) the manner in which, and the procedure subject to which,  any certificate issued                 
under sub-section ( 3) of section 7 shall be amended, suspended or cancelled; ] 
(g) the fi ling of appeals under section 7 and the fees payable therefore;  
2[(gg) the authority or person by which or by whom, and the manner in which , any document 
received from a place outsid e India shall be authenticated; ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1 984, s. 8 (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  
2. Ins. by  s. 9, ibid, (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  12 
 (h) the manner in which the accounts of the Council shall be maintained and audited;  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session  1[immediately following the session] or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so howev er 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.  
18. Act to over -ride other enactments .—As from the date on which a commodity is notified under 
clause ( a) of section 6, the provisions of this Act or anything done or any action taken there under shall 
have effect in relation to that commodity notwithstanding any provisions (relating to quality control and 
inspection prior to the export of such commodity ) contained in any enact ment other than this Act or in 
any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 1984, s. 9, for “immediately following the session”,  (w.e.f. 2 -7-1984).  
 
--------------------------The Government of Union Territories Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
 PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS   
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions and interpretation.  
  PART II  
 LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLIES  
3. Legislative Assemblies for Union territories and their composition.  
4. Qualification for membership of Legislative Assembly.  
5. Duration of Legislative Assemblies.  
6. Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.  
7. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legis lative Assembly.  
8. Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from  office is under  
    consideration.  
9. Right of Administrator to address and send messages to Legislative Assembly.  
10. Rights of Ministers as respects Legi slative Assembly.  
11. Oath or affirmation by members.  
12. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.  
13. Vacation of seats.  
14. Disqualifications for membership.  
14A. Disqualification on ground of defection for being  a member.  
15. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or when not qualified or when        
disqualified.  
16. Powers, privileges, etc., of members.  
17. Salaries and allowances of members.  
18. Extent of legislative power.  
19.  Exemp tion of property of the Union from taxation.  
20. Restrictions o r laws passed by Legislative Assembly with respect to certain matters.  
21. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by Legislative Assembly.  
22. Sanction of the Administ rator  required for certain legi slative proposals.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
  23. Special provisions as to financial Bills.  
  24. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.  
  25. Assent to Bills.  
25A. Bills reserved for consideration.  
  26. Requirements as to sanction s and recommendations  to be regarded as matters of procedure  only.  
  27. Annual financial statement.  
  28. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates.  
  29. Appropriation Bills.  
  30. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.  
  31. Votes on account.  
  32. Authorisa tion of expenditure pending its sanction by Leg islative Assembly.  
  33.  Rules of  procedure.  
  34. Official langua ge or languages of Union territor y and language or languages to be used in    
Legislativ e Assembly  thereof.  
  35. Lang uage to be  used f or Acts, Bills, e tc. 
  36. Restriction on discussion in the Legis lative  Assembly . 
  37. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative  Assembly.  
 
PART III 
DELIMITATION  OF CONSTITUENCIES  
38. Definitions.  
39. Assem bly c onstituencies . 
40. Representation of  Pondicherry in the H ouse of the People.  
41. Duties of Delimitation Commission.  
42. Associate members.  
43. Procedure as to delimitation . 
43A. Special provision for delimitation of constituencies of Mizoram Legislative Assembly.  
43B. Re presentation of Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the People.  
      43C. Special provisions for delimitation of parliamentary constituencies in Arunachal Pradesh and 
constituencies of Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly.  
 3 
 SECTIONS  
43D. Special provision  for determination of constituencies in the Legislative Assembly of Goa, 
Daman and Diu for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.  
43E. Special provisions as to readjustment of territorial constituencies.   
43F. Special provision as to readjustment of territ orial constituencies on the basis of 2001 census .  
PART IV  
COUNCIL  OF MINISTERS  
44. Council of Ministers.  
45. Other provisions as to M inisters.  
46. Conduct of business.  
PART V  
MISCELLANEOUS  AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
47. Consolidated Fund of the Union territory.  
47A. Public Account of the Union territory and moneys credited to it.  
48. Contingency Fund of the Union territory.  
48A. Borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory.  
48B. Form of accounts of the Union territory.  
49. Audit reports.  
50. Relation of Administrator and his Ministers to President.  
51. Provision in case of failure of constitutional machin ery. 
52. Authorisation of expenditure by President.  
53. Provisions for election to Parliament from Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry.  
54. Transitional provisions for administration of justice in certain areas in the Union territory of  
Mizoram.  
54A. Provision as to provisional Legislative Assembly of Arunachal Pradesh.  
55. Contracts and suits.  
56. Power of President to r emove difficulties.  
57. Am endm ent to certain enactments.  
58. Repeal and savings.  
    THE FIRST S CHEDUL E. 
    THE SECOND SCHED ULE . 4 
  
 
 
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1963  
[10th May , 1963.]  
An Act to provide for Legislative Assemblies and Councils of Ministers for certain Union 
territories and for certain other matters.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows:―   
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
                                                           
1. 13-5-1963, vide notificatio n No. G.S.R. 814, dated 13 -5-1963 , in respect of Part I,  sections 3, 4 and 14 of Part II, Part III, 
sections 53, 56 and 57 of Part V and First and Second Schedules  as applicable to  the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu , 
see Gazette of India , Extraordinary, P art II, Sec tion 3(i). 
20-12-1963 , vide notificatio n. No. G.S.R 1922 , dated 16-12-1963 , in respect of remaining provisions of the Act applicable to  
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, see Gazette of India, Ext raordinar y, Part II, Section 3(i). 
17-2-1972 , vide notificatio n No. G.S.R. 81(E) , dated 16 -2-1972 , in respect of s ections 1, 2, 3, 4, 14, 38, 43A and 56 of the Act 
shall come into force in the Unio n territory of Mizoram, see Gazette of India, Ext raordinary , Part II, Sec tion 3(i). 
 3-5-1972, vide notificatio n No. G.S .R. 269(E), dated 30 -4-1972 , in respect of a ll the provisions of the Act, other than those 
which have already come into force in the Union territory of Mizoram, shall, so far as they are applicable, come into  force in 
that Union territory, see Gazette  of India, Ext raordinar y, Part II, Sec tion 3(i). 
13-5-1963 , vide notification. No. G.S.R. 815, dated 13 -5-1963 , in respect of Part I, sections 53, 56 and 57 of Part V and the 
Second Schedule in the Union territory  of Pondicherry , see Gazette  of India, Ext raordinar y, Part II, Sec tion 3(i). 
 1-7-1963 , vide notificatio n No . G.S.R. 1025, dated 15 -6-1963,  for the remaining provisions came into force in the Union 
territory of Pondicherry , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, P art II, Sec tion 3(i). 
1-7-1963 , vide notification No. S.O. 1660, dated 14 -6-1963 , in respect of all the provisions in the Union territories of Himachal 
Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura, and so much of the provisions as apply to the Union territory of Delhi, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, P art II, Section 3(ii). 
1-7-1963, vide notificatio n No . G.S.R. 1025, dated 15 -6-1963 , in respect of the  provisions as apply to the Union territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, P art II, Sec tion 3(i). 
  
 5 
  1[Provided that it shall come into force in the Union ter ritory of Mizoram on such date, being a date not 
earlier than the date of commencement of the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1971 
(83 of 1971), as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:]  
 2[Provided  further that it shall come into force in the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh on such 
date, being a date not earlier than the date of commencement of the Government of Union Territories 
(Amendment) Act, 1975 (29 of 1975), as the Central Government may , by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint:]  
3[Provided also that, subject to the preceding provisos,] different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act and for different Union territories and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.   
2. Definitions and interpretation .―(1) In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires,―  
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator  of 4[the Union territory] appointed by the President 
under artcle 239;  
(b) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) “assembly constituency ” means a constituency provided under this Act for the purpose of 
elections to the Legislative Assembly of 4[the Union territory] ;  
(d) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
article 324;  
(e) “Judicial Commissioner ” includes an Additional Judicial Commissioner;  
(f) “scheduled castes ” in relation to 4[the Union territory] mean s such castes, races or tribes or 
parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be scheduled 
castes in relation to that Union territory;  
(g) “scheduled tribes ” in relation to 4[the Union territory ] mean s such tribes or tribal communities 
or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under article 342 to be 
scheduled tribes in re lation to that Union territory;  
5[(h) “Union territory ” means the Union territory of 6[Pudu cherry ].  
(2) Any reference in this Act to laws made by Parliament shall be construed as including a reference 
to Ordinances promulgated by the President under article 123 and a reference to Regulations made by the 
President under article 240.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1972).  
2. Ins. by Act  29 of 1975, s. 2  (w.e.f. 15 -8-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Provided further that” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 65, ibid., for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
6. Subs. by Act 44 of 2006, s. 7, for “Pondicherry” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2006).  6 
 PART II  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES  
3. Legislative Assemblies for Union territories and their composition .―(1) There shall be a 
Legislative Assembly for each Union territory.  
1[(2) The total number of seats i n the Legislative Assembly of 2[the Union territory] to be fi lled by 
persons chosen by direct election shall be thirty.]  
(3) The Central Government may nominate not more than three persons, not being persons in the 
service of Government, to be members of the Legislative Assembly of 2[the Union territory].  
3[(4) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory.]  
(5) The number of seats reserved for the scheduled castes or the scheduled tribes  in the Legislative 
Assembly of 2[the Union territory] under sub -section (4) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same 
proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the scheduled castes in the 
Union territory or of the scheduled tribes in the Union territory, as the case may be, in respect of w hich 
seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the Union territory.  
4[Explanation .―In this sub -section, the expression “population ” means the population as ascertained 
at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been publ ished :  
Provided that the reference in this Explanation  to the last preceding census of which the relevant 
figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 5[2026]  
5[2026]  have been published, be construed as a reference to the 6[2001]  census.]  
7[(6) Notwithstanding anything in sub -section ( 4), the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes in 
in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall cease to have effect on the same date on which 
the reservatio n of seats for the Scheduled Castes in the House of the People shall cease to have effect 
under article 334:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall affect any representation in the Legislative Assembly 
of the Union territory until the dissolution  of the then existing Assembly.]  
4. Qualification for membership of Legislative Assembly .―A person shall not be qualified to be 
chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of 2[the Union territory] unless he — 
(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person authorised in that behalf by 
the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the 
First Schedule;  
(b) is not less than twenty -five years of age; and  
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or under any law.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the State of Himachal Pradesh (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1973, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 25 -1-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 , for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 65, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
4. The Explanation  ins. by Act 19 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -5-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 19 of 2005, s. 2, for “ 2000” (w.e.f. 21 -5-2005).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “1971”(w.e.f. 21 -5-2005).  
7. Subs. by  Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987) . 7 
 5. Duration of Legislative Assemblies .―The Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory], unless 
sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years fro m the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer, 
and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolu tion of the Assembly:  
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency issued under clause (1) of 
article 352 is in operation, be extended by the President by order for a period not exceeding one year at a 
time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to 
operate.  
6. Sessions of Legislative Assembly, pr orogation and dissolution .―(1) The Administrator shall, 
from time to time, summon the Legislative Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but 
six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed fo r its first 
sitting in the next session.  
(2) The Administrator may, from time to time, ―  
(a) prorogue the Assembly;  
(b) dissolve the Assembly.  
7.  Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly .―(1) Every Legislative Assembly shall, 
as soon as may be, choose two members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall 
choose another membe r to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.  
(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of an Assembly — 
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;  
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addresse d, if such member is the Speaker, to the 
Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office;  
(c) may  be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembly passed by a majority of all 
the then members of the Assembly:  
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause ( c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days ’ 
notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:  
Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office until 
immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution.  
(3) While the office of Speaker is vacan t, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy 
Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly as may be 
determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.  
(4) During the absence of the Speaker f rom any sitting of the Assembly, the Deputy Speaker, or, if he 
is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, if no such 
person is present, such other person as may be determined by the Assembly, shall act a s Speaker.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 , for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  8 
 (5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly such 
salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory 
by law and, until provision in that behalf is  so made, such salaries and allowances as the Administrator 
may, with the approval of the President, by order determine.  
8. Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is 
under consideration .―(1) At any sitting o f the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the 
removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution for the 
removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker, s hall not, 
though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 7 shall apply in relation to 
every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the case may be, the 
Deputy Speaker is absent.  
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the 
Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office is under consideration in the 
Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in sectio n 12, be entitled to vote only in the first instance 
on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an equality of 
votes.  
9. Right of Administrator to address and send messages to Legislative Assembly .―(1) The 
Admi nistrator may address the Legislative Assembly and may for that purpose require the attendance of 
members.  
(2) The Administrator may also send messages to the Assembly whether with respect to a Bill then 
pending in the Assembly or otherwise, and when a me ssage is so sent, the Assembly shall with all 
convenient dispatch consider any matter required by the message to be taken into consideration.  
10. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly .― Every Minister shall have the right to 
speak in, and ot herwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, 
and to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the Legislative 
Assembly of which he may be named a member, but shall not by vi rtue of this section be entitled to vote.  
11. Oath or affirmation by members .― Every member o f the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union 
territory] shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the Administrator, or some person 
appointed in that b ehalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the 
First Schedule.  
12. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum. ―(1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions at any sitting of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the 
Union territory] shall  be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting other than 
the Speaker or person acting as such.   
(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance but shall have and exercise 
a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  9 
 (3) The Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] shall have power to act notwithstanding any 
vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union 
territory] shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not 
entitled so to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.  
(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] shall be 
one-third of the total number of members of the Assembly.  
(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Un ion territory] there is no 
quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the Assembly or to 
suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.  
13. Vacation of seats .―(1) No person shall be a member both of Parliament an d of the Legislative 
Assembly of 1[the Union territory] and if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such 
Assembly, then, at the expiration of such period as may be specified in the rules made by the President, 
that person ’s seat in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned his seat in the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.  
(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] — 
(a) becomes subject to any disqualification men tioned in 2[section 14 or section 14A] for 
membership of the Assembly, or  
(b) resigns his seat by writing under his  hand addressed to the Speaker,  
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.  
(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the union territory] is 
without permission of the Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assemb ly may declare his seat 
vacant:  
Provided that in computing the said period of s ixty days, no account shall be taken of any period 
during which the Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four consecutive days.  
14. Disqualifications for membership .― (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and 
for being, a m ember of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] — 
 (a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State 
or the Government of  3[the Union territory] other than an office declared by law made by Parliament 
or by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory not to disqualify its holder; or  
(b) if he is for the time being disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either 
House of Parliament under the provisions of sub -clause ( b), sub -clause ( c) or sub -clause ( d) of clause 
(1) of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance of that article.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit under the 
Government of India or the Government  of any State or the Government of 3[the Union territory] by 
reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State or Union territory.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 , for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 1985, s. 2, for “section 14” ( w.e.f. 29 -3-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 , for “any Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  10 
  
(3) If any question arises as to whether a member o f the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union 
territo ry] has become disqualified for being such a member under the provisio ns of sub -section ( 1), the 
question shall be referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.  
(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Presiden t shall obtain the opinion of the 
Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.   
2[14A. Disqualification on ground of defection for being a member .―The provisions of the Tenth 
Schedule to the Constitution shall, subject to the necessary modifications (including modifications for 
construing references therein to the Legislative Assembly of a State, article 188, article 194 and article 
212 as references , respectively, to the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory], section 11, section 
16 and section 37 of this Act), apply to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
1[the Union territory] as they apply to and in relation to the  members of the Legislative Assembly of a 
State, and accordingly, ― 
(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed to form part of this Act; and  
(b) a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union 
territory] if he is so disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.]  
15. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or when not qualified or 
when disqualified .―If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assem bly of 1[the Union 
territory] before he has complied with the requirements of section 11 or when he knows that he is not 
qualified or that he is disqualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on 
which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.  
16. Powers, privileges, etc., of members. ―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules 
and standing orders regulating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly, ther e shall be freedom of 
speech  in the Legislative Assembly of 3[the Union territory].  
(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] shall be liable to any 
proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in  the Assembly or any 
committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication  by or under the authority 
of such Assembly of any report,  paper, votes or proceedings.   
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of t he Legislative Assembly of 1[the 
Union territory] and of the members and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the time being 
enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees.  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall apply in relation to persons who by virtue of 
this Act have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative 
Assembly of 1[the Union territory] or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of th at 
Assembly.  
 17. Salaries and allowances of members .―Members of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union 
territory] shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined 
by the Legislative Assembly of the Union te rritory by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 , for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 24 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29 -3-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 for “every Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  11 
 such salaries and allowances as the Administrator may, with the approval of the President, by order 
determine.   
18. Extent of legislative power .―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act , the Legislative Assembly 
of 1[the Union territory] may make laws for the whole or any part of the Union territory with respect to 
any of the matters enumerated in the State List or the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution in so far  as any such matter is applicable in relation to Union territories.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall derogate from the powers conferred on Parliament by the 
Constitution to make laws w ith respect to any matter for 1[the Union territory] or any part thereof.  
19. Exemption of property of the Union from taxation .―The property of the Union shall, save in 
so far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any 
law made by the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Unio n territory] or by or un der any other law in force in 
1[the Union territory]:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides,  prevent any 
authority within 1[the Union territory] from levying any tax on any property  of the Union to which such 
property was immediately before the commencement of the Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long 
as that tax continues to be levied in that Union territory.  
20. Restrictions o r laws passed by Legislative Assembly with r espect to certain matters .―2[1] 
The provisions of article 286, article 287 and article 288 shall apply in relation to any law passed by the 
Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] with respect to any of the matters referred to in those 
articles as t hey apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with respect to those 
matters.  
3[(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to any law 
passed by the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] with respect to any of the matters referred to 
in that article as they apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with respect to those 
matters.]  
4[21. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by L egislative 
Assembly .―If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] with 
respect to any matter enumerated in the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution is 
repugnant to any provision of a  law made by Par liament with respect to that matter, whether passed 
before or after the law made by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, or, if any provision of a 
law made by the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] with respect to any matter enumera ted in 
the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution is repugnant to any provision of any 
earlier law, other than a law made by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, with respect to that 
matter, then, in either case, the law ma de by Parliament, or, as the case may be, such earlier law shall 
prevail and the law made by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall, to the extent of the 
repugnancy, be void:  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 , for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).    
2. Secton 20 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 83 of 1971, s. 5 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1972).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -2-1972).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 4, for section 21 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1975).  12 
 Provided that if such law made by the Legislative Assembly of the  Union territory has been reserved 
for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, such law shall prevail in that Union 
territory:  
Provided further that nothing in this section shall prevent Parliament from enacting at any time any 
law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so 
made by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.]  
22. Sanction of the administrator required for certain legislative proposals .―No Bill or 
amendme nt shall be introduced into, or moved in, the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] 
without the previous sanction of the Administrator, if such Bill or Amendment makes provision with 
respect to any of the following matters, namely: ―  
(a) constitut ion and organisation of the court of the Judicial Commissioner;  
(b) jurisdiction and powers of the court of the Judicial Commissioner with respect to any of the 
matters in the State List or the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  
23. Special provisions as to financial Bills .―(1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, 
or moved in, the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] except on the recommendation of the 
Administrator, if such Bill or Amendment makes provision  for any of the following matters, namely: ―  
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;  
(b) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be 
undertaken by the Government of the Union  territory;  
(c) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory;  
(d) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the 
Union territory or the increasing of the amount of any such expe nditure;  
2[(e) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory or the 
public account of the Union territory or the custody or issue of such money  or the audit of the account 
of the Union territory] : 
Provided that no recommendation sh all be required under this sub -section for the moving of an 
amendment making provision for the re duction or abolition of any tax.  
(2) A Bill or Amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by 
reason only  that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or 
payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, 
abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of  any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.  
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of 1[the Union territory] shall not be passed by the Legislative Assembly of the Unio n 
territory unless the Administrator has recommended to that Assembly the consideration of the Bill.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 , for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).    
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2001, s. 2, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 10 -5-2006).  13 
  
24. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills .―(1) A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union 
territory] shall not lapse by reason of the prorogati on of the Assembly.  
 (2) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] shall lapse on a 
dissolution of the Assembly.  
 2[25. Assent to Bills .―When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union 
territory], it shall be presented to the Administrator and the Administrator shall declare either that he 
assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration 
of the President:  
Provided th at the Administrator may, as soon as possible after the presentation of the Bill to him for 
assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting that the Assembly will 
reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof,  and, in particular, will consider the desirability of 
introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is so returned, 
the Assembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again with or without 
amendment and presented to the Administrator for assent, the Administrator shall declare either that he 
assents to the Bill or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:  
Provided further that the Administrator shall not assent to, but  shall reserve for the consideration of 
the President, any Bill which, ― 
(a) in the opinion of the Administrator would, if it became law, so derogate from the powers of 
the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court is, by the Constitution, des igned to fill; or  
(b) relates to any of the matters specified in clause (1) of article 31A; or  
(c) the President may, by order, direct to be reserved for his consideration; or  
(d) relates to matters referred to in sub -section ( 5) or section 7 or section  17 or section 34 or  
sub-section ( 6) of section 45 or in entry 1 or entry 2 of the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution:  
Provided also that without prejudice to the provisions of the second proviso, the Administrator shall 
not assent to , but shall reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which has been passed by 
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram and which relates to any area comprised in 
any autonomous district in that Union territory under the Si xth Schedule to the Constitution.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section and section 25A, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money 
Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters specified in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23 or a ny matter incidental to any of those matters and, in either case, there is endorsed thereon 
the certificate of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.   
25A. Bills reserved for consideration .―When a Bill is reserved by an Administrator for the 
consideration of the President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he 
withholds assent therefrom:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory ” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 7, for section 25 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1972).  14 
 Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may d irect the Administrator to return 
the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a message as is mentioned in the first proviso to 
section 25 and, when a Bill is so returned, the Assembly shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of 
six mont hs from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the Assembly with or 
without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration.]   
26. Requirements as to sanction and recommendations to be regarded as ma tters of procedure 
only.―No Act of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory]  and no provision in any such Act, 
shall be invalid by reason only that some previous sanction or recommendation required by this Act was 
not given, if assent to that Act was given 2[by the Administrator, or, on being reserved by the 
Administrator for the consideration of the President, by the President].  
27. Annual financial statement .―(1) The Administrator of each Union territory shall in respect of 
every financial year c ause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, with the 
previous approval of the President, a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Union 
territory for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual financi al statement ”. 
 (2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately — 
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Act as expenditure charged upon the 
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, and   
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund 
of the Union territory;  
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.  
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charge d on the Consolidated Fund of each Union 
territory: ― 
 (a) the emoluments and allowances of the Administrator and other expenditure relating to his 
office as determined by the President by general or special order;  
(b) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the Union territory from the Consolidated 
Fund of India including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure 
connected therewith;  
 (c) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly;  
(d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of a Judicial Commissioner;  
(e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;  
 (f) expenditure  incurred by the Administrator in the discharge of his special responsibility;  
 (g) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by law made by Parliament or by the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory to be so charged.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory ” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 1975, s . 5, for “by the President ” (w.e.f. 15 - 8-1975).  15 
 28. Procedure in Leg islative Assembly with respect to estimates .―(1) So much of the estimates as 
relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of 1[the Union territory] shall not be submitted 
to the vote of the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory], but n othing in this sub -section shall be 
construed as preventing the discussion in the Legislative Assembly of any of those estimates.  
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in the form of 
demands for grants to the  Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent, 
or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount 
specified therein.  
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the  recommendation of the Administrator.  
29. Appropriation Bills .―(1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have been made 
by the Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the Uni on territory of all moneys required to meet — 
(a) the grants so made by the Assembly, and  
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory but not exceeding in 
any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before the Assembly.   
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative Assembly which  will have the 
effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of 
any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory and the decision of the person 
presiding as to whether an amend ment is inadmissible under this sub -section shall be final.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated 
Fund of the Union territory except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the  
provisions of this section.  
30. Supplementary, additional or excess grants .―(1) The Administrator shall — 
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions of section 29 to 
be expended for a particular service for the current f inancial year is found to be insufficient for the 
purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for supplementary or 
additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for 
that year, or  
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of the amount 
granted for that service and for that year,  
cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, with the previous approval of t he 
President, another statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to 
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory with such previous approval a demand for such excess, as 
the case may be.  
(2) The provisions of se ctions 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to any such statement and 
expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for  “a Union territory ” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  16 
 Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or the gr ant in respect of such demand 
as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or 
to a demand for a grant and the law to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the 
Consolidated  Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or grant.  
31. Votes on account .―(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the 
Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] shall have power to make any grant in advance in  respe ct 
of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of the procedure 
prescribed in section 28 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the 
provisions of section 29 in relation to t hat expenditure and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to 
authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory for the 
purposes for which the said grant is made.  
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under 
sub-section ( 1) or to any law to be made under that sub -section as they have effect in relation to the 
making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and  the law 
to be made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union 
territory to meet such expenditure.  
32. Authorisation  of expenditure  pending  its sanction  by Legislative  Assembly .― 
Notwithstanding anything in t he foregoing provisions of this Part, the Administrator may authorise such 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory as he deems necessary for a period of not 
more than six months beginning with the date of the constitution of the Conso lidated Fund of the Union 
territory, pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.  
33. Rules of procedure .―(1) The Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] may make rules for 
regulating, subject to the p rovisions of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:  
Provided that the Administrator shall, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly 
and with the approval of the President, make rules — 
(a) for securing the timely completion of financial business;  
(b) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the Legislative Assembly in 
relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated  
Fund of the Union territory;  
(c) for prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matter which affects the 
discharge of the functions of the Administrator in so far as he is required by this Act to act in his 
discretion.  
(2) Until r ules are made under sub -section ( 1), the rules of procedure and standing orders with respect 
to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh in force immediately before the commencement 
of this Act in 2[the Union territory] shall have effect in r elation to the Legislative Assembly of that Union 
territory subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Administrator :  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory ” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 65, ibid., for “any Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  17 
 1*    *    *    *    * 
34. Official language or languages of Union territory and language or languages to be used in 
Legislative Assembly thereof .―(1) The Legislative Assembly of 2[the Union territory] may by law 
adopt any one or more of the languages in use in the Union territory or Hindi as the official language or 
languages to be used for all or any of t he official purposes of the Union territory:  
Provided that so long as the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Pondicherry does not 
decide otherwise, the French language shall continue to be used as an official language of that Union 
territory f or the same official purposes for which it was being used in that territory immediately before the 
commencement of this Act:  
Provided further that the President may b y order direct — 
(i) that  the official language of the Union shall be adopted for such of the official purposes of the 
Union territory as may be specified in the order;  
(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted throughout the Union territory or such part 
thereof for such  of the official purposes of the Union territory as may be specified in the order, if the 
President is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of the Union territory desires the 
use of that other language for all or any of such purposes.  
(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly of 2[the Union territory] shall be transacted in the 
official language or languages of the Union territory or in Hindi or in English:  
Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or person acting as s uch, as the case may be, 
may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of the languages aforesaid to 
address the Assembly in his mother -tongue.  
35. Language to be used for Acts, Bills, etc .―Notwithstanding anything contained in section  34, 
until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the authoritative texts — 
(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in the Legislative Assembly 
of  2[the Union territory],  
(b) of all Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly of 2[the Union territory], and  
(c) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye -laws issued under any law made by the Legislative 
Assembly of 2[the Union territory],  
shall be in the English language:  
Provided that where the Legislative Assembly of 2[the Union ter ritory] has prescribed any language 
other than the English language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory or in any order, rule, regulation or bye -law issued under any law made by 
the Legislative  Assembly of the Union territory, a translation of the same in the English language 
published under the authority of the Administrator in the Official Gazette shall be deemed to be the 
authoritative text thereof in the English language.  
                                                           
1. The p roviso omitted by Act 69 of 1986, s. 44 (w.e.f. 20 -2-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory ” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  18 
 36. Restriction on discussion in the Legislative Assembly .―No discussion shall take place in the 
Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] with respect to the conduct of any Judicial Commissioner 
or of any judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.  
37. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative Assembly .―(1) The validity of any 
proceedings in the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] shall not be called in question on the 
ground of any alleged irregularity of proced ure.  
(2) No officer or member of the Legislative  Assembly of  1[the Union territory] in whom powers are 
vested by or under this Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order 
in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject t o the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by 
him of those powers.  
PART III  
DELIMITATION  OF CONSTITUENCIES  
38. Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ―  
(a) “associate member ” means a member associated with the Delimitation Commission under 
section 42 2[or with the Election Commission 3[under section 43A or section 43C]];  
(b) “Delimitation Commission ” means the Delimitation Commission  constituted under section 3 
of 4[the Delim itation Act, 2002 (33 of 200 2)];  
5[(bb) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
article 324;]  
(c) “latest census figures ” mean the census figures in 1[the Union territory] ascertained at the 
latest census of w hich the finally published figures are available;  
(d) “parliamentary constituency ” means a constituency provided by law for the purpose of 
elections to the House of the People from 1[the Union territory] including the Union territory of Delhi.  
39. Assembly constituencies .―For the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of 1[the 
Union territory], the Union territory shall be divided into single -member assembly constituencies in 
accordance with the provisions of this Part in such manner that the population of each of the 
constituencies shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Union territory.  
40. Representation of Pondicherry in the House of the People .―There shall be allotted one seat to 
the Union territory of Pondicherry in t he House of the People and that Union territory shall form one 
parliamentary constituency.  
41. Duties of Delimitation Commission .―(1) It shall be the duty of the Delimitation Commission — 
(a) to delimit the assembly constituencies in each Union territory, a nd 
(b) to determine, on the basis of the latest census figures, the number of seats to be reserved for 
the scheduled castes and for the scheduled tribes in the Legislative Assembly of 1[the Union territory] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “ a Union territory” ( w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 9 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 7, for “under section 43A” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 19 of 2005, s. 2, for “the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 (61 of 1962)” (w.e.f. 21 -5-2005). 
5. Ins. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 9 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1972).  19 
 other than the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, and the constituencies in which these seats 
shall be so reserved.  
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Delimitation Commission — 
(a) to readjust, on the basis of the latest census figures, the division of each of the Union 
territories of Delhi, Himach al Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura into parliamentary constituencies, 1[the 
number being 7, 4, 2 and 2];  
(b) to determine the constituency in which the seat shall be reserved for the scheduled castes or 
for the scheduled tribes, as the case may be; and  
(c) to divide the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu into two single -member parliamentary 
constituencies.   
42. Associate members .―(1) For the purpose of assisting the Delimitation Commission in its duties, 
the Delimitation Commission shall  associate with itself ,―  
(a) in respect of the Union territory of Delhi, all the members of the House of the People 
representing that Union territory;  
(b) in respect of each of the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura, all the 
membe rs of the House of the People representing that Union territory and three members of the 
Legislative Assembly of that Union territory to be nominated by the Speaker of the Assembly from 
among the members thereof;  
(c) in respect of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, the two members of the House of the 
People representing that Union territory;  
(d) in respect of the Union territory of Pondicherry, three members of the Legislative Assembly 
of that Union territory to  be nominated by the Speaker of the Assembly from among the members 
thereof.  
(2) The nomination of members of the several Legislative Assemblies under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
made by the respective Speakers thereof as soon as practicable and shall be com municated to the 
Delimitation Commission.  
(3) If owing to death or resignation the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled as 
soon as practicable under and in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section.  
(4) None of the  associate members shall have the right to vote or to sign any decision of the 
Delimitation Commission.  
43. Procedure as to delimitation .―The provisions of sections 7, 9, 10 and 11 of the Delimitation 
Commission Act, 1962 (61 of 1962), shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to the delimitation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies under this Part as they apply in relation to the delimitation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies under that Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of  1966, s. 37, for “the total number thereof remaining the same” (w.e.f. 13 -6- 1966).  20 
 1[43A. Special provision for delimitation of constituencies of Mizoram Legislative 
Assembly .―(1) The provisions of sections 39 to 43 (both inclusive) shall not apply to the delimitation of 
constituencies for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram.  
(2) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute the seats assigned to the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 to single 
member assembly constituencies and delimit them on the ba sis of the latest census figures having regard 
to the provisions of the Constitution and to the following provisions: ― 
 (a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas;  
 (b) in delimiting the constituencies, regard shal l be had to physical features, existing boundaries 
of administrative units, facilities of communication and public convenience.  
(3) For the purpose of assisting in the performance of its functions under sub -section ( 2), the Election 
Commission shall assoc iate with itself as associate members — 
(a) all the persons who, having been elected to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam 
from the Lungleh, Aijal East and Aijal West territorial constituencies, are members of that Assembly 
immediately before th e day appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the North -Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971); and  
(b) such three elected members of the District Council of the Mizo District as the Chairman 
thereof may nominate:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or sign any decision of the 
Election Commission.  
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled, 
if practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3).  
(5) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof in the Official Gazette and 
in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, tog ether with a notice inviting objections 
and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will 
be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it bef ore the date so 
specified;  
(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before 
the date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause 
such order or orders to be publi shed in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or 
orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in any court.  
(6) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, ―  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 10 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1972).    21 
 (a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under sub -section ( 5) or any error arising 
therein from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any such order or orders 
are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such 
order up -to- date.  
(7) Every order made under sub -section ( 5) and every notification issued under sub -section ( 6) shall 
be laid as soon as may be after it is made or issue d before the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory 
of Mizoram.  
(8) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement of this Act in the Union territory of 
Mizoram with a view to delimiting the territorial constituencies of that Union ter ritory for purposes of 
elections to the Legislative Assembly of that Union territory shall, in so far as they are in conformity with 
the foregoing provisions of this section, be deemed to have been done or taken under those provisions as 
if those provision s were in force at the time such things were done or such steps were taken.]   
1[43B. Representation of Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the people .― In the House of the 
People to be constituted after the general election to that House to be held after the  commencement of the 
Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1975 (29 of 1975) and thereafter, there shall be 
allotted two seats to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh and the First Schedule to the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950 (43 o f 1950) shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
43C. Special provisions for delimitation of parliamentary constituencies in Arunachal Pradesh 
and constituencies of Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly .―(1) The provisions of sections 39 to 
43 (both inclusive) shall not apply to the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies in the Union 
territory of Arunachal Pradesh or to the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections to the 
Legislative Assembly of that Union territory.  
(2) The Election Commission shall divide the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh into two single -
member parliamentary constituencies on the basis of the latest census figures.  
(3) The Election Commission shall also, in the manner herein provided, distribute the seats assigned 
to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh under sub -section ( 2) of section 
3 to single -member assembly constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest census  figures 
having regard to the following provisions: ― 
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas;  
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall only within one parliamentary 
constituency;  
(c) in delimiting the constituencies, regard shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries 
of administrative units facilities of communication and public convenience.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 8 (w.e.f . 15-8-1975).  22 
 (4) For the purpose of assisting in the performance of its functions under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), the 
Election Commission shall associate with itself as associate members — 
(a) the member of the House of the People representing the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh;  
(b) such five members of the Legislative Assembly of the Union ter ritory of Arunachal Pradesh 
as the Speaker of that Assembly shall, having regard to the composition of the Legislative Assembly, 
nominate:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or sign any decision of the 
Election Commissi on.  
(5) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled, if 
practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 4).  
(6) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delim itation of constituencies together with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof in the Official Gazette and 
in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objection s 
and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will 
be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified;  
(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before 
the date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause 
such order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or 
orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in any court.  
(7) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistak e in any order made under sub -section ( 6) or any error arising 
therein from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any such order or orders 
are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bring ing such 
order up -to-date.  
(8) Every order made under sub -section ( 6) and every notification issued under sub -section ( 7) shall 
be laid as soon as may be  after it is made or issued before the House of the People  and the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.  
(9) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement of this Act in the Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh with a view to delimiting the territorial constituencies o f that Union territory for 
purposes of elections to the Legislative Assembly of that Union territory shall, in so far as they are in 
conformity with the foregoing provisions of this section, be deemed to have been done or taken under 
those provisions as if  these provisions were in force at the time such things were done or such steps were 
taken.]   23 
 1[43D. Special provision for determination of constituencies in the Legislative Assembly of Goa, 
Daman and Diu for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes .―(1) The Election Commission shall 
determine on the basis of the latest census figures — 
(i) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes in 
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu (hereafter in this section 
referred to as the Legislative Assembly) having regard to the provisions of sub -section ( 5) of section 
3; and  
(ii) the constituencies in which those seats shall be so reserved having regard to the provisions of 
clause ( c), or, as the case may be, clause ( d), of sub -section ( 1) of section 9 of the Delimitation Act 
and without altering the extent of any constituency as delimited by the Delimitation Commission.  
(2) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the determination of the constituencies in which seats shall be 
reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in the Gazette of 
India and in the Official Gazette of the Union territory of Goa , Daman and Diu and also in such other 
manner as the Election Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and 
suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be 
further conside red by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified;  
(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before 
the date so specified, determine by on e or more orders the number of seats to be reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in the Legislative Assembly and 
the constituencies in which those seats shall be so reserved and cause such order or orders to be 
published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and 
Diu; and upon such publication in the Gazette of India, the order or orders shall have the full force of 
law and shall not be called in question in any c ourt and the Second Schedule to the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) and the order made by the Delimitation Commission under section 
9 of the Delimitation Act in relation to the Legislative Assembly shall be deemed to have been 
amended a ccordingly.  
(3) Subject to the provisi ons of sub -section ( 4), the re -adjustment of representation of any territorial 
constituencies in the Legislative Assembly necessitated by any order made by the Election Commission 
under this section, shall apply in re lation to every election to the Legislative Assembly held after the 
publication in the Gazette of India, under sub -section ( 2), of such order.  
(4) Nothing contained in the foregoing sub -sections shall affect the representation in the Legislative 
Assembly existing on the date of publication in the Gazette of India, under sub -section ( 2), of any order 
made by the Election Commission.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 86 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -9-1976).   24 
 (5) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Gazette of India and in 
the Official Gazette of th e Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu — 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under sub -section ( 2) or any error arising 
therein from in advertent slip or omission;   
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any  such order are, or 
is, altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such order 
up-to-date.  
(6) Every order made under sub -section ( 2) and every notification issued under sub -section ( 5) shall 
be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made or issued before the Legislative Assembly.  
Explanation .―In this section, ―  
(a) “Delimitation Act ” means the Delimitation Act, 1972 (76 of 1972);  
(b) “Delimitation Commission ” means the Delimitation Com mission constituted under section 3 
of the Delimitation Act.]  
1[43E. Special provisions  as to readjustment of territorial constituencies .―Notwithstanding 
anything contained in sections 38 to 43D (both inclusive), until the relevant figures for the first ce nsus 
taken after the year 2[2026]  have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust the division of each 
Union territory into territorial constituencies and any reference to the “latest census figures ” in this Part 
shall be construed as a reference to the 3[2001]  census figures.]  
4[43F. Special provision as to readjustment of territorial constituencies on the basis of 2001 
census .―Notwithstanding the publication of orders under sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 10 of the 
Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002) or anything contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) of the said 
section, any readjustment in the division of Union territory into territorial constituencies by the 
Delimitation Commission under the sa id Act, on the basis of 2001 census shall take effect from such date 
as the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, specify and until such 
readjustment takes effect, any election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the b asis of the 
territorial constituencies exi sting before such readjustment.]  
PART IV  
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS  
44. Council of Ministers .―(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers in each Union territory with the 
Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Administrator in the exercise of his functions in relation 
to matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union terr itory has power to make laws 
except in so far as he is required by or under this Act to act in his discretion or by or under any law to 
exercise any judicial or quasi -judicial functions:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 19 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 19  of 2005, s. 4, for “2000” (w.e.f. 21 -5-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “1971” (w.e.f. 21 -5-2005).  
4. Ins. by Act 5 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2005).  25 
 Provided that, in case of difference of opinion between the Administ rator and his Ministers on any 
matter, the Administrator shall refer it to the President for decision and act according to the decision given 
thereon by the President, and pending such decision it shall be competent for the Administrator in any 
case where the matter is in his opinion so urgent that it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to 
take such action or to give such direction in the matter as he deems necessary:  
1*    *    *    *    * 
2*   *   *   *   *  
(3) If and in so far as any special  responsibility of the Administrator is involved under this Act, he 
shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in his discretion.  
(4) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the 
Administrator is by or unde r this Act required to act in his discretion, the decision of the Administrator 
thereon shall be final.  
(5) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects which the 
Administrator is required by any law to exercise any judicial or quasi -judicial functions, the decision of 
the Administrator thereon shall be final.  
(6) The ques tion whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by Ministers to the Administrator 
shall not be inquired into in any court.  
45. Other provisions as to Ministers .―(1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President 
and the other Ministers shall  be appointed by the President on t he advice of the Chief Minister .  
(2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.  
(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory.  
(4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Administrator shall administer to him the oaths of 
office and of secrecy according to the fo rms set out for the purpose in the First Schedule.  
(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.  
(6) The salar ies and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory may from time to time by law determine, and until the Legislative Assembly so determines, shall 
be determined by the Administrator with the approval of the Pre sident.  
46. Conduct of business .―(1) The President shall make rules — 
(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers; and  
(b) for the more convenient transaction of business with the Ministers including the procedure to 
be adopted in the case of a dif ference of opinion between the Administrator and the Council of 
Ministers or a Minister.  
                                                           
1. The second proviso omitted by Act 34 of 1986, s. 41 (w.e.f. 20 -2-1987).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 69 of 1986, s. 44 (w.e.f. 20 -2-1987).  26 
 (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive action of the Administrator, whether taken on 
the advice of his Ministers or otherwise, shall be expressed t o be taken in the name of the Administrator.  
(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Administrator, shall be 
authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the Administrator, and the 
validity of an or der or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground 
that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the Administrator.  
PART V  
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL  PROVISIONS  
47. Consolidated Fund of the Union terr itory .―(1) As from such date  as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues received in 1[the Union 
territory] by the Government of India or the Administrator of the Union territory in relation to any matter 
with respect to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory has power to make laws, and all 
grants made and 2[all loans advance d to the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India and all 
loans raised by the Government of India or the Administrator of the Union territory upon the security of 
the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory] and all moneys received by the Union  territory in 
repayment of loans shall form one Consolidated Fund to be entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the Union 
territory ”.  
(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of 1[the Union territory] shall be appropriated except in 
accordance with, and for the purposes and in the manner provided in, this Act.  
(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of 1[the Union territory], the payment of moneys into such 
Fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom and all other matters connected with or ancillary to those 
matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Administrator with the approval of the President.  
3[47A. Public Account of the Union territory and moneys credited to it .―(1) As from such date 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Ga zette, appoint in this behalf, all other 
public moneys received by or on behalf of the Administrator shall be credited to a Public Account entitled 
“the Public Account of the Union territory ”. 
(2) The custody of public moneys, other than those credited to the Consolidated Fund of the Union 
territory or the Contingency Fund of the Union territory, received by or on behalf of the Administrator, 
their payment into the Public Account of the Union territory and the withdrawal of moneys from such 
account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to the aforesaid matters shall be regulated by 
rules made by the Administrator with the approval of the President. ] 
48. Contingency Fund of the Union territory .―(1) There shall be established a Contingency Fund 
in the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency Fund of the Union territory , into which shall be 
paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory such sums as may, from time to time, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory ” (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2001, s. 3, for “all loans advanced to the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India ” 
 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2006).  
3. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -5-2006).   27 
 be determined by law made by the Legislative As sembly of the Union territory; and the said Fund shall be 
held by the Administrator to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund.  
(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund of the Union territory except for the 
purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory under appropriations made by law.  
(3) The Administrator may make rules regulating all matters connected with or ancillary to the 
custody of, the payment of moneys into, and the withdrawal of moneys from, the Contingency Fund of 
the Union territory.  
1[48A. Borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of  the Union Territory .―(1) The 
executive power of the Union extends to borrowing up on the security of the Consolidated Fund of the 
Union territory within such limits, if any, as may, from time to time, be fixed by Parliament by law and to 
the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed:  
Provided that the powers ex ercisable by the Government of India under this sub -section shall also be 
exercisable by the Administrator subject to such conditions, if any, as the Government of India may think 
fit to impose.  
(2) Any sums required for the purpose of invoking a guarantee  shall be charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of the Union territory.  
48B. Form of accounts of the Union territory .―The accounts of the Union territory shall be kept in 
such form as the Administrator may, after obtaining advice of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India and with the approval of the  President, prescribe by rules.]  
49. Audit reports .―The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India relating to the 
accounts of 2[the Union territory] for any period subsequent to the date re ferred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 47 shall be submitted to the Administrator who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory.  
50. Relation of Administrator and his Ministers to President .― Notwithstanding anythi ng in this 
Act, the Administrator and his Council of Ministers shall be under the general control of, and comply 
with such particular directions, if any, as may from time to time be given by, the President  
51. Provision in case of failure of constitutional  machinery .―If the President, on receipt of a 
report from the Administrator of 2[the Union territ ory] or otherwise, is satisfied,―   
(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration of the Union territory cannot be carried 
on in accordance with t he provisions of this Act, or  
(b) that for the proper administration of the Union territory it is necessary or expedient so to do,  
the President may, by order, suspend the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act for such 
period as he thinks  fit and make such incidental and consequential provisions as may appear to him to be 
necessary or expedient for administering the Union territory in accordance with the provisions of article 
239. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2001, s. 5 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory ” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).   28 
 1[52. Authorisation of expenditure by President .―Where the Legislative Assembly of 2[the Union 
territory] is dissolved, or its functioning as such Assembly remains suspended, on account of an order 
under section 51, it shall be competent for the President to authorise when the House of the People is not 
in session  expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of that Union territory pending the sanction of such 
expenditure by P arliament.]  
53. Provisions for election to Parl iament from Goa, Daman and Diu , and Pondicherry .―(1) As 
soon as practicable after the commencement of this Act, elections shall be held in accordance with law ―  
(a) to fill the seats in the House of the People allotted to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and 
Diu; and  
(b) to fill the seat in the House of the People and the seat in the Council of States  allotted to the 
Union territory of Pondicherry.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the members 
nominated to represent the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu in the House of the People shall 
continue to  be such until the election of the members to fill the two seats in that House allotted to that 
Union territory:  
Provided that where the dates of election of the members are different, the members so nominated 
shall cease to be members of that House on th e earlier of those two dates.  
Explanation .―In this sub -section, the expression “date of election ” has the same meaning as in 
section 67A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951).  
3[54. Transitional provisions for administration of justi ce in certain areas in the Union territory 
of Mizoram .―On and from the commencement of this Act in the Union territory of Mizoram and until 
other provisions in this behalf are made by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, the 
administration  of justice in those areas of that Union territory which are not comprised in any autonomous 
district under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall be carried on, so far as may be, in accordance 
with the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5 of that Schedu le, as if those areas were comprised in an 
autonomous district under that Schedule and the provisions of the said paragraphs were in force in those 
areas and for this purpose, ― 
(i) all powers and functions of a District Council under the provisions of the said paragraph 4 
shall be exercised and discharged by the Administrator or any officer appointed by him in this behalf;  
(ii) the said paragraph 5 shall have effect as if references to the District Council, the Regional 
Council and the courts constituted b y the District Council, by whatever form of words, had been 
omitted therefrom; and  
(iii) references to Governor in the said paragraphs 4 and 5 shall be construed as references to the 
Administrator.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1979).   
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
3. Subs. b y Act 83 of 1971, s. 12, for section 54 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1972).  29 
 1[54A. Provision as to provisional Legislative Assembly of Arunachal Pradesh .―(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act (including provisions relating to the strength of the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh), until the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory of Aruna chal Pradesh has been duly constituted and summoned to meet for the first 
session under and in accordance with the provisions of this Act, there shall be a provisional Legislative 
Assembly which shall consist of members, being those persons referred to in clauses ( b), (c) and ( d) of 
section 3 of the North -East Frontier Agency (Administration) Supplementary Regulation, 1971  
(4 of 1971) and who are functioning, immediately before the commencement of this Act in the Union 
territory of Arunachal Pradesh, as me mbers of the Pradesh Council constituted under the said section 3.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the provisional Legislative Assembly shall expire 
immediately before the first meeting of the Legislative Assembly duly constituted after the first  general 
election to that Assembly.  
(3) The provisional Legislative Assembly constituted under this section shall, for so long as it is in 
existence, be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly duly constituted under this Act and accordingly the 
other provisions of this Act, so far as may be, apply in relation to the provisional Legislative Assembly as 
they apply in relation to the Legislative Assembly.]  
55. Contracts and suits. ―For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that — 
(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of 2[the Union territory] are contracts made 
in the exercise of the executive power of the Union;  
(b) all suits and proceedings in connection with the administration of 2[the Union territory] shall 
be instituted by or ag ainst the Government of India.  
56. Power of President to remove difficulties .―If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition 
from the provisions of any of the laws repealed by this Act or in giving effect to the provisions of this Act 
and, in parti cular, in relation to the constitution of the Legislative Assembly for 3[the Union territory], the 
President may by order do anything not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act which appear to him 
to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of remov ing the difficulty.  
57. Amendment to certain enactments .―(1) The enactments specified in the Second Schedule ―  
(a) shall, together with all rules, notifications and orders made or issued thereunder, extend to and 
come into force in the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry; and  
(b) shall be subject to the amendments mentioned in the fourth column of the said Schedule.  
(2) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement of this Act in connection with the 
preparation or revision of electoral rolls for the purpose of elections to the House of the People from the 
Union territories of Goa , Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry, and to the Legislative Assemblies of those 
Union territories shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), as amended by this Act, be deemed to h ave been done in accordance with 
law. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1975).  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 65, ibid., for “any Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  30 
 58. Repeal and savings .―(1) The following laws are hereby repealed: ― 
(a) the Territorial Councils Act, 1956 (103 of 1956);  
(b) the Decree No. 46 -2381, dated the 25th October, 1946, as subsequently amended, relating to  
the Representative Assembly of the State of Pondicherry;  
(c) the Decree No. 47 -1490, dated the 12th August, 1947, as subsequently amended, relating to 
the setting up of a Council of Government in the State of Pondicherry;  
(d) the State of Pondicherry (R epresentation of the People) Order, 1955, in so far as it relates to 
the Representative Assembly of Pondicherry.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Territorial Councils Act, 1956 (103 of 1956), ― 
(a) every officer and other employee of the Territorial C ouncil of 1[the Union territory] serving 
under the Council immediately before such repeal shall become an officer or other employee of 
Government and shall be employed in connection with the administration of the Union territory with 
such designation as th e Administrator may determine and shall hold office by the same tenure and at 
the same remuneration and on the same terms and conditions of service as he would have but for such 
repeal held the same and shall continue to do so unless and until such tenure,  remuneration and terms 
and conditions are duly altered by the Administrator:  
Provided that — 
(i) the  tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such officer or other 
employee shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central 
Government;  
(ii) any service rendered by any such officer or other employ ee before such repeal shall be 
deemed to be service rendered in connection with the administration of the Union territory;  
(iii) the Administrator may employ any such officer or other employee in the discharge of such 
functions as the Administrator may think proper and every such officer or other employee shall 
discharge those functions accordingly;  
(b) anything done or any actio n taken (including any notification, order, sch eme, rule, form, 
notice or bye -law made or issued, any licence or permission granted) under the repealed Act shall in 
so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force unless and until it is 
superseded by anything done or any action taken in accordance with law;  
(c) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be done by, with or for the Territorial Council b efore such repeal shall be deemed 
to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done in exercise of the executive power of the 
Union for the purposes of the administration of the Union territory;  
(d) all assessments, valuations, measurements or div isions made by the Territorial Council shall, 
in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force unless and until 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 , for “a Union territory ” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  31 
 they are superseded by any assessment, valuation, measurement or division made by the 
Administrator in accordance with law;  
(e) all properties, movable and immovable, and all interests of whatsoever nature and kind, vested 
in the Territorial Council immediately before such repeal shall, with all rights of whatsoever 
description, used, enjoyed or possessed by that Council, vest in the Union for the purposes of the 
administration of the Union territory;  
(f) all rates, taxes, cesses, fees, rents, fares and other charges which immediately before such 
repeal were being lawfully levied by the Territorial Council  shall continue to be levied at the same 
rate at which they were being levied by the Council immediately before such repeal until provision to 
the contrary is made by law;  
(g) all rates, taxes, cesses, fees, rents, fares and other charges due to the Terri torial Council 
immediately before such repeal shall be deemed to be due to the Union in connection with the 
administration of the Union territory;  
(h) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been 
instituted by or  against the Territorial Council may be continued or instituted by or against the 
Government of India.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 4 ( a), 11 and 45 ( 4)] 
FORMS  OF OATHS OR AFFIRMATIONS  
I 
FORM OF OATH OR AFFIRMATION  TO BE  MADE BY A  CANDIDATE  FOR  
ELECTION  TO THE  LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY  
“I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly  
of                             
                that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of I ndia as by law 
established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India. ”  
II 
FORM OF OATH OR AFFIRMATION  TO BE MADE BY A  MEMBER OF THE  
LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY  OF 1[THE UNION  TERRITORY ] 
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a mem ber of the Legislative Assembly  
of                             
                that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law 
established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the 
duty upon which I am about to enter. ”  
III 
FORM OF OATH OF OFFICE FOR A  MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS  
OF 1[THE UNION  TERRITORY ] 
“I, A.B.,                             
                that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India 
as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will faithfully and 
conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union territory o f--------- , and that I will do 
right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, 
affection or ill -will.” 
IV 
FORM OF OATH OF SECRECY FOR A MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL OF  
MINISTERS OF 1[THE UNION  TERRITORY ] 
“I, A.B.,                            
                that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any 
person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to 
me as a Minister for the Union terri tory of -------- , except as may be required for the due discharge of my 
duties as such Minister. ” 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  33 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 57)  
ENACTMENTS AMENDED  
 
Year  Number  Short  title  Amendments  
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1950  43 The Representation of 
the People Act, 1950  In section 4, in sub -section ( 1), the words “to Goa, Daman and Diu ” shall 
be omitted.  
   In section 13B, in sub -section ( 1), for the words “1[the Union territory ]”, 
the words “the Union territory of Delhi ” shall be substituted.  
   In section 13D, in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), for the words “1[the Union 
territory ]”, the words “the Union territory of Delhi ” shall be 
substituted.  
   
 
 
 
 
 In section 27A,―  
 (i) sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted;  
(ii) for sub -section ( 4), the following sub -section shall be substituted, 
namely:―  
“(4) The electoral college for each of the Union territories of 
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura and Pondicherry shall 
consist of the  elected members of the Legislative Assembly 
constituted for that territory under the Gove rnment of Union 
territories Act, 1963. ” 
   In the First Schedule,―  
(i) after the entry “24. Goa, Daman and Diu……2 ”, the entry “25. 
Pondicherry…….1 ” shall be inserted and the e xisting entry 
relating to North -East Frontier Tract shall be renumbered as entry  
26; 
(ii) for the total, the following total shall be substituted, namely:―  
“Total……………………………………………………..508 ”. 
   In the Second Schedule, after entry 15 relating to Nagaland, the 
following entries shall be inserted, namely:―  
“16. Himachal Pradesh………………………………….40  
17. Manipur..…………………………………………….30  
18.Tripura………………………………………………30  
19. Goa, Daman and Diu.………………………………30  
20. Pondich erry.………………………………………..30 ” 
The Fifth Schedule shall be omitted.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for “a Union territory” (w.e.f. 30 -5-1987).  34 
  
Year  Number  Short title  Amendments  
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1951  43 The Representation of 
the People Act, 1951  In section 4, the words “to Goa, Daman and Diu ” shall be omitted.  
   In section 15, in sub -section ( 2),― 
(i) for the words “the Governor ”, the words “the Governor or 
Administrator, as the case may be ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in the proviso, the words and figures “or under the provisions of 
section 5 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, as 
the case may be ” shall be added at the end.  
   In section 32, the words and figures “or under the provisions of the 
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, as the case may be, ” 
shall be added at the end.  
   In section 36, in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2),― 
(i) the word “and” occurring after the figures “191” shall be omitted;  
(ii) for the words and figure “Part II of this Act ”, the words and 
figures “Part II of this Act, and sections 4 and 14 of the 
Government of Union territories Act, 1963 ” shall be substituted.  
   In section 55, the words and figures “or under the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963, as the case may be ,” shall be added at the end.  
   In section 100, in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), after the words “this Act ”, 
the words and figures “or the Government of Union Territories Act, 
1963 ,” shall be inserted.  
1956  37 The States 
Reorganisation Act, 
1956  In section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956,―  
(i) in clause ( d), after the words “Maharashtra ”, the words “and the 
Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa, Daman and 
Diu” shall be inserted;  
(ii) in clause ( e), after the words “Kerala ”, the words “and the Union 
territory of Pondicherry ” shall be inserted.   
 
 
--------------------------The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1963  
ACT NO.29 OF 1963  
[12th September,  1963 .] 
An Act to amend the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961 . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of Indian as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Institutes of Technology 
(Amendment) Act, 1963.  
(2) It shall come into force into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint.  
2*                                  *                             *                                            *                                           * 
7. College of Engineering and Technology, Delhi to cease to be affiliated College of University of 
Delhi .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Delhi University Act, 1922 (8 of 1922) , or the 
Statutes made thereunder, the College of Engineering and Technology, Delhi, incorporated under this 
Act, shall, on the commencement of this Act, cease to be an “Affiliated College ” within the meaning of 
clause ( a) of section 2 of the Delhi University Act, 1922, except as respect things done or omitted to be 
done before such ce sser. 
 
                                                           
1. 13th September , 1963 , vide Notification No . S.O. 2694 (E), dated 12 th September , 1963,  see Gazette of India, Part II,                    
Sec. 3(ii). 
2. Sections  2 to 6 Rep. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 12 -9-1963) . 
--------------------------The Limitation Act, 1963--------------------------
1 THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
LIMITATION OF SUITS, APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS  
3. Bar of limitation.  
4. Expiry of prescribed period when court is closed.  
5. Extension of prescribed period in certain cases.  
6. Legal disability.  
7. Disability of one of several persons.  
8. Special exceptions.  
9. Continuous running of time.  
10. Suits against trustees and their representatives.  
11. Suits on contracts entered into outside the territories to which the Act extends.  
PART III  
COMPUTATION OF PERIOD OF LIMITATION  
12. Exclusion of time in legal proceedings.  
13. Exclusion of time in cases where leave to sue or appeal as a pauper is applied fo r. 
14. Exclusion of time of proceeding bona fide  in court without jurisdiction.  
15. Exclusion of time in certain other cases.  
16. Effect of death on or before the accrual of the right to sue.  
17. Effect of fraud or mistake.  
18. Effect of acknowledgment in writing.  
19. Effect of payment on account of debt or of interest on legacy.  
20. Effect of acknowledgment or payment by another person.  
21. Effect of substituting or adding new plaintiff or defendant.  
22. Continuing breaches and torts.  
23. Suits for compens ation for acts not actionable without special damage.  
24. Computation of time mentioned in instruments.  
PART IV  
ACQUISITION OF OWNERSHIP BY POSSESSION  
25. Acquisition of easement s by prescription.  
26. Exclusion in favour of reversioner of ser vient tenement.  
27. Extinguishment of right to property.  2 PART V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS   
28. [Repealed .] 
29. Savings.  
30. Provision for suits, etc., for which the prescribed period is shorter than the period prescribed by 
the Indian Limitation Act, 1908.  
31. Provisions as to barred or pending suits, etc.  
32. [Repeal ed.] 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 3 THE LIMITATION ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 36 OF 1963  
[5th October , 1963 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law for the limitation of suits and other proceedings and for 
purposes connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Limitation Act, 1963.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “applicant ” includes— 
(i) a petitioner;  
(ii) any person from or through whom an applicant derives his right to apply;  
(iii) any person whose estate is represented by the applicant as executor, administrator or 
other representative;  
(b) “application ” includes a petition;  
(c) “bill of exchange ” includes a hundi and a cheque;  
(d) “bond ” includes any instrument whereby a person obliges himsel f to pay money to another, 
on condition that the obligation shall be void if a specified act is performed, or is not performed, as 
the case may be;  
(e) “defendant ” includes— 
(i) any person from or through whom a defendant derives his liability to be sued;  
(ii) any person whose estate is represented by the defendant as executor, administrator or 
other representative;  
(f) “easement ” includes a right not arising from contract, by which one person is entitled to 
remove and appropriate for his own profit any par t of the soil belonging to another or anything 
growing in, or attached to, or subsisting upon, the land of another;  
(g) “foreign country ” means any country other than India;  
(h) “good faith ”—nothing shall be deemed to be done in good faith which is not don e with due 
care and attention;  
(i) “plaintiff ” includes— 
(i) any person from or through whom a plaintiff derives his right to sue;  
(ii) any person whose estate is represented by the plaintiff as executor, administrator or other 
representative;  
(j) “period of limitation ” means the period of limitation prescribed for any suit, appeal or 
application by the Schedule, and “prescribed period”  means the period of limitation computed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1964 , vide notification No. S.O. 3118, dated 29th October, 1963, see Gazette of India, P art II, sec. 3 (ii). 
    Amended in West Bengal by W.B. Act 18 of 1977.  
1st September, 1984, vide notification No. S. O. 647 (C), in respect of the State of Sikkim dated 24th August, 1984, see 
Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 (k) “promissory note ” means any instrument whereby the maker engages absolutely to pay a 
specified sum of money to another at a time therein limited, or on demand, or at sight;  
(l) “suit” does not include an appeal or an application;  
(m) “tort" means a civil wrong which is not  exclusively the breach of a contract or the breach of a 
trust;  
(n) “trustee ” does not include a benamidar , a mortgagee remaining in possession after the 
mortgage has been satisfied or a person in wrongful possession without title.  
PART II  
LIMITATION OF SU ITS, APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS  
3. Bar of limitation .—(1) Subject to the provisions contained in sections 4 to 24 (inclusive), every 
suit instituted, appeal preferred, and application made after the prescribed period shall be dismissed , 
although limitation has not been set up as a defence.  
(2) For the purposes of this Act ,— 
(a) a suit is instituted ,— 
(i) in an ordinary case, when the plaint is presented to the proper officer;  
(ii) in the case of a pauper, when his application for leave to sue as a pauper is made; and  
(iii) in the case of a claim against a company which is being wound up by the court, when the 
claimant first sends in his claim to the official liquidator;  
(b) any claim by way of a set off or a counter claim, shall be treat ed as a separate suit and shall be 
deemed to have been instituted — 
(i) in the case of a set off, on the same date as the suit in which the set off is pleaded;  
(ii) in the case of a counter claim, on the date on which the counter claim is made in court;  
(c) an application by notice of motion in a High Court is made when the application is presented 
to the proper officer of that court.  
4. Expiry of prescribed period when court is closed .—Where the prescribed period for any suit, 
appeal or application expires on a day when the court is closed, the suit, appeal or application may be 
instituted, preferred or made on the day when the court re -opens.  
Explanation .—A court shall be deemed to be closed on any day within the meaning of this section if 
during any part of its normal working hours it remains closed on that day.  
5. Extension of prescribed period in certain cases .—Any appeal or any application, other than an 
application under any of the provisions of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ), 
may be admitted after the prescribed period if the appellant or the applicant satisfies the court that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or making the application within such period.  
Explanation .—The fact that the appellant or the applicant was mis sed by any order, practice or 
judgment of the High Court in ascertaining or computing the prescribed period may be sufficient cause 
within the meaning of this section.  
6. Legal disability .—(1) Where a person entitled to institute a suit or  make an application for the 
execution of a decree is, at the time from which the prescribed period is to be reckoned, a minor or insane, 
or an idiot, he may institute the suit or make the application within the same period after the disability has 
ceased,  as would otherwise have been allowed from the time specified therefor in the third column of the 
Schedule.  
(2) Where such person is, at the time from which the prescribed period is to be reckoned, affected by 
two such disabilities , or where, before his di sability has ceased, he is affected by another disability, he 
may institute the suit or make the application within the same period after both disabilities have ceased, as 
would otherwise have been allowed from the time so specified.  5 (3) Where the disabili ty continues up to the death of that person, his legal representative may institute 
the suit or make the application within the same period after the death, as would otherwise have been 
allowed from the time so specified.  
(4) Where the legal representative  referred to in sub -section ( 3) is, at the date of the death of the 
person whom he represents, affected by any such disability, the rules contained sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) 
shall apply.  
(5) Where a person under disability dies after the disability ceases b ut within the period allowed to 
him under this section, his legal representative may institute the suit or make the application within the 
same period after the death, as would otherwise have been available to that person had he not died.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, „minor ‟ includes a child in the womb.  
 7. Disability of one of several persons .—Where one of several persons jointly entitled to institute a 
suit or make an application for the execution of a decree is under any such disab ility, and a discharge can 
be given without the concurrence of such person, time will run against them all; but, where no such 
discharge can be given, time will not run as against any of them until one of them becomes capable of 
giving such discharge witho ut the concurrence of the others or until the disability has ceased.  
Explanation  I.—This section applies to a discharge from every kind of liability, including a liability 
in respect of any immovable property.  
Explanation  II.—For the purposes of this section, the Manager of a Hindu undivided family governed 
by the Mitakshara law shall be deemed to be capable of giving a discharge without the concurrence of the 
other members of the family only if he is in management of the joint  family property.  
8. Special exceptions .—Nothing in section 6 or in section 7 applies to suits to enforce rights of               
pre-emption, or shall be deemed to extend, for more than three years from the cessation of the disability 
or the death of the p erson affected thereby, the period of limitation for any suit or application.  
9. Continuous running of time .—Where once time has begun to run, no subsequent disability or 
inability to institute a suit or make an application stops it:  
Provided that , where letters of administration to the estate of a creditor have been granted to his 
debtor, the running of the period of limitation for a suit to recover the debt shall be suspended whi le the 
administration continues.  
10. Suits against trustees and their  representatives .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this Act, no suit against a person in whom property has become vested in trust for 
any specific purpose, or against his legal representatives or assigns (not being assigns for valuable 
consideration), for the purpose of following in his or their hands such property, or the proceeds thereof, or 
for an account of such property or proceeds, shall be barred by any length of time.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section any  property comprised in a Hindu, Muslim or 
Buddhist religious or charitable endowment shall be deemed to be property vested in trust for a specific 
purpose and the manager of the property shall be deemed to be the trustee thereof.  
11. Suits on contracts ent ered into outside the territories to which the Act extends .—(1) Suits 
instituted in the territories to which this Act extends on contracts entered into in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir or in a foreign country shall be subject to the rules of limitation contained in this Act.  
(2) No rule of limitation in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir or in a foreign country shall be a 
defence to a suit instituted in the said territories on a contract entered into in that State on in a foreign 
country unless — 
(a) the rule has extinguished the contract; and  
(b) the parties were domiciled in that State or in the foreign country during the period prescribed 
by such rule.  6 PART III  
COMPUTATION OF PERIOD OF LIMITATION  
12. Exclusion of time in legal proceedings .—(1) In computing the period of limitation for any suit, 
appeal or application, the day from which such period is to be reckoned, shall be excluded.  
(2) In computing the period of limitation for an appeal or an application for leave to appeal or for 
revision or fo r review of a judgment, the day on which the judgment complained of was pronounced and 
the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the decree, sentence or order appealed from or sought to be 
revised or reviewed shall be excluded.  
(3) Where a decree or order  is appealed from or sought to be revised or reviewed, or where an 
application is made for leave to appeal from a decree or order, the time requisite for obtaining a copy of 
the judgment  1*** shall also be excluded.  
(4) In computing the period of limitatio n for an application to set aside an award, the time requisite 
for obtaining a copy of the award shall be excluded.  
Explanation .—In computing under this section the time requisite for obtaining a copy of a decree or 
an order, any time taken by the court to  prepare the decree or order before an application for a copy 
thereof is made shall not be excluded.  
13. Exclusion of time in cases where leave to sue or appeal as a pauper is applied for .—In 
computing the period of limitation prescribed for any suit or appeal in any case where an application for 
leave to sue or appeal as a pauper has been made and rejected, the time during which the applicant has 
been prosecuting in good faith his application for such leave shall be excluded, and the court may, on 
paymen t of the court fees prescribed for such suit or appeal, treat the suit or appeal as having the same 
force and effect as if the court fees had been paid in the first instance.  
14. Exclusion of time of proceeding bona fide  in court without jurisdiction .—(1) In computing the 
period of limitation for any suit the time during which the plaintiff has been prosecuting with due 
diligence another civil proceeding, whether in a court of first instance or of appeal or revision, against the 
defendant shall be excluded,  where the proceeding relates to the same matter in issue and is prosecuted in 
good faith in a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable to 
entertain it.  
(2) In computing the period of limitation for any applicatio n, the time during which the applicant has 
been prosecuting with due diligence another civil proceeding, whether in a court of first instance or of 
appeal or revision, against the same party for the same relief shall be excluded, where such proceeding is 
prosecuted in good faith in a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is 
unable to entertain it.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 2 of Order XX III of the Code of Civil                   
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1 908), the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply in relation to a fresh suit 
instituted on permission granted by the court under rule 1 of that Order , where such permission is granted 
on the ground that the first suit must fail by reason of a defect in the jurisdiction of the court or other 
cause of a like nature.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) in excluding the time during which a former civil proceeding was pending, the day on which 
that proceeding was instituted and the day on which it ended shall both be counted;  
(b) a plaintiff or an applicant resisting an appeal shall be deemed t o be prosecuting a proceeding;  
(c) misjoinder of parties or of causes of action shall be deemed to be a cause of a like nature with 
defect of jurisdi ction.  
                                                           
1. The  words “on which the decree or order is founded” omitted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  7 15. Exclusion of time in certain other cases .—(1) In computing the period of limitation of any suit 
or application for the execution of a decree, the institution or execution of which has been stayed by 
injunction or order, the time of the continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued 
or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.  
(2) In computing the period of limitation for any suit of which notice has been given, or for which the 
previous consent or sanction of the Government or any other authority is required, in accordance with the 
requirements of any law for the time being in force, the period of such notice or, as the case may be, the 
time required for obtaining such consent or sanction  shall be excluded.  
Explanation .—In excluding the time required for obtaining the consent or sanction of the 
Government or any other authority, the date on which the application was made for obtaining the consent 
or sanction and the date of receipt of the order of the Government or other authority shall both be 
counted.  
(3) In computing the period of limitation for any suit or application for execution of a decree by any 
receiver or interim  receiver appointed in proceedings for the adjudication of a person as an insolvent or by 
any liquidator or provisional liquidator appointed in proceedings for the winding up of a company, the 
period beginning with the date of institution of such proceeding and ending with the expiry of three 
months from the date of appoin tment of such receiver or liquidator, as the case may be, shall be excluded.  
(4) In computing the period of limitation for a suit for possession by a purchaser at a sale in execution 
of a decree, the time during which a proceeding to set aside the sale has  been prosecuted shall be 
excluded.  
(5) In computing the period of limitation for any suit the time during which the defendant has been 
absent from India and from the territories outside India under the administration of the Central 
Government, shall be ex cluded.  
16. Effect of death on or before the accrual of the right to sue .—(1) Where a person who would, if 
he were living, have a right to institute a suit or make an application dies before the right accrues, or 
where a right to institute a suit or make an application accrues only on the death of a person, the period of 
limitation shall be computed from the time when there is a legal representative of the deceased capable of 
instituting such suit or making such application.  
(2) Where a person against whom , if he were living, a right to institute a suit or make an application 
would have accrued dies before the right accrues, or where a right to institute a suit or make an 
application against any person accrues on the death of such person, the period of limi tation shall be 
computed from the time when there is a legal representative of the deceased against whom the plaintiff 
may institute such suit or make such application.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) applies to suits to enforce rights of  pre-emption or to 
suits for the possession of immovable property or of a hereditary office.  
17. Effect of fraud or mistake .—(1) Where, in the case of any suit or application for which a period 
of limitation is prescribed by this Act ,— 
(a) the suit or application is based upon the fraud of the defendant or respondent or his agent; or  
(b) the knowledge of the right or title on which a suit or application is founded is concealed by 
the fraud of any such person as aforesaid; or  
(c) the suit or application is for relief from the consequences of a mistake; or  
(d) where any document necessary to establish the right of the plaintiff or applicant has been 
fraudulently concealed from him,  
the period of limitation shall not begin to run until the plaintiff or appl icant has discovered the fraud or 
the mistake or could, with reasonable diligence, have discovered it; or in the case of a concealed 
document, until the plaintiff or the applicant first had the means of producing the concealed document or 
compelling its pr oduction:  8 Provided that nothing in this section shall enable any suit to be instituted or application to be made to 
recover or enforce any charge against, or set aside any transaction affecting, any property which — 
(i) in the case of fraud, has been purchased for valuable consideration by a person who was not a 
party to the fraud and did not at the time of the purchase know, or have reason to believe, that any 
fraud had been committed, or  
(ii) in the case of mistake, has been purchased for valuable co nsideration subsequently to the 
transaction in which the mistake was made, by a person who did not know, or have reason to believe, 
that the mistake had been made, or  
(iii) in the case of a concealed document, has been purchased for valuable consideration by a 
person who was not a party to the concealment and, did not at the time of purchase know, or have 
reason to believe, that the document had been concealed.  
(2) Where a judgment -debtor has, by fraud or force, prevented the execution of a decree or order 
within the period of limitation, the court may, on the application of the judgment -creditor made after the 
expiry of the said period extend the period for execution of the decree or order:  
Provided that such application is made within one year from the dat e of the discovery of the fraud or 
the cessation of force, as the case may be.  
18. Effect of acknowledgment in writing .—(1) Where, before the expiration of the prescribed 
period for a suit or application in respect of any property or right, an acknowledgme nt of liability in 
respect of such property or right has been made in writing signed by the party against whom such 
property or right is claimed, or by any person through whom he derives his title or liability, a fresh period 
of limitation shall be compute d from the time when the acknowledgment was so signed.  
(2) Where the writing containing the acknowledgment is undated, oral evidence may be given of the 
time when it was signed; but subject to the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or al 
evidence of its contents shall not be received.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) an acknowledgment may be sufficient though it omits to specify the exact nature of the 
property or right, or avers that the time for payment, delivery, performance or enjoyment has not yet 
come or is accompanied by a refusal to pay, deliver, perform or permit to enjoy, or is coupled with a 
claim to set  off, or is addressed to a person other than a person entitled to the property or right , 
(b) the word “signed ” means signed either personally or by an agent duly authorised in this 
behalf , and 
(c) an application for the execution of a decree or order shall not be deemed to be an application 
in respect of any property or right.  
19. Effect of payment on account  of debt or of interest on legacy .—Where payment on account of 
a debt or of interest on a legacy is made before the expiration of the prescribed period by the person liable 
to pay the debt or legacy or by his agent duly authorised in this behalf, a fresh period of limitation shall be 
computed from the time when the payment was made:  
Provided that, save in the case of payment of interest made before the 1st day of January, 1928, an 
acknowledgment of the payment appears in the handwriting of, or in a writing  signed by, the person 
making the payment.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) where mortgaged land is in the possession of the mortgagee, the receipt of the rent or produce 
of such land shall be deemed to be a payment;  
(b) “debt” does not include money payable under a decree or order of a court.  9 20. Effect of acknowledgment or payment by another person .—(1) The expression “agent duly 
authorised in this behalf ” in sections 18 and 19 shall, in the case of a person under disability, include his 
lawful guardian, committee or manager or an agent duly authorised by such guardian, committee or 
manager to sign the acknowledgment or make the payment.  
(2) Nothing in the said sections renders one of several joint contractors, partners, executors or 
mortgagees chargeable by reason only of a written acknowledgment signed by, or of a payment made by, 
or by the agent of, any other or others of them.  
(3) For the purposes of the  said sections, — 
(a) an acknowledgment signed or a payment made in respect of any liability by , or by the duly 
authorised agent of, any limited owner of property who is governed by Hindu law, shall be a                  
valid acknowledgment or payment, as the case may be, against a reversioner succeeding to such 
liability; and  
(b) where a liability has been incurred by , or on behalf of a Hindu undivided family as such, an 
acknowledgment or payment made by, or by the duly authorised agent of, the manager of the family 
for the time being shall be deemed to have been made on behalf of the whole family.  
 21. Effect of substituting or adding new plaintiff or defendant .—(1) Where after the institution of 
a suit, a new plaintiff or defendant is substituted or added , the suit shall, as regards him, be deemed to 
have been instituted when he was so made a party:  
Provided that where the court is satisfied that the omission to include a new plaintiff or defendant was 
due to a mistake made in good faith it may direct that  the suit as regards such plaintiff or defendant shall 
be deemed to have been instituted on any earlier date.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a case where a party is added or substituted owing to 
assignment or devolution of any interest durin g the pendency of a suit or where a plaintiff is made a 
defendant or a defendant is made a plaintiff.  
22. Continuing breaches and torts .—In the case of a continuing breach of contract or in the case of 
a continuing tort, a fresh period of limitation begins  to run at every moment of the time during which the 
breach or the tort, as the case may be, continues.  
 23. Suits for compensation for acts not actionable without special damage .—In the case of a suit 
for compensation for an act which does not give rise to a cause of action unless some specific injury 
actually results therefrom, the period of limitation shall be computed from the time when the injury 
results.  
24. Computation of time mentioned in instruments .—All instruments shall for the purposes of this 
Act be deemed to be made with reference to the Gregorian calendar.  
PART IV  
ACQUISITION OF OWNERSHIP BY POS SESSION  
 25. Acquisition of easement s by prescription .—(1) Where the access and use of light or air to and 
for any building have been peaceably enjoyed therewith as an easement, and as of right, without 
interruption, and for twenty years, and where any way or watercourse or the use of any water or any other 
easement (whether affirmative or negative) has been peaceably and openly enjoyed by any per son 
claiming title thereto as an easement and as of right without interruption and for twenty years, the right to 
such access and use of light or air, way, watercourse, use of water, or other easement shall be absolute 
and indefeasible.  
(2) Each of the sai d periods of twenty years shall be taken to be a period ending within two years next 
before the institution of the suit wherein the claim to which such period relates is contested.  
(3) Where the property over which a right is claimed under sub -section ( 1) belongs to the 
Government that sub -section shall be read as if for the words “twenty years ” the words “thirty years ” 
were substituted.  10 Explanation .—Nothing is an interruption within the meaning of this section, unless where there is an 
actual discontinuanc e of the possession or enjoyment by reason of an obstruction by the act of some 
person other than the claimant, and unless such obstruction is submitted to or acquiesced in for one year 
after the claimant has notice thereof and of the person making or auth orising the same to be made.  
26. Exclusion in favour of reversioner of ser ivent tenement .—Where any land or water upon, over 
or from, which any easement has been enjoyed or derived has been held under or by virtue of any interest 
for life or in terms of years exceeding three years from the granting thereof , the time of the enjoyment of 
such easement during the continuance of such interest or term shall be excluded in the computation of the 
period twenty years in case the claim is, within three years next after the  determination of such interest  or 
term resisted by the person entitled on such determination to the said land or water.  
27. Extinguishment of right to property .—At the determination of the period hereby limited to any 
person for instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right to such property shall be 
extinguished.  
PART V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 28. [Amendment of certain Acts.]—Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1974 (56 of 1974) , s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
29. Savings .—(1) Nothing in this Act shall affect section 25 of the Indian Contract                                    
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872).  
(2) Where any special or local law prescribes for any suit, appeal or application a period of limitation 
different fro m the period prescribed by the Schedule, the provisions of section 3 shall apply as if such 
period were the period prescribed by the Schedule and for the purpose of determining any period of 
limitation prescribed for any suit, appeal or application by any special or local law, the provisions 
contained in sections 4 to 24 (inclusive) shall apply only in so far as, and to the extent to which, they are 
not expressly excluded by such special or local law.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in any law for the time b eing in force with respect to marriage and 
divorce, nothing in this Act shall apply to any suit or other proceeding under any such law.  
(4) Sections 25 and 26 and the definition of “easement ” in section 2 shall not apply to cases arising in 
the territories  to which the Indian Easements Act, 1882 (5 of 1882), may for the time being extend.  
30. Provision for suits, etc., for which the prescribed period is shorter than the period 
prescribed by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 .—Notwithstanding a nything contained  in this Act, — 
(a) any suit for which the period of limitation is shorter than the period of limitation prescribed by 
the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908), may be instituted within a period of  1[seven years] next 
after the commencement of this Act o r within the period prescribed for such suit by the Indian 
Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908), whichever period expires earlier:  
2[Provided that if in respect of any such suit, the said period of seven years expires earlier than 
the period of limitation prescribed therefor under the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908) and the 
said period of seven years together with so much of the period of limitation in respect of such suit 
under the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908), as ha s already expired before the commencement 
of this Act is shorter than the period prescribed for such suit under this Act, then, the suit may be 
instituted within the period of  limitation prescribed therefor  under this Act;]  
(b) any appeal or application fo r which the period of limitation is shorter than the period of 
limitation prescribed by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908), may be preferred or made within 
a period of ninety days next after the commencement of this Act or within the period prescr ibed for 
such appeal or application by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, whichever period expires earlier.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1969, s. 2, for “five years” (w.e.f. 26 -3-1969).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -3-1969).   11  31. Provisions as to barred or pending suits, etc. —Nothing in this Act shall, — 
(a) enable any suit, appeal or application to be instituted, preferred  or made, for which the period 
of limitation prescribed by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908), expired before the 
commencement of this Act; or  
(b) affect any suit, appeal or application instituted, preferred or made before, and pending at, such 
commencement.  
32. [Repeal .]—Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1974 (56 of 1974) , s. 2 and the First Schedule  
(w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
 
  12 THE SCHEDULE  
(PERIODS OF LIMITATION ) 
[See sections 2( j) and 3]  
FIRST DIVISION —SUITS  
 
Description of suit  Period o f limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
PART I.—SUITS  RELATING TO ACCOUNTS  
1. For the balance due on a mutual, 
open and current account, where 
there have been reciprocal 
demands between the parties . Three year s. The close of the year in which the  last 
item admitted or proved is entered in 
the account; such year to be computed 
as in the account . 
2. Against a factor for an account.  Three years . When the account is, during the 
continuance of the agency, demanded 
and refused or, where no such demand 
is made, when the agency terminates.  
3. By a principal against his agent for 
movable property received by the 
latter and not accounted for.  Three years . When the account is, during the 
continuance of the agency, demanded 
and refused or, where no such demand 
is made, when the agency terminates.  
4. Other suits by principals against 
agents for neglect or misconduct.  Three years . When the neglect or misconduct becomes 
known to the plaintiff.  
5. For an account and a share of the 
profits of a dissolved partnership.  Three years . The date of the dissolution.  
PART II .—SUITS RELATING TO CONTRACTS  
6. For a seaman ‟s wages  Three years . The end of the voyage during which the 
wages are earned.  
7. For wages in the case of any other 
person.  Three years . When the  wages accrue due . 
8. For the price of food or drink sold 
by the keepe r of a hotel, tavern 
or lodging -house.  Three years . When the food or drink is delivered.  
9. For the price of lodging . Three years . When the price becomes payable.  
10. Against a carrier for compensation 
for losing or injuring goods.  Three years . When the loss or injury occurs.  
11. Against a carrier for compensation 
for non -delivery of, or delay in 
delivering , goods.  Three years . When the goods ought to be delivered.  
12. For the hire of an imals, vehicles, 
boats or house hold furniture.  Three years . When the hire becomes payable.  
13. For the balance of money advanced 
in payment of goods to be 
delivered.  Three years . When the goods ought to be delivered.  
14. For the price of goods sold and 
delivered where no fixed period 
of credit is agreed upon.  Three years . The date of the delivery of the goods.  
15. For the price of goods sold and 
delivered to be paid for after the 
expiry of a fixed period of 
credit.  Three years . When the period of credit expires.  
    13  Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
16. For the price of goods sold and 
delivered to be paid for by a bill 
of exchange, no such bill being 
given.  Three years . When the period of the proposed bill 
elapses.  
17. For the price of trees or growing 
crops sold by the plaintiff to the 
defendant where no fixed period 
of credit is agreed upon.  Three years.  The date of the sale.  
18. For the price of work done by the 
plaintiff for the defendant  at his 
request, where no time has been 
fixed for payment.  Three years . When the work is done.  
19. For money payable for money lent.  Three years . When the loan is made.  
20. Like suit when the lender has given 
a cheque for the money.  Three years . When the  cheque is paid.  
21. For money lent under an agreement 
that it shall be payable on 
demand.  Three years . When the loan is made.  
22. For money deposited under an 
agreement that it shall be 
payable on demand, including 
money of a customer in the 
hands of his banker so payable.  Three years . When the demand is made.  
23. For money payable to the plaintiff 
for money paid for the 
defendant.  Three years . When the money is paid.  
24. For money payable by the 
defendant to the plaintiff for 
money received by the 
defendant, for the plaintiff's use.  Three years . When the money is received.  
25. For money payable for interest 
upon money due from the 
defendant to the plaintiff.  Three years . When the interest becomes due.  
26. For money payable to the plaintiff 
for money found to be due from 
the defendant to the plaintiff on 
accounts stated between them.  Three years . When the accounts are stated in writing 
signed by the defendant or his agent 
duly authorised in this behalf, unless 
where the debt is, by a simultaneous  
agreement in writing signed as 
aforesaid, made payable at a future 
time, and then when that time arrives.  
27. For compensation for breach of a 
promise to do anything at a 
specified time, or upon the 
happening of a specified 
contingency.  Three years . When  the time specified arrives or the 
contingency happens.  
28. On a single bond, where a day is 
specified for payment.  Three years . The day so specified.  
29. On a single bond, where no such 
day is specified.  Three years . The date of executing the bond.  
30. On a bond subject to a condition.  Three years . When the condition is broken.  14  Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
31. On a bill of exchange or promissory 
note payable at a fixed time after 
date.  Three years . When the bill or note falls due.  
32. On a bill of exchange payable at 
sight, or after sight, but not at a 
fixed time.  Three years . When the bill is presented.  
33. On a bill of exchange accepted 
payable at a particular place.  Three years . When the bill is  presented at that place.  
34. On a bill of exchange or promissory 
note payable at a fixed time after 
sight or after demand.  Three years . When the fixed time expires.  
35. On a bill of exchange or promissory 
note payable on demand and not 
accompanied by any writing 
restraining or postponing the 
right to sue.  Three years . The date of the bill or note.  
36. On a promissor y note or bond 
payable by insta lments.  Three years . The expiration of the first term of 
payment as to the part then payable; 
and for the other parts, the expiration 
of the respective terms of payment.  
37. On a promissor y note or bond 
payable by insta lments, which 
provides that, if default be made 
in payment of one or more 
instalments, the whole shall be 
due. Three years . When the default is made, unless where 
the payee or obligee waives the 
benefit of the provision and then 
when fresh default is made in respect 
of which there is no such waiver.  
38. On a promissory note given by the 
maker to a third person to be 
delivered to the payee afte r a 
certain event should happen.  Three years . The date of the delivery to the payee.  
39. On a dishonoured foreign bill 
where protest has been made 
and notice given.  Three years . When the notice is given.  
40. By the payee against the drawer           
of a bill of exchange, which            
has been dishonoured by                 
non-acceptance.  Three years . The date of the refusal to accept.  
41. By the acceptor of an 
accommodation -bill against the 
drawer.  Three years . When the acceptor pays the amount of the 
bill. 
42. By a surety against the principal 
debtor.  Three years . When the surety pays the creditor.  
43. By a surety against a co -surety.  Three years . When the surety pays anything in excess 
of his own share.  
44. (a) On a policy of insurance when 
the sum insured is payable after 
proof of the death has been 
given  to or received by the 
insurers.  Three years . The date of the death of the deceased, or 
where the claim on the policy is 
denied, either partly or wholly, the 
date of such denial.  
 (b) On a policy of insurance when 
the sum insured is payable after 
proof of the loss has been given 
to or received by the insurers.  Three years . The date of the occurrence causing the 
loss, or where the claim on the policy 
is denied, either partly or wholly, the 
date of such denial.  15  Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
45. By the assured to recover premia  
paid under a policy voidable at 
the election of the insurers.  Three years . When the insurers elect to avoid the 
policy.  
46. Under the Indian Succession                  
Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), section 
360 or section 361, to compel a 
refund by a person to whom an 
executor or administrator has 
paid a legacy or distributed 
assets.  Three years . The date of the payment or distribution.  
47. For money paid upon an existing 
consideration which afterwards 
fails.  Three years . The date of the failure.  
48. For contribution by a party who has 
paid the whole or more than his 
share of the amount due under a 
joint decree, or by a sharer in a 
joint estate who has paid the 
whole or more than his share of 
the amount of revenue due from 
himself and his co -sharers.  Three years . The date of the payment in excess of the 
plaintiff ‟s own share.  
49. By a co -trustee to enforce against 
the estate of a deceased trustee a 
claim for contribution.  Three years . When the right to contribution accrues.  
50. By the manager of a joint estate of 
an undivided family for 
contribution, in respect of a 
payment made by him on 
account of the estate.  Three years . The date of the payment.  
51. For the profits of immovable 
property belonging to the 
plaintiff which have been 
wrongfully received by the 
defendant.  Three years . When the profits are received.  
52. For arrears of rent.  Three years . When  the arrears become due.  
53. By a vendor of immovable property 
for personal payment of unpaid 
purchase -money.  Three years . The time fixed for completing the sale, 
or (where the title is accepted after 
the time fixed for completion) the 
date of the acceptance.  
54. For specific performance of a 
contract.  Three years . The date fixed for the performance, or, if 
no such date is fixed, when the 
plaintiff has notice that performance 
is refused.  
55. For compensation for the breach of 
any contract, express  or implied 
not herein specially provided 
for. Three years . When the contract is broken or (where 
there are successive breaches) when 
the breach in respect of which the 
suit is instituted occurs or (where the 
breach is continuing) when it ceases.  16  Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
PART III .—SUITS RELATING TO DECLARATIONS  
56. To declare the forgery of an 
instrument issued or registered.  Three years . When the issue or registration becomes 
known to the plaintiff.  
57. To obtain a declaration that an 
alleged adoption is invalid, or 
never, in fact, took place.  Three years . When the alleged adoption becomes 
known to the plaintiff.  
58. To obtain any other declaration.  Three years . When the right to sue first accrues.  
PART IV .—SUITS RELATING TO DECREES AND INSTRUMENTS  
59. To cancel or set aside an instrument 
or decree or for the rescission of 
a contract.  Three years . When the facts entitling the plaintiff to 
have the instrument or decree 
cancelled or set aside or the contract 
rescinded first become known to him.  
60. To set aside a transfer of property 
made by the guardian of a 
ward—   
 (a) by the ward who has attained 
majorit y; Three years . When the ward attains majority.  
 (b)  by the ward‟s legal 
representative —   
 (i) when the ward dies within 
three years from the date of 
attaining majority.  Three years . When the ward attains majority.  
 (ii) when the ward dies before 
attaining majority.  Three years . When the ward dies.  
PART V .—SUITS RELATING TO  IMMOVABLE PROPERTY  
61. By a mortgagor —   
 (a)  to redeem or recover 
possession of immovable 
property mortgaged;  Thirty years . When the right to redeem or to recover 
possession accrues.  
 (b)  to recover possession of 
immovable property mortgaged 
and afterwards transferred by 
the mortgagee for a valuable 
consideration ; Twelve years . When the transfer becomes known to the 
plaintiff.  
 (c) to recover surplus collections 
received by the mortgagee after 
the mortgage has been 
satisfied.  Three years . When the mortgagor re -enters on the 
mortgaged property.  
62. To enforce payment of money 
secured by a mortgage or 
otherwise charged upon 
immovable property.  Twelve years . When the money sued for becomes due.  
63. By a mortgagee —   
 (a) for foreclosure ; Thirty years . When the money secured by the mortgage 
becomes due.  
 (b) for possession of immovable 
property mortgaged.  Twelve year s. When the mortgagee becomes entitled to 
possession.  17  Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run 
64. For possession of immovable 
property based on previous 
possession and not on title, when 
the plaintiff while in possession 
of the property has been 
dispossessed.  Twelve year s. The date of dispossession.  
 
 
65. For possession of immovable 
property or any interest therein 
based on title.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of 
this article — 
(a)  where the suit is by a 
remainderman, a reversioner 
(other than a landlord) or a 
devisee , the possession of the 
defendant shall be deemed to 
become adverse only when the 
estate of the remainderman, 
reversioner or devisee, as the 
case may be, falls into 
possession;  
(b) where the suit is by a Hindu 
or Muslim entitled to the 
possession of immovable 
property on the death of a 
Hindu or Muslim female, the 
possession of the defendant 
shall be deemed to become 
adverse only when the female 
dies; 
(c)  where the suit is by                           
a purchaser at a sale in 
execution of a decree when the 
judgment -debtor was out of 
possession at the date of the 
sale, the purchaser shall be 
deemed to be a representative 
of the judgment -debtor who 
was out of possession.  Twelve years . When the possession of the defendant 
becomes adverse to the plaintiff.  
66. For possession of immovable 
property when the plaintiff has 
become entitled to possession by 
reason of any forfeiture or breach 
of condition.  Twelve years . When the forfeiture is incurred or the 
condition is broken.  
67. By a landlord to recover possession 
from a tenant.  Twelve years . When the tenancy is determined.  
PART VI .—SUITS RELATING TO MOVABLE PROPERTY  
68. For specific movable property lost, 
or acquired by theft, or dishonest 
misappropriation or conversion.  Three years . When the person having the right to the 
possession of the property first learns 
in whose possession it is.  
69. For other specific movable property.  Three years . When the property is wrongfully taken.  
70. To recover movable property 
deposited or pawned from a 
deposit ary or pawnee.  Three years . The date of refusal after demand.  18  Description of suit  Period of 
limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
71. To recover movable property 
deposited or pawned , and 
afterwards bought from the 
depository or pawnee for a 
valuable consideration.  Three years . When the sale becomes known to the 
plaintiff.  
PART VII .—SUITS RELATING TO TORT  
72. For compensation for doing or for 
omitting to do an act alleged to 
be in pursuance of any enactment 
in force for the time being in the 
territories to which this Act 
extends.  One year . When the act or omission takes place.  
73. For compensation for false 
imprisonment . One year . When the imprisonment ends.  
74. For compensation for a malicious 
prosecution.  One year . When the plaintiff is acquitted or the 
prosecution is otherwise terminated.  
75. For compensation for libel.  One year . When the libel is published.  
76. For compensation for slander.  One year . When the words are spoken , or, if the 
words are not actionable in 
themselves, when the special damage 
complained of results.  
77. For compensation for loss of service 
occasioned by the seduction of 
the plaintiff ‟s servant or 
daughter.  One year . When the loss occurs.  
78. For compensation for inducing a 
person to break a contract with 
the plaintiff.  One year . The date of the breach.  
79. For compensation for an illegal, 
irregular or excessive distress.  One year . The date of the distress.  
80. For compensation for wrongful 
seizure of movable property 
under legal process.  One year . The date of the seizure.  
81. By executors, administrators or 
representatives under the Legal 
Representatives ‟ Suits Act, 1855 
(12 of 1855).  One year . The date of the death of the person 
wronged.  
82. By executors, administrators or 
representatives under the Indian 
Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 
1855).  Two years . The date of the death of the person killed.  
83. Under the Legal Representatives ‟ 
Suits Act, 1855 (12 of 1855) , 
against an executor, an 
administrator or any other 
representative.  Two years . When the wrong complained of is done.  
84. Against one who, having a right to 
use property for specific 
purposes, perverts it to other 
purposes.  Two years . When the perversion first becomes known 
to the person injured thereby.  19  Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
85. For compensation for obstructing a 
way or a water -course.  Three years . The date of the obstruction.  
86. For compensation for diverting a 
water -course.  Three years . The date of the diversion.  
87. For compensation for trespass upon 
immovable property.  Three years . The date of the trespass.  
88. For compensation for infringing 
copyright or any other exclusive 
privilege.  Three years . The date of the infringement.  
89. To restrain waste.  Three years . When the waste begins.  
90. For compensation for injury caused 
by an injunction wrongfully 
obtained.  Three years . When the injunction ceases.  
91. For compensation, — 
(a)  for wrongfully taking                          
or detaining any specific        
movable property lost, or 
acquired by theft, or dishonest 
misappropriation, or conversion ;  
Three years .  
When the person having the right to the 
possession of the property  first learns 
in whose possession it is.  
 (b) for wrongfully taking or injuring 
or wrongfully detaining any other 
specific movable property.  Three years . When the property is wrongfully taken or 
injured, or when the detainer ‟s 
possession becomes unlawful.  
PART VIII .—SUITS RELATING TO TRUSTS AND TRUST PROPERTY  
92. To recover possession of immovable 
property conveyed or bequeathed 
in trust and afterwards transferred 
by the trustee for a valuable 
consideration.  Twelve years . When the transfer becomes known to the 
plaintiff.  
93. To recover possession of movable 
property conveyed or bequeathed 
in trust and afterwards transferred 
by the trustee for a valuable 
consideration.  Three years . When the transfer becomes known to the 
plaintiff.  
94. To set aside a transfer of immovable 
property comprised in a Hindu, 
Muslim or Buddhist religious or 
charitable endowment, made by a 
manager thereof for a valuable 
consideration.  Twelve years . When the transfer becomes known to the 
plaintiff.  
95. To set aside a transfer of movable 
property comprised in a Hindu, 
Muslim or Buddhist religious or 
charitable endowment, made by a 
manager thereof for a valuable 
consideration.  Three years . When the transfer becomes known to the 
plaintiff.  
96. By the manager of Hindu, Muslim or 
Buddhist religious or charitable 
endowment to recover possession 
of movable or immovable 
properly comprised in the 
endowment which has been 
transferred by a previous 
manager for a valuable 
consideration.  Twelve years . The date of death, resignation or remo val 
of the transferor or the date of 
appointment of the plaintiff as 
manager of the endowment, 
whichever is later.  20                                                            
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 196 4, s. 3 and the  Second Schedule, for “an order under rule 63 or rule 103 ,” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).   Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
PART IX .—SUITS RELATING TO MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS  
97. To enforce a right of pre -emption 
whether the right is founded on 
law or general usage or on 
special contract.  One year.  When the purchaser take  under the                       
sale sought to be impeached,                   
physical possession of the whole or part 
of the prope rty sold, or, where the 
subject matter of the sale does not admit 
of physical possession of the whole or 
part of the property, when the 
instrument of sale is registered.  
98. By a person against whom                  
 1[an order referred to in rule 63 
or in rule 103] of Order XXI of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908) , or an order 
under section 28 of the  
Presidency Small Cause Courts 
Act, 1882 (15 of 1882) , has 
been made, to establish the 
right which he claims to the 
property comprised in the 
order.  One year . The date of the final order.  
99. To set aside a sale by a civil or 
revenue court or a sale for 
arrears of Government revenue 
or for any demand recoverable 
as such arrears.  One year . When the sale is confirmed or would 
otherwise have become final and 
conclusive had no such suit been 
brought.  
100. To alter or set aside any decision 
or order of a civil court in any 
proceeding other than a suit or 
any act or order of an officer of 
Government in his official 
capacity.  One year . The date of the final decision or order by the 
court or the date of the act or order of 
the officer, as the case may be.  
101. Upon a judgment , including a 
foreign judgment, or a 
recognisance.  Three years . The date of th e judgment or recognisance.  
102. For property which the plaintiff has 
conveyed while insane.  Three years . When the plaintiff is restored to sanity 
and has knowledge of the conveyance.  
103. To make good out of the general 
estate of a deceased trustee the 
loss occasioned by a breach of 
trust.  Three years . The date of the trustee's death or if the 
loss has not then resulted, the date of 
the loss.  
104. To establish a periodically 
recurring right.  Three years . When the plaintiff is first refused the 
enjoyment  of the right.  
105. By a Hindu for arrears of 
maintenance.  Three yea rs. When the arrears are payable.  
106. For a legacy or for a share of a 
residu r bequeathed by a testator 
or for a distributive share of the 
property of an intestate against 
an executor or an administrator 
or some other person legally 
charged with the duty of 
distributing the estate.  Twelve years . When the legacy or share becomes 
payable or deliverable.  21  Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
107. For pos session of a hereditary 
office.  
Explanation .—A hereditary office 
is possessed when the properties 
thereof are usually received, or 
(if there are no properties) when 
the duties thereof are usually 
performed.  Twelve years . When the defendant takes possession of 
the office adversely to the plaintiff.  
108. Suit during the life of a Hindu or 
Muslim female by a Hindu or 
Muslim  who, if the female died 
at the date of instituting the suit, 
would be entitled to the 
possession of land, to have an 
alienation of such land made by 
the female declared to be void 
except for her life or until her  
re-marriage.  Twelve years . The date of the ali enation.  
109. By a Hindu governed by 
Mitakshara law to set aside his 
father ‟s alienation of ancestral 
property.  Twelve years . When the alien ee takes possession of the 
property.  
110. By a person excluded from a joint 
family property to enforce a 
right to share therein.  Twelve years . When the exclusion becomes known to 
the plaintiff.  
 
111. By or on behalf of any local 
authority for possession of any 
public street or road or any part 
thereof from which it has been 
dispossessed or of which it has 
discontinued the possession.  Thirty years . The date of the dispossession or 
discontinuance . 
112. Any suit (except a suit before the 
Supreme Court in the exercise of 
its original jurisdiction) by or on 
behalf of the Central 
Government or any State 
Government, including the 
Government of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  Thirty years . When the period of limitation would 
begin to run under this Act against a 
like suit by a private person.  
PART X .—SUITS FOR WHICH THERE IS NO PRESCRIBED PERIOD  
113. Any suit for which no period of 
limitation is provided elsewhere 
in this Schedule.  Three years . When the right to sue accrues.  
SECOND DIVISION —APPEALS  
114. Appe al from an order of 
acquittal ,—     
 (a) under sub -section ( 1) or  sub-
section ( 2) of section 417  of 
the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) ; Ninety days . The date of the order appealed from.  
 (b) under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 417 of th at Code.  Thirty days . The date of the grant of special leave.  22  Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
115. Under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) —    
 (a) from a sentence of death 
passed by a court of session or 
by a High Court in the 
exercise of its original 
criminal jurisdiction ; Thirty days . The date of the sentence.  
 (b) from any other sentence or 
any order not being an order 
of acquittal —    
 (i) to the High Court  Sixty days . The date of the sentence or order.  
 (ii) to any other court  Thirty days . The date of the sentence or order.  
116. Under the Code of Ci vil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908) —    
 (a) to a High  Court from any 
decree or order.  Ninety days . The date of the decree or order.  
 (b) to any other court from any 
decree or order.  Thirty days . The date of the decree or order.  
117. From a decree or order of any High 
Court to the same Court.  Thirty days . The date of the decree or order.  
THIRD DIVISION —APPLICATIONS  
PART I .—APPLICATIONS IN SPECIFIED CASES  
118. For leave to appear and defend a 
suit under summary 
procedure.  Ten days . When the summons is served.  
119. Under the Arbitration Act, 1940 
(10 of 1940), —   
 (a) for the filing in court of an 
award;  Thirty days . The date of service of the notice of the 
making of the award ; 
 (b) for setting aside an award 
or getting an award remitted 
for reconsideration.  Thirty days . The date of service of the notice of the 
filing of the award.  
120. Under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , 
to have the legal  
representative of a deceased 
plaintiff or appellant  or of a 
deceased defendant or 
respondent, made a party.  Ninety days . The date of death of the plaintiff, 
appellant, defendant or respondent , as 
the case may be.  
121. Under the same Code for an order 
to set aside an abatement.  Sixty days . The date of abatement.  
122. To restore a suit or appeal or 
application for review or 
revision dismissed for default 
of appearance or for want of 
prosecution or for failure to 
pay costs of service of process 
or to furnish security for costs.  Thirty days . The date of d ismissal.  23                                                            
1. Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, s. 98, for “Thirty days” (w.e.f. 9 -9-1976).    Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
123. To set aside a decree passed ex 
parte  or to rehear an appeal 
decreed or heard ex parte . 
Explanation .—For the purpose of 
this article, substituted service 
under rule 20 of Order V of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908) shall not be 
deemed to be due service.  Thirty days . The date of the decree or where the 
summons or notice was not duly 
served, when the applicant had 
knowledge of the decree.  
124. For a review of judgment by a 
court other than the Supreme 
Court.  Thirty days . The date of the decree or order.  
125. To record an adjustment or 
satisfaction of a decree.  Thirty days . When the payment or adjustment is made.  
126. For the payment of t he amount of  
a decree by instal ments.  Thirty days . The date of the decree.  
127. To set aside a sale in execution   
of a decree, including any 
such application by a 
judgment -debtor.  1[Sixty days ]. The date of the sale.  
128. For possession by one 
dispossessed of immovable 
property and disputing the 
right of the decree -holder or 
purchaser at a sale in 
execution of a decree.  Thirty days . The date of the dispossession.  
129. For possession after removing 
resistance or obstruction to 
delivery of possession of 
immovable property decreed 
or sold in execution of a 
decree.  Thirty days . The date of resistance or obstruction.  
130. For leave to appeal as a pauper —   
 (a) to the High Court;  Sixty days . The date of decree appealed from.  
 (b) to any other court.  Thirty days . The date of decree appealed from.  
131. To any court for the exercise of 
its powers of revision under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908), or the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 
(5 of 1898).  Ninety days . The date of the decree or order or 
sentence sought to be revised.  
132. To the High Court for a 
certificate of fitness to appeal 
to the Supreme Court under 
clause ( 1) of article 132, 
article 133 or sub -clause ( c) of 
clause ( 1) of article 134 of the 
Constitution or under any 
other law for the time being in 
force.  Sixty days . The date of the decree, order or sentence.  24  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Where” (w.e.f. 12 -12-1964.)   Description of suit  Period of limitation  Time from which period begins to run  
133. To the Supreme Court for special 
leave to appeal, —   
 (a) in a case involving death 
sentence ; Sixty days . The date of the judgment  final order or 
sentence.  
 (b) in a case where leave to 
appea l was refused by the 
High Court;  Sixty days . The date of the order of refusal.  
 (c) in any other case.  Ninety days . The date of the judgment or order.  
134. For delivery of possession by a 
purchaser of immovable 
property at a sale in execution 
of a decree.  One year . When the sale becomes absolute.  
135. For the enforcement of a decree 
granting a mandatory 
injunction.  Three years.  The date of the decree or where a date is 
fixed for performance, such date.  
136. For the execution of any decree 
(other than a decree granting a 
mandatory injunction) or 
order of any civil court.  Twelve years . 1[When] the decree or order becomes 
enforceable or where the decree or any 
subsequent order directs any payment 
of money or the delivery of any 
property to be made at a certain date or 
at recurring periods, when default in 
making the payment or delivery in 
respect of which execution is sought, 
takes place:  
Provi ded that an application for the 
enforcement or execution of a decree 
granting a perpetual injunction shall 
not be subject to any period of 
limitation.  
PART II —OTHER APPLICATION  
137. Any other application for which 
no period of limitation is 
provided elsewhere in this 
Division.  Three years . When the right to apply accrues.  
    
--------------------------The Major Port Trusts Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE MAJOR PORT TRUSTS ACT, 1963  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND COMMITTEES THEREOF  
3. Constitution of Board of Trustees.  
4. First Board of Trustees.  
5. Board to be body corporate.  
6. Disqualification for office of Trustee.  
7. Term of office of Trustees.  
8. Vacation of office of Trustees.  
9. Eligibility of Trustee for re -appointment or re -election.  
10. Filling of vacancies in office of Trustees.  
11. Saving provision for appointment of Trustee by Central Government after prescribed period.  
12. Power of Central Government to extend time for election or appoint Trustees in default of 
election.  
13. Term of office in case of certain Trustees.  
14. Absence of Chairman and Depu ty Chairman.  
14A. Acting Chairman or Deputy Chairman.  
15. Conditions of service of Chairman and Deputy Chairman.  
16. Meetings of Board.  
17. Committees of Board.  
18. Fees and allowances payable to Trustees.  
19. Restriction of power of Trustees to vote in certain cases.  
20. Defects  in appointments or election not to invalidate acts, etc.  
21. Delegation of powers.  
22. Duties of Chairman and Deputy Chairman.  
CHAPTER III  
STAFF OF THE BOARD  
23. Schedule of Board’s staff.  
24. Power to make appointments.  
25. Power to grant leave, etc., to employees of Board.  
26. Consulting Engineer to Board.  
27. Power to create posts.  
28. Power to make regulations.  
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND  CONTRACTS  
SECTIONS  
29. Transfer of assets and liabilities of Central Government, etc., to Board.  
30. Existing rates, etc., to continue until altered by Board.  
31. Repayment of capital with interest.  
32. Procedure when immovable property cannot be acquired by agreement . 
33. Contracts by Board.  
34. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of Board.  
CHAPTER V  
WORKS AND SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED AT PORTS  
35. Power of Board to execute  works and provide appliances.  
35A. Power with respect to landing places and bathing ghats.  
36. Power of Board to undertake certain works.  
37. Power of Board to order sea -going vessels to use docks, wharves, etc.  
38. If accommodation sufficient, all sea -going vessels compelled to use docks, wharves,  etc. 
39. Power to order vessels not to come alongside of , or to be removed from , docks, wharves,             
etc. 
40. Power of Central  Government to exempt from obligation to use docks wharves, etc.  
41. Board to declare when vessels other than sea -going vessels compelled to use docks, wharves etc.  
42. Performance of services by Board or other person.  
43. Responsibility of Board for loss, etc., of goods.  
44. Accommodation to be provided for customs officers in wharves, etc., appointed under Custom s 
Act. 
45. Dues at customs wharves, etc.  
46. Power to permit erection of private wharves, etc., within a port subject to conditions.  
47. Compensation payable in certain cases where use of any private wharf, etc., rendered unlawful.  
CHAPTER VA  
TARIF F AUTHORITY FOR MAJO R PORTS  
47A. Constitution and incorporation of Tariff Authority for major ports.  
47B. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and other Members.  
47C. Disqualification for the office of Chairperson and Member.  
47D. Removal, etc., of Chairperson and Members.  
47E. Meetings.  
47F. Authentication of all orders and decisions of the Authority.  
47G. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Authority.  
47H. Officers and employees of the Authority.  
CHAPTER VI  
IMPOSITION AND RECOVERY O F RATES AT PORTS  
48. Scales of rates for services performed by Board or other person.  
49. Scale of rates and statement of conditions for use of property belonging to Board.  
49A. Fees for pilotage and certain other services.  
49B. Fixation of port -dues.  
50. Consolidated rates for combination of services.  3 
 SECTIONS  
50A. Port -due on vessels in ballast.  
50B. Port -due on vessels not discharging or taking in cargo.  
50C. Publication of orders of Authority  
51. Power to levy concessional rates in certain cases.  
52.  [Omitted .] 
53. Exemption from, and remission of, rates or charges.  
54. Power of Central Government to require modification or cancellation of rates.  
55. Refund of overcharges.  
56. Notice of payment of charges short -levied or erroneously refunded.  
57. Board not to lease rates with out sanction  
58. Time for payment of rates on goods . 
59. Board’s lien for rates . 
60. Ship-owner ’s lien for freight and other charges . 
61. Sale of goods after two months if rates or rent are not paid or lien for freight is not discharged . 
62. Disposal of goods not removed from  premises of Board within time limit . 
63. Application of sale proceeds.  
64. Recovery of rates and charges by distraint of vessel.  
65. Grant of port -clearance after payment of rates and realisation of damages, etc.  
CHAPTER VII  
BORROWING POWERS OF BOARD  
66. Power to raise loans.  
67. Port Trust securities.  
68. Right of survivors of joint or several payees of securities.  
69. Power of one or two or more joint holders to grant receipts.  
70. Indorsements to be made on security itself.  
71. Indorser of security not liable for amount thereof.  
72. Impressi on of signature on securities.  
73. Issue of duplicate securities.  
74. Issue of converted, etc., securities.  
74A. Recognition as holder of Port Trust securities in certain cases.  
74B. Legal effect of recognition by the Board under section 74A.  
75. Discharge in certain cases.  
76. Power of Board to make regulations.  
77. Place and currency of loans raised by Board.  
78. Security for loans taken out by Board.  
79. Remedies of Government in respect of loans made to Boards.  
80. Power of Board to repay loans before due date.  
81. Establishment of sinking fund.  
82. Investment and application of sinking fund . 
83. Examination of sinking fund.  
84. Power of Board to raise loans on short -term bills.  
85. Power of Board to take temporary loans or overdrafts.  
86. Power of Board to borrow money from International Bank for Recon struction and Development 
or other foreign institutions.  4 
 CHAPTER VIII  
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE  
SECTIONS  
87. General account of port.  
88. Application of moneys in general account.  
89. [Omitted .] 
90. Establishment of reserve funds.  
91. Power to reserve Port Trust securities for  Board ’s own investments.  
92. Prior sanction of Central Government to charge expenditure to capital.  
93. Works requiring sanction of Board or Central Government.  
94. Powers of Chairman as to execution of works.  
95. Power of Board to compound or compromise claims.  
96. Writing off of losses.  
97. Powers, etc., of Board as Conservator or Body appointed under section 36 of Indian Ports Act.  
98. Budget estimates.  
99. Preparation of supplemental estimate.  
100. Re-appropriation of amounts in estimate.  
101. Adherence to estimate except in emergency.  
102. Accounts and audit.  
103. Publication of audit report.  
104. Board to remedy defects and irregularities pointed out in audit report.  
105. Central Government to decide difference between Board and auditors.  
CHAPTER IX  
SUPERVISION AND CONTROL OF CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
106. Admin istration report.  
107. Submission of statements of income and expenditure to Central Government.  
108. Power of Central Government to order survey or examination of works of Board.  
109. Power of Central Government to restore or complete works at the cost of  Board.  
110. Power of Central Government to supersede Board.  
110A. Power of Central Government to supersede the Authority.  
111. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Board.  
CHAPTER X  
PENALTIES  
112. Every person employed by the authority of this Act to be a public servant.  
113. Penalty for contravention of sections 37,  38, 40 and 41.  
114. Penalty for setting up wharves, quays, etc., without permission.  
115. Penalty for evading rates, etc.  
116. Recovery of value of damage to property of Board.  
117. Other offences.  
117A. Perso n interested in contracts, etc. , with the Board to be deemed to have committed an offence 
under section 168 of Indian Penal Code.  
118. Cognizance of offences.  
119. Offences by companies.  
  5 
 CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
SECTIONS  
120. Limitation of proceedings in respect of things done under the Act.  
121. Protection of acts done in good faith.  
122. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
123. General power of Board to make regulations.  
123A. Power of Authority to make regulatio ns. 
124. Provisions with respect to regulations.  
125. Power of Central Government to direct regulations to be made or to make regulations.  
126. Power of Central Government to make first regulations.  
127. Posting of certain regulations, etc.  
128. Saving of right of Central Government and municipalities to use wharves, etc., for collecting 
duties and of power of Customs Officers.  
129. Application of certain provisions of the Act to aircraft.  
130. Power to evict certain persons from the premises  of Board.  
131. Alternative remedy by suit.  
132. Requirements as to publication of notifications, orders, etc., in the Official Gazette.  
133. Repeal.   
134. Power to remove difficulties.  
  6 
 THE MAJOR PORT TRUSTS ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 38 OF 1963  
[16th October , 1963.]  
An Act to make provision for the constitution of port authorities for certain major ports in India 
and to vest the administration, control and management of such ports in such authorities and 
for matters connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliam ent in the Fourteen Year of the Republic of India as follows: —    
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called th e Major Port Trusts 
Act, 1963.  
(2) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(3) It applies in the first instance to the major ports of Cochin, Kandla and Vishakhapatnam, and the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply2 the provisions of this Act to such 
other major port 3*** and with effect from such date, as may be specified in the notification.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ”, in relation to a port, means the date on which this Act is made a pplicable to 
that port;  
4[(aa) “Authority ” means the Tariff Authority for Major Ports constituted sub -section 47A;]  
(b) “Board ”, in relation to a port, means the Board of Trustees constitute d under this Act for that 
port;  
(c) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of a Board and includes the person appointed to act  in his 
place under section 14;  
(d) “Collector of Customs ” has the same meani ng as in the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) ; 
(e) “Deputy Chairman ” means 5[the Deputy Chairman, or, as the case may be, a Deputy 
Chairman of a Board] and includes the person appointed to act in his place under section 14;  
(f) “dock ” includes all basins, locks, cuts, entrances, graving docks, graving blocks, inclined 
planes, slip ways, gridirons, moorings, transit -sheds, warehouses, tramways, railways and other works 
and things appertaining to any dock, and also the portion of the sea enclosed or protected by the  arms 
or groynes of a harbour;  
(g) “foreshore ”, in relation to a port,  means the area between the high -water mark and the            
low-water mark relating to that port;  
(h) “goods ” includes livestock and every kind of movable property;  
                                                           
1. 29th February, 1964, vide notification No. G.S.R. 296, dated 28th February, 1964, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
2. Applied to — 
Major Port of Mormugao (w.e.f. 1 -7-1964) by notification No. G.S.R. 922,  dated 22 -6-1964, Gazette of India, Part II,            
sec. 3( i). 
Major Port of Paradip (w.e.f. 1 -11-1967) by notification No. G.S.R. 1516, dated 27 -9-1967, Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
3. The brackets and words “(not being the Major Port of Bombay, Calcutta or Madras)” omitted by Act 29 of 1974, s. 2                   
(w.e.f. 1-2-1975).  
4. Ins. by  Act 15 of 1997, s. 10 (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
5. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 2, for “the Deputy Chairman of a Board”  (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  7 
 (i) “high-water mark ”, in relation to a port, means a line drawn through the highest points reached 
by ordinary spring -tides at any season of the year at the port;  
1[(ia) “immovable property ” includes wharfage -rights and all other rights exercisable on, over, or 
in respect of , any land, wharf, dock or pier;]  
(j) “Indian Ports Act ” means the India n Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908);  
(k) “land” includes the bed of the sea or river below high -water mark, and also things attached to 
the earth or permanently fastened to anything attache d to the earth;  
(l) “low-water mark ”, in relation to a port, means a line drawn through the lowest points reached 
by ordinary spring -tides at any season of the year at that po rt; 
(m) “major port ” has the same mean ing as in the Indian Ports Act;  
(n) “master ”, in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any port, means any person 
having for the time being the charge or control of such vessel or such aircraft, as the case may be, 
except a pilot, harbour m aster, assistant harbour master,  dock master  or berthing master of the port;  
(o) “owner ”, 
(i) in relation to goods, includes any consignor, consignee, shipper or agent for the sale, 
custody, loading or unloading of such  goods; and  
(ii) in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any port, includes any part -owner, 
charterer, consignee, or m ortgagee in possession thereof;  
(p) “pier” includes any stage, stairs, landing pla ce, hard, jetty, floating barge  2[, transhipper] or 
pontoon, and any bridges or o ther works connected therewith.  
 2[Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “transhipper ” means a floating craft or vessel, 
whether dumb or self -propelled, on which gears are provided for discharging cargo from a barge or 
wharf and loading it into a ship;]  
(q) “port” means any major port to which this Act applies within such limits as may, from time to 
time, be defined by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act by notification in the Official 
Gazette, and, until a notification is so issued, within such lim its as may have been defined by the 
Central Government under the prov isions of the Indian Ports Act;  
(r) “port approaches ”, in relation to a port, means those parts of the navigable rivers and channels 
leading to the port, in which th e Indian Ports Act is in force;  
(s) “Port Trust security ” means debentures, bonds or stock certificates issued by a Board in  
respect of any loan contracted by it under the provisions of this Act or issued by any other authority 
for the payment of which the Board is liable under  this Act;  
(t) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules or r egulations made under this Act;  
(u) “public securities ” means — 
(i) promissory notes, debentures, stock or other securities of the Central Governm ent or of 
any State Government:  
Provided that securities, both the principal whereof and the interest whereon have been fully 
and unconditionally guaranteed by any such Government, shall be deemed, for the purposes of 
this clause, to be  securities of such Government;  
(ii) debentures or other securitie s for money issued by or on behalf of any municipal body, 
Improvement Trust or Port Trust under the authority of any law for the time being in force in 
India (including the Port Trust securities);  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-2-1975 ). 
2. Ins. by Act  17 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  8 
 (v) “rate” includes any toll, due, rent, rate, fee, or char ge leviable under this Act ; 
(w) “regulations ” means r egulations made under this Act;  
(x) “rules ” means rules made by the Cen tral Government under this Act;  
(y) “Trustee ”, in relation to a port, means a member of the Board constituted for the port;  
1[(z) “vessel ” includes anything made for the conveyance, mainly by water, of human bei ngs or of 
goods and a caisson; ] 
(za) “wharf ” includes any wall or stage and any part of the land or foreshore that may be used for 
loading or unloading goods, or for the embark ation or disembarkation of passengers and any wall 
enclosing or adjoining the same.  
CHAPTER II  
BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND COMMITTEES THEREOF  
3. Constitution of Board of Trustees .—(1) With effect from such date as may be specified by 
notification in the Official Gazette, the Central Government shall cause to be constituted in respect of any 
major port a Board of Trustees to be called the Board of Trustees of that port, which shall con sist of the 
following Trustees, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman to be appoi nted by the Central Government;  
2[(b) one Deputy Chairman or more, as the Central Government may deem fit to appoint;]  
3[(c) not more than nineteen persons in the case of each of the ports  of Bombay, Calcutta and 
Madras and not more than seventeen persons in the case of any ot her port who shall consist of — 
(i) such number of persons, as the Central Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, to be ap pointed by that Government from amongst 
persons who are in its opinion capable of representing any one or more of such of the following 
interests as may be specifie d in the notification, namely: — 
(1) labour employed in  the port;  
(2) the Mercantile Marine D epartment;  
(3) the Customs Department;  
(4) the Government of the State  in which the port is situated;  
(5) the Defence Services;  
(6) the Indian Railways; and  
(7) such other interests as, in the opinion of the Central Government, ought to be 
represented on t he Board:  
Provided that before appointing any person to represent the labour  employed in the port, the 
Central Government shall obtain the opinion of the trade unions, if any, composed of persons 
employed in the port and registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926  (16 of 1926) , and that the 
number of persons so appoin ted shall not  be less than two;  
(ii) such number of persons, as the Central Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, to be elected by such bodies and representing any one 
or more of such of the following interests as may be specified in the notification f rom among 
themselves, namely: — 
(1) ship owners;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 3, for clause ( z) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 3, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 4, for clauses ( c) and ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  9 
 (2) owners of sailing vessels;  
(3) shippers; and  
(4) such other interests as, in the opinion of the Central Government, ought to be 
represented on the Board:  
Provided that in a case where any such body is an undertaking owned or controlled by the 
Government, the person to be elected by such body shall be appointed by the Central 
Government.]  
(2) A Trustee appointed by the Central Government under this Act may be appointed by name  or by 
virtue of office.  
(3) Every notification issued under 1[sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1)] may also specify 
the number of Trustees that each of the bodies referr ed to in that clause may elect.  
(4) The election of Trustees under 1[sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1)] shall be held 
within such period as may, from time to time, be specified by the Central Governme nt. 
(5) The chief executive authority of every electing body shall communicate forthwith to the Central 
Gover nment the result of any election held i n pursuance of sub -section ( 4). 
(6) The names of persons appointed or elected as Trustees shall be notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette.  
4. First Board of Trustees .—(1) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in section 3, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute in respect of any major port the first 
Board of T rustees thereof consisting of — 
(a) a Chairman to be appoi nted by the Central Government;  
(b) a Deputy Chairman, if the Central Governmen t deems fit to appoint one; and  
(c) such number of other Trustees, 2[not exceeding seventeen] , as that Government may deem 
expedient, to be appointed by that Government from amongst persons who are in its op inion capable 
of representing, — 
(i) labour employed in the port;  
(ii) Government of the State  in which the port is situated;  
(iii) Government departments specified 3[in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( c)] of sub -section (1) of 
section 3; and  
(iv) such other interests as, in t he opinion of the Central Government, ought to be represented 
on the Board.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the persons appointed as Trustees under                     
sub-section ( 1) shall hold office during the plea sure of the Central G overnment.  
(3) On the constitution of the Board under section 3, the first Board of Trustees shall cease to exist.  
5. Board to be body corporate. —Every Board constituted under this Act shall be a body corporate 
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold or dispose of property and may by the name by which it is constituted, sue or  be sued.  
6. Disqualification for office of Trustee. —A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as a 
Trustee, if he— 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Governmen t, involves moral tu rpitude; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 4, for “ clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “not exceeding twenty -two” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “in sub -clause s (ii), (iii), (v) and ( vi) of clause ( c)” (w.e.f. 1-2-1975).  10 
 (b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) holds any of fice of profit under the Board:  
1[Provided that this disqualification shall not apply to the Chairman, Deputy Chairman or a 
Trustee who has been appointed to represent the labour employed in the port or appointed by virtue of 
office as officer or member of an association formed for the purpose of promoting the interests or 
welfare of any cl ass of employees of the Board;]  
(d) has, directly or indirectly, any share or interest in any work done by order of the Board, or in 
any contract or employment, with,  by, or on behalf of the Board:  
Provided that no person shall be deemed to have a share or interest in such work, contract or 
employment by reason only of his — 
(i) having a share in any company or firm which may contract with or be employed b y or on 
behalf of the Board, or  
(ii) having a share or interest in any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the 
affairs o f the Board may be inserted, or  
(iii) being interested in any  loan of money  to the Board, or  
(iv) having a share or interest in any lease, sale, exchange or purchase of immovable property 
or any agreement for the same, or  
(v) having a share or interest in any licence by the Board, or right by agreement or otherwise 
with the Board  to the sole or preferential use of any railway siding or any berth for vessels in the 
docks belonging to the Boa rd, or 
(vi) having a share or interest in the occasional sale to the Board, to a value not exceeding ten 
thousand rupees in any one financial y ear, of any article in which he trades.  
7. Term of office of Trustees .—(1) The Chairman and the Deputy Chairman shall hold office during 
the plea sure of the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act ,— 
(a) every person elected or appointed by name to be a Trustee shall hold office to which he is 
elected or so appointed, for a term of two years commencing on the 1st day of April next following 
his election or a ppointment, as the case may be:  
Provided that the term of office of a mem ber elected to represent any body of persons shall come 
to an end as soon as he ceas es to be a member of that body;  
(b) a person appointed by virtue of an office to be a Trustee shall, until the Central Government 
by notification in the Official Gazette ot herwise directs, continue to be a Trustee so long as he 
continues to hold that office.  
8. Vacation of office of Trustees .—(1) The Central Governmen t shall remove a Trustee if he — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 6; or  
2[(aa) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, ceased to represent the interest by virtue of 
which h e was appointed or elected; or]  
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable  of acting; or  
(c) is, without the permission of the Board previously obtained, absent from six consecutive 
ordinary meetings of the Board; or  
(d) is absent from the meetings of the Board for a period excee ding six consecutive months; or  
(e) acts in contra vention o f the provisions of section 19.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 29 of 1974, s. 6 , for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-1975).  11 
 (2) A Trustee may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the Chairman who shall forward the 
same to the Central Government, and on such resignation being accepted by that Government he shall be 
deemed to h ave vacated his office.  
9. Eligibility of Trustee for re -appointment or re -election .—Any person ceasing to be a Trustee 
shall, unless disqualified under section 6, be eligible for re -appointment or re -election.  
10. Filling of vacancies in office of Trustees .—(1) In the case of a vacancy in the office of a Trustee 
appointed by name or an elective Trustee caused by the expiration of the term of office of such Trustee, 
the appointment to fill such vacancy shall be made or an election to fill such vacanc y shall be completed, 
as the case may be, within two months immediately preceding the d ate of expiration of such term.  
(2) In the case of a vacancy in the office of a Trustee appointed by the Central Government by virtue 
of an office, the appointment to fi ll such vacancy shall be made within one month of the occurrence of 
such vacancy.  
(3) In the case of a casual vacancy in the office of a Trustee appointed by name or an elective Trustee 
caused by the death of such Trustee or by virtue of the provisions of section 8, such vacancy shall be 
filled within one month of the occurrence thereof by appointment or election, as the case may be, in the  
manner hereinbefore specified:  
Provided that the Trustee so appointed or elected shall retain his office so long only as the vacating 
Trustee shall have retained the same if  such vacancy had not occurred:  
Provided further that no such casual vacancy occurring within three months of the date of expiry of 
the normal term of office of the vacating Trustee shall be filled up under this sub -section.  
11. Saving provision for appointment of Trustee by Central Government after prescribed 
period .—Nothing in the foregoing provisions shall prevent a person being appointed by the Central 
Government to fill any vacancy in the office of  a Trustee appointed by the Central Government after the 
expiration of the period specified in section 10, if for any reason it has not been possible for the Central 
Government to make the appointment within the said period.  
12. Power of Central Government  to extend time for election or appoint Trustees in default of 
election. —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that an electing body has failed to elect a Trustee 
within the period specified there for in sub -section ( 4) of section 3 or section 10 for reasons beyond its 
control, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the election shall 
be held on or before such date as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) In the event of default being made in electing any T rustee within the period specified therefor 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 3 or under section 10, or as the case may be, on or before the date 
specified in the notification issued under sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Central Government to 
appoint a person by notification in the Official Gazette and the person so appointed shall be deemed to be 
an elective Trustee.  
13. Term of office in case of certain Trustees .—Where a Trustee is appointed under section 11 or 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 12 or elected in pursuance of a direction issued under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 12, the term of office of such Trustee shall commence on the date on which his appointment or 
election. as the case may be, is notified in the Official Gazette and shall expi re on the date on which his 
term of office would have expired if his appointment or election had been made within the period 
specified under section 10, or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 4) of section 3.  
14. Absence o f Chairman and Deputy Chairman. —If the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman is, by 
infirmity or otherwise, rendered incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise, in 
circumstances not involving the vacation of his appointment, or is sent on deputation outsi de India for any 
of the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint another person to act i n his place during 
his absence:  
Provided that the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman, while on deputation outside India may, if the 
Central Government by o rder so directs and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be 
specified in that order, exercise such of the powers and perform such of the duties conferred or imposed 12 
 on the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman, as the case may be, by or under this Act as he may deem 
necessary, and the Chairman or Deputy Chairman while exercising such powers and performing such 
duties shall be deemed to be a Trustee notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act.  
1[14A. Acting Chairman or Deputy Chair man .—The Central Government may, pending the 
consideration of the question as to who may be appointed as Chairman or Deputy Chairman of a Board 
under section 3 or section 4, appoint a person to be the acting Chairman or Deputy Chairman thereof and 
notify h is name in the Official Gazette and the person so appointed shall, until the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette otherwise directs, be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the 
Chairman or Deputy Chairman of such Board appointed under section 3 or section 4, as the case may be.]  
15. Conditions of service of Chairman and Deputy Chairman .—The Chairman and the Deputy 
Chairman shall be paid such salary and be governed by such terms and conditions of service as may, from 
time to time, be determined by the Central Government.  
16. Meetings of Board .—(1) A Board shall meet at such times and places and shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings as may be provide d by rules made under this Act.  
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, the Deputy Chairman, and in the absence of both, any person 
chosen by the Trustees present from among themselves, shall pr eside at meetings of the Board.  
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the Trustees 
present and voting and, in the case of an equality of votes, the person presiding shall  have a second or 
casting vote.  
(4) No business shall be transact ed at any meeting of the Board unless not less than five Trustees are 
present throughout such meeting.  
17. Committees of Board .—(1) A Board may, from time to time, constitute from amongst the 
Trustees one or more committees, each consisting of such number as the Board may consider necessary, 
for the purpose of discharging such of its functions as may be delegated to such committee or committees 
by the Board.  
2[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or any other provision of this Act, the 
Board may appoint a person who is not a Trustee to be a member of any committee constituted under that 
sub-section and a person so appointed shall, for the purpose of the discharge of his functions as such 
memb er, be deemed to be a Trustee.]  
(2) A comm ittee constituted under this section shall meet at such times and at such places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the 
quorum) as may be provided by regulations made under this Act . 
18. Fees and allowances payable to Trustees .—3[(1)] The Trustees shall be paid by the Board such 
fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the Board or of any of its committees and for attending 
to any other work of the Board as may be provide d by rules made under this Act:  
Provided that no fees shall be payable to the Chairman, Deputy Chairman or any other Trustee who is 
a servant of the Government.  
4[(2) A member of a committee appointed under sub -section ( 1A) of section 17 shall be paid the same 
fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the committee and for attending to any other work of 
the Board as are payable to a trustee under sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Board may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, pay to any such 
member fees and allowances at a rate higher than that provided in the case of Trustees.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
2. Ins. by s. 5,  ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
3. Section 18 re -numbered as sub-section ( 1) thereof by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  13 
 19. Restriction of power of Trustees to vote in certain cases .—No Trustee shall vote or take part in 
the discussion of any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Board or any of its 
committees if the matter is one in which he has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest by himself or his 
partner, or in which he is interested professionally on behalf of a client or as agent for any person other 
than the Government 1[or an undertaking owned or controlled by the Government] or a local authority or 
a trade union registered under 2[the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926), or other than as officer or 
member of an association formed for the purpose of promoting the interests or welfare of any class of 
employees of the B oard]. 
20. Defects in appointments or election not to invalidate acts, etc. —No act or proceeding of a 
Board or of any of its committees shall b e invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacan cy therein or any defect in the constitution thereof, or 
(b) any defect in the election or appointment of a  person as a member thereof, or  
(c) any Trustee having acted or taken part in any proceedings in c ontravention of section 19, or  
(d) any irregularity  in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
21. Delegation of powers .—A Board may, with the approval of th e Central Government, specify —  
(a) the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the Board by or under this Act, which may 
also be exercised or  performed by the Chairman; and  
(b) the powers and duties conferred or imposed on the Chairman by or under this Act, which may 
also be exercised or performed by the Deputy Chairman or any officer of the Board and the 
conditions and restrictions , if any, subject to which such powers and duties may be exercised and 
performed:  
Provided that any powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the Deputy Chairman or any 
officer of the Board under clause ( b) shall be exercised and performed by him subject  to the 
supervision and control of the Chairman.  
22. Duties of Chairman and Deputy Chairman .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Chairman and the 
Deputy Chairman to attend every meeting of the Board unless prevented by sick ness or other reasonable 
cause.  
(2) The Chairman shall, as soon as possible, transmit to the Central Government a copy of the 
minutes of every meeting of the Board and shall furnish to that Government such reports, returns, 
documents or other information as it ma y, from time to time, call fo r. 
(3) The Chairman shall exercise supervision and control over the acts of all employees of the Board in 
matters of executive administration and in matters concerning the accounts and records of the Board.  
CHAPTER III  
STAFF OF THE BOARD  
23. Schedule of Bo ard’s staff. —A Board shall, from time to time, prepare and sanction a Schedule 
of the employees of the Board whom it deems necessary and proper to maintain for the purposes of this 
Act and such Schedule shall indicate therein the designations and grades of  employees and the salaries, 
fees and allowances which a re proposed to be paid to them:  
3[Provided that the previous sanction of the Central Government shall be obtained for the inclusion in 
the said Schedule of those designations and grades of employees and the salaries, fees and allowances 
payable to them which the Central Government may, by order, specify, and where no such order is made, 
of such posts (including the salaries and allowances attached thereto) which are required to be created by 
the Centr al Government, or for the creation of which the previous sanction of the Central Government is 
required, under this Act.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “the Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926  (16 of 1926) ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
3. The proviso added by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  14 
 24. Power to make appointments .—(1) Subject to the provisions of the Schedule for the time being 
in force sanctioned by a Board under section 23, the power of appointing any person to any post, whether 
temporary or permanent, shall — 
1[(a) in the case of a post — 
(i) the incumbent of which is to be regarded as the Head of a department; o r 
(ii) to which such incumbent is to be appointed; or   
2[(iii) the maximum of the pay scale of which (exclusive of allowances) exceeds such amount 
as the Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, fix;]  
be exercisable by the Central Government after consultation with the Chairman; ]  
3[(b) in the case of any other post, be exercisable by the Chairman or by such authority as may  be 
prescribed by regulations:]  
Provided that no person shall be appointed as a pilot at any port, who is not for the time being 
authorised by the Central Governm ent under the provisions of the Indian Ports Act to pilot vessels  4[at 
that or any other port].  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, specify any post the incumbent of which shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be regarded as the Head of a department.  
25. Power to grant leave, etc., to employees of Board .—(1) Subject to any regulations made under 
section 28, the power of 5*** granting extension of service to, granting leave to, suspending, reducing, 
6[compulsorily retiring,] removing or dismissing or of  disposing of any other question relating to the 
services of, the employees of a Board, including the power of dispensing with the services of any such 
employee otherwise than by reason of the misconduct of such emp loyee, shall be exercised —  
7[(a) in the case of an employee holding a post referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of                       
section 24, by the Chairman;  
(b) in any other case, by the Chairman or by such authority as may be prescribed by regulations:]  
Provided that no such o rder, so far as the same involves extension of service, suspension, reduction in 
rank, 6[compulsory retirement ,] removal or dismissal of 8[an employee referred to in clause ( a),] shall 
have effect until it is approved by the Central Gov ernment.  
(2) Any emp loyee of a Board 9*** aggrieved by an order involving his reduction in rank, 
10[compulsory retirement,] removal or dismissal may, within such time and in such manner as may be 
provided for by  regulations, prefer an appeal —  
11[(a) to the Central Government, where such order is passed by the Chairman;  
(b) to the Chairman, where such order is passed by any such authority as is prescribed by 
regulations under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1):]  
Provided that where the person who passed the order becomes, by virtue of his subsequent 
appointment as the Chairman, the appellate authority in respect of the appeal against the order, such 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 10, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 7, for sub -clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 10, for clauses ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).   
4. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 7, for “at that port” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
5. The word “promoting,” omitted by Act 29 of 1974, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
6. Ins. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
7. Su bs.by Act 29 of 1974, s. 11, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
8. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “a Head of a department” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
9. The brackets and words “(not being a Head of a department)” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
10. Ins. by Act 17 of 19 82, s. 8 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
11. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 11, for clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  15 
 person shall forward the appeal to 1[the Central Government] and 1[the Central Government] in relation to 
to that appeal shall be deemed to be the appellate authority of the purposes of this section.  
26. Consulting Engineer to Board .—A Board may appoint any person as Consulting Engineer to the 
Board otherwise than on the basis of payment of a monthly salary, but every such appointment shall be 
subject to the sanction of the Central Government.  
2[27. Power to create posts. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 23, the power to create 
any post, whether t emporary or permanent, shall, — 
(a) in the case of a pos t the holder of which is to be regarded as the Head of a department or in 
the case of a post the maximum of the pay -scale of which (exclusive of allowances) 3[exceeds such 
amount as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, be exercisable by 
that Government; ] 
(b) in the case of a post [other than a post referred to in clause ( a)], the maximum of the pay -scale 
of which exceeds such amount as the Central Government may, from time to time, by order fix in this 
behalf, or where n o such amount has been fixed, is not less than one thousand rupees, be exercisable 
by the Board with the previous sanc tion of the Central Government;  
(c) in the case of any other post, be exercisable by the Chairman.]  
28. Power to make regulations .—A Board  may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act, to 
provide for any one or more of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the appointment, promotion, suspension, 4[reduction in rank, compulsory retirement,] removal 
removal and dismissal of its employees;  
(b) their leave, leave allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate allowances and travelling 
allowances and the establishment and maintenance of a Provident Fund or an y other fund for their 
welfare;  
(c) the terms and conditions of service of persons who be come employees of the Board under 
clause  (f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 29;  
(d) the time and manner in which appeals may be preferred under sub -section ( 2) of section 25 
and the proce dure for deciding such appeals;  
(e) any other matter which is incident al to, or necessary for, the purpose of regulating the 
appointment and conditions of service of its employees.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
29. Transfer of assets and liabilities of Central Government, etc., to Board .—(1) As from the 
appointe d day in  relation to any port — 
(a) all property, assets and funds 5[and all rights to levy rates] vested in the Central Government 
or, as the case may be, any other authority for the purposes of the port immediately before suc h day, 
shall vest in the Board;  
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be done, by, with or for the Central Government or, as the case may be, the other 
authority immediately before such day, for or in connection wi th the purposes of the port, shall be 
deemed to have been incurred, entered into and engaged to be done by, with or for the Board;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 11, for “the Board” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for section 27 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
3. Subs. by Act 17  of 1982, s. 9, for “exceeds two thousand rupees, be exercisable by the Central Government;”                    
(w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
4. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
5. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  16 
 (c) all non -recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Government or any State Government 
for or in connection with the pu rposes of the port up to such day and declared to be capital 
expenditure by the Central Government shall be treated as the capital provided by the Central 
Government or, as the case may be, the  State Government to the Board;  
(d) all rates, fees, rents and other sums of money due to the Central Government or, as the case 
may be, the other authority in relation to the port immediately before such day shall be  deemed to be 
due to the Board;  
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted by or against the  Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the other authority immediately before such day for any matter in relation to the port 
may be con tinued by or against the Board;  
(f) every employee serving under the Central Government or, as the case may be, the  other 
authority immediately before such day solely or mainly for or in connection with the affairs of the 
port shall become an employee of the Board, shall hold his office or service therein by the same 
tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of ser vice as he would have held the same if the Board 
had not been established and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Board is 
terminated or  until his tenure, remuneration or terms and conditions of service  are duly altered by the 
Board:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such employee 
shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanc tion of the Central Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any employee under this section to the 
Board shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law, and no such cla im 
shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), the right to fix rate s vested 
in the Board shall vest in the Authority as from the date it is c onstituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 
47A.]  
30. Existing rates, etc., to continue until altered by Board. —As from the appointed day, all rates, 
fees and other charges in relation to any port, shall, unless and until they are varied by the competent 
authority in accor dance with the provisions of this Act, continue to be levied and collected at the same 
rate at which they were being levied and collected by the Central Government or, as the case may be, any 
other authority immediately before such day.  
31. Repayment of ca pital with interest. —A Board shall repay, at such intervals and on such terms 
and conditions as the Central Government may determine, the amount of capital provided under clause ( c) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 29 with interest at such rate as may be fixed by that Government and such 
repayment of capital or payment of interest shall be deemed to be part of the expenditure of the Board.  
32. Procedure when immovable Property cannot be acquired by agreement. —2[When any 
immovable property is required for t he purposes of the Board], the Central Government may, at the 
request of the Board, procure the acquisition thereof under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 
1894 (1 of 189 4), and on payment by the Board of the compensation awarded under that Act a nd of the 
charges incurred by the Government in connection with the proceedings, the land shall vest in the Board.  
33. Contracts by Board. —Subject to the provisions of section 34, a Board shall be competent to 
enter into and perform any contract necessary for the performance of its functions under this Act.  
34. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of Board. —(1) Every contract shall, on behalf of a 
Board, be made by the Chairman 3[or by any such officer of the Board not below the rank of the Head of 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1997, s.  11 (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 14, for “Whenever any immovable property which is required for the purposes of the Board can not 
be acquired by agreement” (w.e.f. 1-2-1975).  
3. Ins. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 11 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  17 
 a depar tment as the Chairman may, by general or special order, authorise in this behalf] and shall be 
sealed with the common seal of the Board:  
Provided that no contract whereof the value or amount exceeds such value or amount as the Central 
Government may from t ime to time fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously approved 
by the Board:  
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable property or for the lease of 
any such property for a term exceeding thirty years, and no other contract whereof the value or amount 
exceeds such value or amount as the Central Government may from time to time fix in this behalf, shall 
be made unless it has been previously appr oved by the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions  of sub -section ( 1), the form and manner in which any contract shall be 
made under this Act shall be such as may be prescribed by re gulations made in this behalf.  
(3) No contract which is not made in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations 
made thereunder shall be binding on the Board.  
CHAPTER V  
WORKS AND SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED AT PORTS  
35. Power of Board to execute works and provide appliances .—(1) A Board may execute such 
works within or without the limits of the port and prov ide such appliances as it m ay deem necessary or 
expedient.  
(2) Such wor ks and appliances may include — 
(a) wharves, quays, docks, stages, jetties, piers and other works within the port or port approaches 
or on the foreshore of the port or port approaches, w ith all such convenient arches, drains, landing 
places, stairs, fences, roads, railways, bridges, tunnels and approaches and buildings required for the 
residence of the employees of the Board as th e Board may consider necessary;  
(b) buses, railways, locomotives, rolling stock, sheds, hotels, warehouses and other 
accommodation for passengers and goods and other appliances for carrying passengers and for 
conveying, receiving and storing goods landed,  or to be shipped or otherwise;  
(c) moorings and crane s, scales and all other necessary means and appliances for loa ding and 
unloading vessels;  
(d) reclaiming, excavating, enclosing and raising any part of the foreshore of the port or port 
approaches which may be necessary for the execution of the works autho rised by this Act, or 
otherwis e for the purposes of this Act;  
(e) such breakwaters and other works as may be expedient for the protection of the port;  
(f) dredgers and other machines for cleaning, deepening and improving any portion of the port or 
port app roaches or of the foreshore of the port or port approaches;  
(g) lighthouses, lightships, beacons, buoys, pilot boats and other appliances necessary for the safe 
navigation of the port and of th e port approaches;  
(h) vessels, tugs or other boats for use wit hin the limits of the port or beyond those limits, whether 
in territorial waters or otherwise, for the purpose of towing or rendering assistance to any vessel, 
whether entering or leaving the port or bound elsewhere, and for the purpose of saving or protec ting 
life or property and for the purpose of landing, shipping or transhipping passengers or goods under 
section 42;  
(i) sinking of tube -wells, and equipment, maintenance and use of boats, barges and other 
appliances for the purpose of t he supply of water  at the port;  
(j) engines and other appliances necessary for the extingushing of fires;  18 
 1[(k) construction of models and plans for carrying out hydraulic studies;  
(l) dry docks, slipways, boat basins and workshops to carry out repairs or overhauling of ve ssels, 
tugs, boats, machinery or other appliances.]  
2[35A. Power with respect to landing places and bathing ghats .—Without prejudice to the powers 
exercisable under section 35, the Board of Trustees for the port of Calcutta may, if it considers it 
necessary so to do  for the purposes of this Act, — 
(i) provide for sufficient number of public landing places from and upon which the public shall be 
permitted to emb ark and to land free of charge;  
(ii) occupy any bathing ghat , or remove any landing place, within the port and thereafter prohibit 
the public from resorting to or using the same:  
Provided that the Board shall not exercise any power under this section unless it reserves, sets out, 
makes and provides for the use of t he public, such number of bathing ghats within the port as the Central 
Government may direct.]  
36. Power of Board to undertake certain works. —3[(1)] A Board may undertake to carry out on 
behalf of any person any works or services or any class of works or s ervices, on such terms and 
conditions as may be agreed upon between the Board and the person concerned.  
4[(2) A Board may, if it considers it necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do, lend any of 
its vessels or appliances or the services of a ny of its employees to any person for such period not 
exceeding three months and on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the Board and 
the person concerned.]  
37. Power of Board to order sea -going vessels to use docks, wharves, etc .—(1) When any dock, 
berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier erected at any port or port approaches under the provisions of this 
Act has been completed with sufficient warehouses, sheds and appliances for receiving, landing or 
shipping goods or passengers from a nd upon sea -going vessels, the Board may, after obtaining the 
approval of the Collector of Customs and by notification published in three consecutive issues of the 
Official Gazette, declare that such dock, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier is ready for rec eiving, landing 
and shipping or for landing or for shipping goods or passengers from and upon sea -going vessels.  
(2) As from the date of the publication of such notification for the third time, it shall be lawful for the 
Board, from time to time, when there is room at such dock berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier, to order 
to come alongside of such dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier for the purpose of landing and 
shipping goods or passengers or for landing or for shipping the same, any sea-going vessel within the port 
or port approaches which has not commenced to discharge goods or passengers, or which being about to 
take in goods or passenge rs, has not commenced to do so:  
Provided that before making such order, the Board shall have rega rd, as far as possible, to the 
convenience of such vessel and of the shippers, in respect of the use of any particular dock, berth, wha rf, 
quay, stage, jetty or pier:  
Provided further that if the Board is not the conservator of the port, the Board shall no t itself make the 
order as aforesaid but shall require the conservator of the port, or other person exercising the rights, 
powers, and authorities of the conservator of the port, to make such order.  
38. If accommodation sufficient, all sea -going vessels co mpelled to use docks, wharves,               
etc.—When a sufficient number of docks, berths, wharves, quays, stages, jetties or piers have been 
provided at any port or port approaches as aforesaid, the Board may, after obtaining the approval of the 
Collect or of Customs and by notification published in three consecutive issues of the Official Gazette, 
direct that no goods or passengers shall be landed or shipped from or upon any sea -going vessel within 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
3. Section 36 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
4. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  19 
 the port or port approaches otherwise than at such docks , berths, wharves, quays, stages, jetties or piers, 
except with the sanction of the Board and in accordance with such conditions as the Board may specify.  
39. Power to order vessels not to come alongside of , or to be removed from docks, wharves,             
etc.—Any officer appointed by the Board in this behalf may, in cases of emergency or for any reason 
which appears to him sufficient, by notice in writing, order the master or owner or agent of any sea -going 
vessel not to bring such vessel alongside of, o r to remove such vessel from, any dock, berth, wharf, quay, 
stage, jetty or pier belonging to or under the control of the Board, and, if such notice is not complied with 
1[the Board may charge, by way of penalty, in respect of such vessel such sum as it th inks fit, not 
exceeding ten thousand rupees] for each day of twenty -four hours, or portion of such day, during which 
such vessel remains at such dock, berth, wha rf, quay, stage, jetty or pier:  
Provided that in the case of a vessel ordered to be removed, su ch charge shall not commence to be 
made till after the expiry of twelve hours from the service of such notice as aforesaid on the master or 
owner or agent of the vessel.  
40. Power of Central Government to exempt from obligation to use docks , wharves,                    
etc.—Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 37 and 38, the Central Government may, if in its 
opinion it is necessary in the public interest so to do, by general or special order, from time to time, 
permit certain specified vessels or classes of vessels to discharge or ship goods or certain specified goods 
or classes of goods, at such place in a port or within the port approaches, in such manner, during such 
period and subject to such payments to the Board and on such conditions as the Central Government may 
think fit.  
41. Board to declare when vessels other than sea -going vessels compelled to use docks, wharves , 
etc.—(1) When any dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier for receiving, landing or shipment of 
goods or passengers fro m or upon vessels, not being sea -going vessels, has been made and completed 
with all proper appliances in that behalf, the Board may, after obtaining the approval of the Collector of 
Customs, by order published in three consecutive is sues of the Official G azette, — 
(i) declare that such dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier is ready for receiving, landing or 
shipment of goods or passengers from or on vessels, n ot being sea -going vessels, and  
(ii) direct that within certain limits to be specified the rein it shall not be lawful, without the 
express sanction of the Board, to land or ship any goods or passengers out of, or into, any vessel, not 
being a sea -going vessel, of any class specified in such order, except at such dock, berth, wha rf, quay, 
stage,  jetty or pier.  
(2) As from the date of the publication of the order mentioned in sub -section ( 1) for the third time, it 
shall not be lawful, without the consent of the Board,  for any vessel of such class, — 
(i) to land or ship any goods or passengers at an y place within the limits so specified except at 
such dock, berth, wharf,  quay, stage, jetty or pier; or  
(ii) while within such limits, to anchor, fasten or lie within fifty yards of the ordinary low -water 
mark.  
(3) If after the publication of such order,  any such vessel shall, while within the limits so specified, so 
anchor, fasten or lie, it shall be lawful for the Board to cause the same to be removed out of the said limits 
at the expense of the master o r owner or agent of the vessel.  
42. Performance of  services by Board or other person. —(1) A Board shall have power to              
under take the following services: — 
(a) landing, shipping or transhipping  passengers and goods between vessels in the port and the 
wharves, piers, quays or docks belonging to or in the possession of the Board;  
(b) receiving, removing, shifting, transporting, storing or delivering goods brought within t he 
Board ’s premises;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 12 , for “the Board may  charge in respect of such vessel such sum as it thinks fit, not exceeding on e 
thousand rupees” (w.e.f  31 -5-1982).  20 
 (c) carrying passengers by rail or by other means within the limits of the port or port approaches, 
subject to such restrictions and conditions as the Central Government may think fit to impose; 1***  
(d) receiving and delivering, transporting and booking and d espatching goods originating in the 
vessels in the port and intended for carriage by the neighbouring railways, or vice versa , as a railway 
administration under the Indian Railways Act, 1890  ( 9 of 1890 ); 2*** 
3[(e) piloting, hauling, mooring, remooring, hooking, or measuring of vessels or any other service 
in respect of vessels ;] 4[and]  
4[(f) developing and providing, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, 
infrastructure facilities for ports. ] 
(2) A Board may, if so requested by the owner, take charge of the goods for the purpose of 
performing the service or services and shall give a receipt in such form as the Board may specify.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Board m ay, with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government, authorise any person to perform any of the services mentioned in sub -section ( 1) 
on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon.  
4[(3A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), a Board may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, enter into any agreement or other arrangement (whether by way of 
partnership, joint venture or in any other manner) with, any body corporate or any other person to perform 
any of the ser vices and functions assigned to the Board under this Act on such terms and conditions as 
may be agreed upon.]  
(4) No person authorised under sub -section ( 3) shall charge or recover for such service any sum in 
excess of the amount 5[specified by the Authori ty, by notification in the Official Gazette] .  
(5) Any such person shall, if so required by the owner, perform in respect of goods any of the said 
services and for that purpose take charge of the goods and give a receipt in such form as the Board may 
speci fy.  
(6) The responsibility of any such person for the loss, destruction or deterioration of goods of which 
he has taken charge shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be that of a bailee under                   
section s 151, 152 and 161 o f the Indian Contract Act, 1872  ( 9 of 1872 ).  
(7) After any goods have been taken charge of and a receipt given for them under this section, no 
liability for any loss or damage which may occur to them shall attach to any person to whom a receipt has 
been given or to the master or owner of the vessel fro m which the goods have been landed or transhipped.  
43. Responsibility of Board for loss, etc., of goods .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
responsibility of any Board for the loss, destruction or deterioration of goods of wh ich it has taken c harge 
shall, — 
(i) in the case of goods received for carriage by railway, be governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Rail ways Act, 1890  (9 of 1890) ; and 
(ii) in other cases, be that of a bailee under sections 151, 152 and 161 of the Indian Contract Act, 
1872 (9 of 1872), omitting the words “in the absence of any special contract ” in section 15 2 of that 
Act: 
6[Provided that no responsibility under this se ction shall attach to the Board — 
(a) until a receipt mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of sectio n 42 is given by the Board; and  
                                                           
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 29 of 1974, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. The word “and” omitted by Act 22 of 2000, s. 2 ( w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
4.  Ins. by Act 22 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 12, for “leviable according to the scale framed under section 48 or section 49 or section 50”            
(w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
6. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 19 , for the proviso  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  21 
 (b) after the expiry of such period as may be prescribed by regulations from the date of taking 
charge of such goods by the Board .] 
(2) A Board shall not be in any way responsible for the loss, destruction or deterioration of, or 
damage t o, goods of which it has taken charge, unless notice of such loss or damage has been given 
within such period as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf 1[from the date of taking 
charge of such goods by the Board] under sub -section ( 2) of sect ion 42.  
44. Accommodation to be provided for customs officers in wharves, etc., appointed under 
Customs Act. —Where the Collector of Customs has, under the provisions of any Act for the levy of 
duties of customs, appointed any dock, berth, wharf, quay, stag e, jetty, pier warehouse or shed or a 
portion of any warehouse or shed provided at any port under the provisions of this Act for the use of            
sea-going vessels to be an approved place for the landing or shipping of goods or a warehouse for the 
storing of dutiable goods on the first importation thereof without payment of duty, within the meaning of  
the first -mentioned Act, the Board shall set apart and maintain such place on or adjoining such dock , 
berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier, or in such warehouse or shed or portion thereof, for the use of 
officers of customs as may be necessary.  
45. Dues at customs wharves, etc.—Notwithstanding that any dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty, 
pier, warehouse or shed or portion thereof at any port has , under the provisions of section 44, been set 
apart for the use of the officers of customs at the port, all rates and other charges payable under this Act in 
respect thereof, or for the storage of goods therein, shall be payable to the Board, or to such p erson or 
persons as may be appointed by the Board to receive the same.  
46. Power to permit erection of private wharves, etc., within a port subject to                    
conditions .—(1) No person shall make, erect or fix within the limits of a port or port approaches any 
wharf, dock, quay, stage, jetty, pie r, erction or mooring 2[or undertake any reclamation of foreshore 
within the said limits] except with the previous permission in writing of the Board and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as the Boar d ma y specify.  
(2) If any person makes, erects or fixes any wharf, dock, quay, stage, jetty, pier, erection or mooring 
2[or undertakes any reclamation of foreshore] in contravention of sub -section ( 1), the Board may, by 
notice, require such person to remove it within such time as may be spe cified in the notice and if the 
person fails so to remove it, the Board may cause it to be removed at the expense of that person.  
47. Compensation payable in certai n cases where use of any private wharf, etc., rendered 
unlawful. —(1) Where, as a result of an order published under section 38 or section 41, the use of any 
wharf, dock, berth, quay, stage, jetty or pier, made, fixed or erected by any person is rendered un lawful, 
the Board may, after hearing the person concerned, by order, close, remove, fill up or destroy such wharf, 
dock, berth, quay, stage, jetty or pier, or permit the use thereof to such person on payment of such rates 
and charges as the Board may, with  the previous sanction of the Central Government, determ ine. 
(2) Save as other wise provided under sub -section (3) no person shall be entitled to claim 
compensation for any injury, damage or loss caused or alleged to have been cau sed by an order made 
under sub-section ( 1). 
(3) If it is proved to the satisfaction of the Board that any such wharf, dock, berth, quay, stage, jetty or 
pier, was made, fixed or erected by any person with the previous permission of the authority competent to 
grant such permission, h e shall be paid by the Board compensation the amount of which shall be 
determined in the manner and in accordance with the principles hereina fter set out, that is to say — 
(a) in computing the compensation, there shall not be taken into account any rates or  other 
charges which such person shall be liable to pay for using any wharf, dock, berth, quay, stage, jetty  or 
pier provided by the Board;  
(b) the amount of compensation shall be calculated with reference to the cost of construction of 
such wharf, dock, b erth, quay, stage, jetty or pier;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 19, for “from the date of the receipt given for the goods” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2.  Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  22 
 (c) where the amount of compensation can be fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance 
with such agreement;  
(d) where no such agreement can be reached, the Central Government shall appoint as arbitrator, 
a person w ho is, or has been, or is qualified for appointme nt as, a Judge of a High Court;  
(e) the Central Government may, in any particular case, nominate a person possessing special 
knowledge of any matter relating to any case under inquiry to assist the arbitrato r in determining any 
question which has to be decided by him under this section, and where such nomination is made the 
person to be compensated may also nominate an assessor for the same purpose;  
(f) at the commencement of the proceeding before the arbitra tor, the Board and the person to be 
compensated shall state what in their respective opinion is  a fair amount of compensation;  
(g) the arbitrator shall, after hearing the dispute, make an award determining the amount of 
compensation which appears to him to  be just and specify the person or persons to whom s uch 
compensation shall be paid;  
(h) where there is a dispute as to the person or persons who are entitled to the compensation, the 
arbitrator shall decide such dispute and if the arbitrator finds that mor e persons than one are entitled 
to compensation, he shall apportion the amount thereof among such persons;  
(i) nothing in 1[the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996)]  shall apply to arbitr ations 
under this section;  
(j) the arbitrator appoint ed under this section, while holding arbitration proceedings under this 
Act, shall have all the powers of a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of C ivil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908 ) in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(ii) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(iii) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(iv) issuing commissions for examina tion of witnesses or documents;  
(k) every award shall al so state the amount of costs incurred in the arbitration proceedings under 
this section and by what persons and in what prop ortions they are to be paid;  
(l) any person aggrieved by an award of the arbitrator made under this section may, within thirty 
days from the date of the award, prefer an appeal to the High Court within whose jur isdiction the port 
is situated:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that the appellant w as prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
time.  
2[CHAPTER VA  
TARIF F AUTHORITY FOR MAJOR FORTS  
 47A. Constitution and incorporation of Tariff Authority for Major Ports .—(1) With effect from 
such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint there shall be 
constituted for the purposes of this Act an Authority to be called the Tariff Authority for Major Ports.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual success ion and a 
common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government may decide 
from time to time.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 13, for “The Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)” (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
2. Ins. by s. 14,  ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  23 
 (4) The Authority shall consist of the following Members to be appointed b y the Central Governmen t, 
namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson from amongst persons who is or who has been a Secretary to the Government 
of India or has held any equivalent post in the Central Government and who has experience in the 
management and knowledge of the functioning of the ports;  
(b) a Member from amongst economists having experience of not less than fifteen years in the 
field of transport or foreign trade;  
(c) a Member from amongst persons having experience of not less than fifteen years in the field 
of finance with special reference to investment or cost analysis in the Government or in any financial 
institution or industrial or services sector.  
47B. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and other Members .—(1) The 
Chairperson or a M ember shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon 
his office or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other conditions of service of the Chair person and the 
other Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government . 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson or a Member may — 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government a notice of not less than 
three months; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 47D.  
(4) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or any Member, whether by reason of 
his death, resignation or inabil ity to discharge his functions owing to illness or other incapacity, such 
vacancy shall be filled up by the Central Government by making a fresh appointment and the Chairperson 
or the Member so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of o ffice of the person in 
whose place he is so appointed.  
47C. Disqualification for the  office of Chairperson and Member .—A person shall be disqualified 
for being appointed as a Chairperson or as a Member of the Authority if he is disqualified for being 
chose n as a Trustee under section 6.  
47D. Removal, etc., of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Central Government shall remove 
from the Authority the Ch airperson or any Member, if he — 
(a) becomes subject to any disqualification under section 47C;  
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;  
(c) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office detrimental to the public interest, or  
(d) is otherwise unsuitable to continue as the Chairperson or as a Mem ber. 
(2) The Central Government may suspend the Chairperson or any Member pending an inquiry against 
him. 
(3) No order of removal under this section shall be made unless the Chairperson or the Member 
concerned, as the case may be, has been given an opportu nity to submit his explanation to the Central 
Government and when such order is passed, the seat of the Chairperson or Member removed shall be 
declared vacant.  
(4) The Chairperson or a Member who has been removed under this section shall not be eligible fo r 
re-appointment as a Chairperson or as a Member or in any other capacity under the Authority.  
47E. Meetings .—The Authority shall meet at such times end places, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meeti ngs as may be specified by regulations.  24 
 47F. Authentication of all orders and decisions of the Authority .—All orders and decisions of the 
Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson or any other Member authorised  by 
the Authority in this behalf.  
47G. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Authority .—No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be i nvalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Authority; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson or a Member of the 
Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
47H. Officers and employees of the Authority .—(1) The Aut hority may appoint officers and such 
other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act . 
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of the officers and other 
employees of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as m ay be specified by 
regulations. ] 
CHAPTER VI  
IMPOSITION AND RECOVERY OF RATES AT PORTS  
48. Scales of rates for services performed by Board or other person .—(1) 1[The Authority shall 
from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scale of rates at which, and a statement 
of conditions under which, any of the services specified hereunder shall be performed by a Bo ard or any 
other person authoris ed under section 42 at or in rel ation to the port or port approaches —] 
(a) transhipping of passengers or goods between vessels in the port or port approaches;  
(b) landing and shipping of passengers or goods from or to such vessels to or from any wharf, 
quay, jetty, pier, dock, berth, mooring, stage or erection, land or building in the possession or 
occupation of the Board or at any place within the limits of the p ort or port approaches;  
(c) cranage or porter age of goods on any such place;  
(d) wharfage, storage or demurr age of goods on any such place;  
(e) any other service in respect of vessels, passengers or goods, 2***. 
(2) Different scales and conditions may be f ramed for different classes of goods and vessels.  
49. Scale of rates and statement of conditions for use of property belonging to                   
Board .—(1) 3[The Authority shall from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, also frame a 
scale of rates on payment of which, and a statement of conditions under which, any property belonging to, 
or in the possession or occupation of, the Board, or any place within the limits of the port or the port 
approaches may be used for the purposes speci fied hereunder —] 
(a) approaching or lying at or alongside any buoy, mooring, wharf, quay, pier, dock, land, 
building or pla ce as aforesaid by vessels;  
(b) entering upon or plying for hire at or on any wharf, quay, pier, dock, land, building, road, 
bridge o r place as aforesaid by animals or vehicle s carrying passengers or goods;  
(c) leasing of land or sheds by owners of goods imported or intended for export or by steamer 
agents;  
(d) any other use of any land, building, works, vessels or appliances belongi ng to or provided by 
the Board.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 15, for the opening portion (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
2. The words “excepting  the services in respect of vessels for which fees are chargeable under the Indian Ports Act” omitted             
by s.15, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
3. Subs. by s. 16,  ibid., for the opening portion (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  25 
 (2) Different scales and conditions may be framed for different classes of goods and vessels.  
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Board may, by auction or by inviting 
tenders, lease any land or sh ed belonging to it or in its possession or occupation at a rate higher than that 
provided under sub -section ( 1).] 
2[49A. Fees for pilotage and certain other services. —(1) Within any port, fees may be charged for 
pilotage, hauling, mooring, re -mooring, hooking, measuring and other services rendered to vessles, at 
such rates as the Authority may fix.  
(2) The fees now chargeable for such services shall continue to be chargea ble unless and until they 
are altered in exercise of the power conferred by sub -section ( 1). 
(3) the Central Government may, in special cases, remit the whole or any portion of the fees 
chargeable under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2). 
 49B. Fixation of  port-dues .—(1) The Authority shall from time to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, fix port -dues on vessles entering the port.  
(2) An order increasing or altering the fees for pilotage and certain other services or port -dues at 
every port shal l not take effect until the expiration of thirty days from the day on which the order was 
published in the Official Gazette. ] 
3[50. Consolidated rates for combination of services .—The Authority may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, frame a consolidated scale of rates for any combination of service 
specified in section 48 or for any combination of such service or services with any user or permission to 
use any property belonging to or in the possession or occupation of the Board, as specified in section 49 
or the fees to be charged for pilotage, hauling, mooring, re -mooring, hooking, measuring and other 
services rendered to vessles as specified in section 49 A or the port dues to be fixed on vessles entering the 
port and for the duration of such dues as specified in section 49B . 
50A. Port -due on vessels in ballast .—A vessele entering any port in ballast and not carrying 
passengers shall be charged with a port -due at a rate to be determined by the Authority and not exceeding 
three -fourths of the rate with which she would otherwise be chargeable.  
 50B. Port -due on vessels not discharging or taking in cargo .—When a vessele enters a port but 
does not discharge or t aken in any cargo or passengers therein (with the exception of such unshipment 
and reshipment as may b e necessary for purposes of rep air), she shall be charged with a port -due at a rate 
to be determined by the Authority and not exceeding half the rate with  which she would otherwise be 
chargeable.  
50C. Publication of orders of Authority .—Every notification, declaration, order and regulation of 
the Authority made in pursuance of this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and a copy thereof 
shall be k ept in the office of the conservator and at the custom -house, if any, of every port to which the 
declaration, order or rule relates, and shall there be open at all reasonable times to the inspection of any 
person without payment of any fee. ] 
51. Power to l evy concessional rates in certain cases. —In framing scales under any of the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the 4[Authority]  may prescri be a lower rate in respect of, — 
(a) costal goods, that is to say, goods, other than imported goods as defined in the Customs Act, 
1962 (52 of 1962 ), carried in a vessel from one Indi an port to another Indian port:  
Provided that the 4[Authority ] shall not make any discrimination between one Indian port and 
another such port in prescribing a  lower rate under this section;  
(b) other goods, in special cases.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 13 (w.e.f . 31-5-1982).  
2. Ins. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 17 (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
3. Subs. by s. 18,  ibid., for section 50 (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
4. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “Board” (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  26 
 52. [Prior sanction of Central Government to rates and conditions .] Omitted by Act , 1982                    
(17 of 1982), s. 13 ( w.e.f . 31-5-1982).  
53. Exemption from, and remission of, rates or charges .—A Board may, in special cases and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt either wholly or partially any goods or vessels or class to goods 
or vessels from the payment of any rate or of any charge leviable in respect thereof accordi ng to any scale 
in force under this Act or remit the whole or any portion of such rate or charge so levied.  
54. Power of Central Government to require modification or cancellation of                        
rates .—(1) Whenever the Central Government considers it necessary in the public interest so to do, it 
may, by order in writing together with a statement of reasons therefor, 1[direct the Authority]  to cancel 
any of the scales in force or modify the same, within suc h period as that Government may specify in the 
order. 
(2) 2[If the  Authority fails or neglects to comply with the direction under sub -section ( 1)] within the 
specified period, the Central Government may cancel any of such scales or make such modifications 
therein as it may th ink fit:  
Provided that before so cancelling or modifying any scale the Central Government shall consider any 
objection or sugg estion which may be made by 3[the Authority]  during the specified period.  
(3) When in pursuance of this section any of the scales has been cancelled or modified, such 
cancellation or modification shall be published by the Central Government in the Official  Gazette and 
shall thereupon have effect accordingly.  
55. Refund of overcharges. —No person shall be entitled to a refund of an overcharge made by a 
Board unless his claim to the refund has been preferred in writing by him or on his behalf to the Board 
within six months from the date of payment duly suppo rted by all relevant documents:  
Provided that a Board may of its own motion remit overcharges made in its bills at any time.  
56. Notice of payment of charges short -levied or erroneously refunded. —(1) When any Board is 
satisfied that any charge leviable under this Chapter has been short -levied or erroneously refunded, it may 
issue a notice to the person who is liable to pay such charge or to whom the refund has erroneously been 
made, requiring him to show cause why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice:  
Provided that no such notice shall be issued after the expiry of two years, — 
(a) when the charge is short -levied, from the dat e of the payment of the charge;  
(b) where a charge has been e rroneously refunde d, from the date of the refund.  
(2) The Board may, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person to whom notice is 
issued under sub -section ( 1), determine the amount due from such person and thereupon such person shall 
pay the amount so determined.  
57. Board not to lease rates without sanction .—4[The Authority shall not lease] , farm, sell or 
alienate any power vested in it under this Act of levying rates without the prior sanctio n of the Central 
Government.  
58. Time for  payment of rates on goods .—Rates in respect of goods to be landed shall be payable 
immediately on the landing of the goods and rates in respect of goods to be removed from the premises of 
a Board, or to be shipped for export, or to be transhipped, shall b e payable before the goods are so 
removed or shipped or transhipped.  
59. Board’s lien for rates .—(1) For the amount of all rates  5[leviable under this Act] in respect of 
any goods, and for the rent due to the Board for any building s, plinths, stacking areas, or other premises 
on or in which any goods may have been placed, the Board shall have a lien on such goods, and may seize 
and detain the same until such rates and rents are fully paid.  
(2) Such lien shall have priority over all other lines and claim s, except for general average and for the 
ship-owner ’s lien upon the said goods for freight and other charges where such lien exists and has been 
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 21, for “direct any Board” (w.e.f. 9-1-1997).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “ If any Board against whom a direction is made under sub -section ( 1) fails or neglects to comply with 
such direction” (w.e.f. 9-1-1997).  
3. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “the Board” (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
4. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “A Board shall not lease” (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
5. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for “leviable by a Board under this Act” (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  27 
 preserved in the manner provided in sub -section ( 1) of section 60, and for money payable to the Central 
Govern ment  1[under any law for the time being in force relating to customs, other than by way of penalty 
or fine].  
 60. Ship -owner's lien for freight and other charges .—(1) If the master or owner of any vessel or 
his agent, at or before the time of landing from such vessel any goods at any dock, wharf, quay, stage, 
jetty, berth, mooring or pier belonging to or in the occupation of a Board, gives to the Board a notice in 
writing that such goods are to remain subject to a lien for freight or other charges payable to the               
ship-owner, to an amount to be mentioned in such notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such 
lien to such amount.  
(2) The goods shall be retained in the custody of the Board at the risk and expense of the owners of 
the goods until such lien is discharged a s hereinafter mentioned; and go down or storage rent shall be 
payable by the party entitled to such goods for the time during which the y may be so retained.  
(3) Upon the production before any officer appointed by the Board in that behalf of a document 
purporting to be a receipt for, or release from, the amount of such lien, executed by the person by whom 
or on whose behalf such notice has  been given, the Board may permit such goods to be removed without 
regard to such lien, provided that the Board shall have used reasonable care in respect to the authenticity 
of such document.  
61. Sale of goods after two months if rates or rent are not pai d or lien for freight is not 
discharged .—(1) A Board may, after the expiry of two months from the time when any goods have 
passed into its custody, or in the case of animals and perishable or hazardous goods after the expiry of 
such shorter period not being less than twenty -four hours after the landing of the animals or goods as the 
Board may think fit, sell by public auction  2[or in such cases as the Board considers it necessary so to do, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, sell by tender, private a greement or in any other manner] such goods 
or so much thereof as, in the opinion of the Board, may be necessary — 
(a) if any rates payable to the Board in respect of such goods have not been paid, or  
(b) if any rent payable to the Board in respect of any p lace on or in which such goods have been 
stored has not been paid, or  
(c) if any lien of any ship -owner for freight or other charges of which notice has been given has 
not been discharged and if the person claiming such lien for freight or other Charges ha s made to the 
Board an application for such sale.  
(2) Before making such sale, the Board shall g ive ten days’  notice of the same by publication thereof  
3[the Port Gazette, or where there is no Port Gazette, in the Official Gazette] and also in at least one  of the 
principal local daily newspapers:  
Provided that in the case of animals and perishable or hazardous goods, the Board may give such 
shorter notice and in such manner as, in the opinion of the Board, the urgency of the case admits of.  
(3) If the addre ss of the owner of the goods has been stated on the manifest of the goods or in any of 
the documents which have come into the hands of t he Board, or is otherwise known  notice shall also be 
given to him by letter delivered at such address, or sent by post, but the title of a bona fide  purchaser of 
such goods shall not be invalidated by a reason of the omission to send such notice, nor shall any such 
purchaser be bound to  inquire whether such notice has been sent.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, arms and ammunition and controlled goods 
may be sold at such time and in such manner as the Central Government may direct.  
Explanation. —In this section and section 62 — 
(a) “arms and ammunition ” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Arms Act, 
1959  (54 of 1959) ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 21, for “under any law for the time being in force” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975). 
2. Ins. by s. 22,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “ the Of ficial Gazette” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975 ). 28 
 (b) “controlled goods ” means goods the price or disposal of which is regulated under any law for 
the time being in force.  
62. Disposal of goods not removed from premises of Board within time                                 
limit .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any goods placed in the custody of the 
Board upon the landing thereof are not removed by the owner or other person entitled thereto from the 
premises of the Board within one month from the date on which  such goods were  placed in their custody, 
the Board may, if the address of such owner or person is known, cause a notice to be served upon him by 
letter delivered at such address or sent by post, or if the notice cannot be so served upon him or his 
address is not known, cause a notice to be published  in 1[the Port Gazette or where there is no Port 
Gazette, in the Official Gazette] and also in at leas t one of the principal local daily newspapers, requiring 
him to remove the goods forthwith and stating that in default of compliance therewith the goods are liable 
to be sold by public auction  2[or by tender, private agreement or in any other manner]:  
Provided that where all the rates and charges payable under this Act in respect of any such goods 
have been paid, no notice of removal shall be so served or published under this sub -section unless two 
months have expired from the date on which the goods we re placed in the custody of the Board.  
(2) The notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) may also be served on the agents of the vessel by which 
such goods were landed.  
(3) If such owner or person does not comply with the requisition in the notice served upon him or 
published under sub -section ( 1), the Board may, at any time after the expiration of two months from the 
date on which such goods were placed in its custody, sell the goods by public auction 3[or in such cases as 
the Board considers it necessary so t o do, for reason to be recorded in writing sell by tender, private 
agreement or in any other manner] after giving notice of the sale in the manner specified in                           
sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 61.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3)— 
(a) the Board may, in the case of animals and perishable or hazardous goods, give notice of 
removal of such goods although the period of one month or, as the case may be, of two months 
specified in sub-section ( 1) has not expired or give such shorter notice of sale and in such manner as, 
in the opinion of the Board, the urgency of the case requires;  
(b) arms and ammunition and  controlled goods may be sold in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (4) of section 61.  
(5) The Central Government may, if it deems necessary so to do in the public interest, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, exempt any goods or classes of goods from the operation of this section.  
63. Application of sale proceeds .—(1) The proceeds of every sale under section 61 or section 62 
shall be applied in the following order — 
(a) in payment of the exp enses of the sale;  
(b) in payment, according to their respective priorities, of the liens and claims excepted in              
sub-section ( 2) of section 59 from the pri ority of the lien of the Board;  
(c) in payment of the rates and expenses of landing, removing, storing or warehousing the same, 
and of all other charges due to the Board in respect thereof 3[, including demurrage ( other than penal 
demurrage) payable in respect of such goods for a period of four months from the date of landing];  
 3[(d) in payment of any penalty or fine due to the Central Government under any law for the time 
being in force relating to customs;  
(e) in payment of a ny other sum due to the Board.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 23, for  “the Official Gazette” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
3. Ins. by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  29 
 1[(2) The surplus, if any, shall be paid to the importer, owner or consignee of the goods or to his 
agent, on an application made by him in this behalf within six months from the  date of the sale of the 
goods.  
(3) Where no application has been made under sub -section ( 2), the surplus shall be applied by the 
Board for the purposes of this Act.]  
64. Recovery of rates and charges by distraint of vessel .—(1) If the master of any vessel in respect 
of which any rates or penalties are payable under this Act, or under any regulations or orders made in 
pursuance thereof, refuses or neglects to pay the same or any part thereof on demand, the Board may 
distrain or arrest such vessel and the tackle, apparel and furniture belonging thereto, or any part thereof, 
and detain the same until the amount so due to the Board, together with such further amount as may 
accrue for any period during which the vessel is unde r distr aint or arrest, is paid.  
(2) In case any part of the said rates or penalties, or of the cost of the distress or arrest, or of the 
keeping of the same, remains unpaid for the space of five days next after any such distress or arrest has 
been so made, the Bo ard may cause the vessel or other things so distrained or arrested to be sold, and, 
with the proceeds of such sale, shall satisfy such rates or penalties and costs, including the costs of sale 
remaining unpaid, rendering the surplus (if any) to the master of such vessel on demand.  
2[65. Grant of port -clearance after payment of rates and realisation of damages, etc. —If a Board 
gives to the officer of the Central Government whose duty it is to grant the port -clearance to any vessel  at 
the port, a notice stati ng,— 
(i) that an amount specified therein is due in respect of rates, fines, penalties or expenses 
chargeable under this Act or under any regulations or orders made in pursuance thereof, against such 
vessel, or by the owner or master of such vessel in resp ect thereof, or against or in respect of any  
goods on board such vessel; or  
(ii) that an amount specified therein is due in respect of any damage referred to in section 116 and 
such amount together with the cost of the proceedings for the recovery thereof before a Magistrate 
under that section has not been realised,  
such officer shall not grant such port -clearance until the amount so chargeable or due has been paid or, as 
the case may be, the damage and cost have been realised.]  
CHAPTER VII  
BORROWING POWER S OF BOARD  
66. Power to raise loans .—(1) A Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government 
and after due notification in the Official Gazette, raise loans for the purposes of this Act : 
Provided that no such notification shall be necessary if a loan is obtained from the Central 
Government or a State Government.  
(2) Loans may be raised by a Board in the open market on Port Trust securities issued by it or may be 
obtained from the Central Go vernment or a State Government.  
(3) The terms of all loans shall be subject to the appr oval of the Central Government.  
67. Port Trust securities. —(1) A Board may, with the sanction of the Central Government, prescribe 
the form in which Port Trust securities shall be issued by it and the mode in which, and th e conditions 
subject to which, they may be transferred.  
(2) The holder of any Port Trust security in any form may obtain in exchange therefor, upon such 
terms as the Board may from time to time determine , a Port Trust security in any other form p rescribed by 
regulations.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 24, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for section 65 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  30 
 (3) The right to sue in respect of moneys secured by Port Trust securities shall be exercisable by the 
holders thereof for the time being without preference in respect of priority of date.  
68. Right of survivors of joint or several payees o f securities. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 45 of the Indian C ontract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872) — 
(a) when any Port Trust security is payable to two or more persons jointly, and either or any of 
them dies, the Port Trust security shall be payable to the survivor or survivors of those persons, and  
(b) when any such security is payable to two or more perso ns severally and either or any of them 
dies, the security shall be payable to the survivor or survivors of those persons, or to the 
representatives of t he deceased, or to any of them.  
(2) This section shall apply whether such death occurred or occurs bef ore or after the appointed day.  
(3) Nothing herein contained shall affect any claim which any representative of a deceased person 
may have against the survivor or survivors under or in respect of any security to which sub -section ( 1) 
applies.  
(4) For the pur poses of this section, a body incorporated or deemed to be incorporate d under the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912) or any other 
enactment for the time being in  force, whether within or without India, shal l be deemed to die when it is 
dissolved.  
69. Power of one or two or more joint holders to grant receipts .—Where two or more persons are 
joint holders of any Port Trust security, any one of those persons may give an effectual receipt for any 
interest payabl e in respect of such security unless notice to the contrary has been given to the Board by 
any other of the holders.  
70. Indorsements to be made on security itself .—Notwithstanding anything in section 15 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, (26 of 1881 ) no indorsement of a Port Trust security, which is 
transferable by indorsement, shall be valid unless made by the signature of the holder inscribed on the 
back of the security itself.  
71. Indorser of security  not liable for amount thereof. —Notwithstanding  anything in the 
Negotiable Instruments Act , 1881  (26 of 1881) , a person shall not by reason only of his having indorsed 
any Port Trust security be liable to pay any money due, either as principal or as interest, thereunder.  
72. Impression of signature on securities .—(1) The signature of the person authorised to sign Port 
Trust securities on behalf of the Board may be printed, engraved or lithographed or impressed by such 
other mechanical process, as the Board  may direct on such securities.  
(2) A signature so printed, engraved, lithographed or otherwise impressed shall be as valid as if it had 
been inscribed in the proper handwriting of the person so authorised.  
73. Issue of duplicate securities. —(1) When any Port Trust security is alleged to have been lost,  
stolen or destroyed either wholly or in part, and a person claims to be the person to whom but for the loss, 
theft or destruction it would be payable, he may, on application to the Board and on producing proof to its 
satisfaction of the loss, theft or des truction and of the justice of the claim and on payment of such fee, if 
any, as may be prescribed by regulations, obtain from t he Board an order for — 
(a) the payment of interest in respect of the security said to be lost, stolen or destroyed, pending 
the issue of a duplicate security; and  
(b) the issue of a duplicate sec urity payable to the applicant.  
(2) An order shall not be passed under sub -section ( 1) until after the issue by the Board of the 
prescribed notification of the loss, theft or destruction.  
(3) A list of the securities in respect of which an order is passed under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
published in such manner as the Board may prescribe.  31 
 (4) If at any time before the Board becomes discharged under the provisions of this Act from liability 
in respect of any security the whole of which is alleged to have been lost, stolen or destroyed, such 
security is found, any order passed in respect thereof under this section shall be cancelled.  
74. Issue of converted, etc., securities. —(1) A Board may, subject to such conditions as it may 
prescribe, on the application of a person claiming to be entitled to a Port Trust security or securities issued 
by it, on being satisfied of the justice of the claim and on delivery of the security or securities receipt ed in 
such manner and on payment of such f ee, if any, as it may prescribe  convert, consolidate or sub -divide the 
security or securities, and issue to the applicant a new security or securities acc ordingly.  
(2) The conversion, consolidation or sub -division referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be into a sec urity 
or securities of the same  or different classes or of the same or different loans.  
1[74A. Recognition as holder of Port Trust securities in certain cases. —The person to whom a 
duplicate security has been issued under section 73 or a new security or securities has or have been issued 
under section 74 shall be deemed for the purposes of section 74B to have been recognised by the Board as 
the holder of the secu rity or securities; and a duplicate security or a new security or securities so issued to 
any person shall be deemed to constitute a new contract between the Board and such person and all 
persons deriving title thereafter through him.  
74B. Legal effect of recognition by the Board under section 74A. —No recognition by the Board of 
a person as the holder of a Port Trust security or securities shall be called in question by any court so far 
as such recognition affects the relations of the Board with the person recognised by it as the holder of a 
Port Trust security or securities or with any person claiming an interest in such security or securities; and 
any such recognition by the Board of any person shall operate to confer on that person a title to the 
security  or securities subject only to a personal liability to the rightful owner of the security or securities 
for money had and received on his account.]  
75. Discharge in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 2[the Limitation Act, 1 963 
(36 of 1963 )]— 
(i) on payment of the amount due on a Port Trust security on or after the date o n which payment 
becomes due, or  
(ii) when a duplicate security has b een issued under section 73, or  
(iii) when a new security or securities has or have been issued upon conversion, consolidation or  
sub-division under section 74,  
the Board shall be discharged from all liability in respect of the security or securities so paid or in place of 
which a duplicate or new security or securities has or have been issued — 
(a) in the  case of payment —after the lapse of six years from the  date on which payment was 
due; 
(b) in the  case of a duplicate security —after the lapse of six years from the dat e of the 
publication under sub -section ( 3) of section 73 of the list in which the securit y is first mentioned 
or from the date of the last payment of interest on the original sec urity, whichever date is later;  
(c) in the case of a new security issued upon conversion , consolidation or sub -division —after 
the lapse of six years from the date of t he issue thereof.  
76. Power of Board to make regulations. —A Board may, from time to time, make regulations to 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the person, if any, authorised  to sign, and the mode of affixing the corporate seal and of 
attestation of documents relating to Port Trust securities issue d or to be issued by the Board;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908)” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  32 
 (b) the manner in which payment of interest in respect of such Port Trust securities is to be m ade, 
recorded and acknowledged;  
(c) the circumstances and the manner in which such Port T rust securities may be renewed;  
(d) the circumstances in which such securities must be renewed before further payment of i nterest 
thereon can be claimed;  
(e) the form in w hich such securities delivered for renewal, conversion, consolidation or                  
sub-division are to be receipted;  
(f) the proof which is to be produced by a person app lying for duplicate securities;  
(g) the form and manner of publication of the n otification mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of            
section 73 and the manner of publicatio n of the list mentioned in sub -section ( 3) of that section;  
(h) the nature and amount of indemnity to be given by a person applying for the payment of 
interest on  Port Trust securities alleged to have been wholly or partly lost, stolen or destroyed, or for 
the issue of d uplicate Port Trust securities;  
(i) the conditions subject to which Port Trust securities may be converte d, consolidated or               
sub-divid ed; 
(j) the amounts for which s tock certificate may be issued;  
(k) generally, all matters connected with the grant of duplicate, renewed, converted, consolidated 
and sub -divided securities;  
(l) the fees to be paid in respect of the issue of duplicate secur ities and of the renewal, conversion, 
consolidation and sub -division of Port Trust securities;  
(m) the fees to be levied in respect of the issue of stock certificates.  
77. Place and currency of loans raised by Board .—All loans contracted by a Board under this Act 
shall be raised in India, and in Indian currency, unless the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, otherwise directs.  
78. Security for loans taken out by Board. —All loans raised by a Board under this A ct shall be a 
first cha rge on — 
(a) the property vested, or which may hereafter during the currency of the loans become vested , 
in the Board 1[other than — 
(i) any sum set apart by the Board — 
(1) as the sinking fund for the pur pose of paying off any loan; or  
(2) for the payment of pension to its employees; or  
(ii) the provident or pension fund  established by the Board; and]  
(b) the rates leviable by the Board under this Act.  
79. Remedies of Government in respect of loans made to Boards .—The Central Government or a 
State Government shall have in respect of loans made by it to a Board, or of loans made to any other 
authority for the repayment of which the Board is legally liable, the same remedies as holders of Port 
Trust securities issued by the Board; and such Government shall not b e deemed to possess any prior or 
greater rights in respect of such loans than holders o f such Port Trust securities:  
Provided that where the terms of any such loan made before the appointed day expressly provide that 
the loan shall have priority over all o ther loans in the matter of repayment by the Board, such loan shall 
have priority.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 29 of 1974, s. 28, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  33 
 80. Power of Board to repay loans before due date .—A Board may, with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government, apply any sums, out of moneys which may come into its h ands under the 
provisions of this Act and which can be so applied without prejudicing the security of the other holders of 
Port Trust securities, in repaying to the Government any sum which may remain due to it in respect of the 
principal of any loan altho ugh the time fixed for the repayment of the same may not have arrived:  
Provided that no such repayment shall be made of any sum less than ten thousand rupees; and that, if 
such repayment is made, the amount of interest in each succeeding instalment shall be so adjusted as to 
represent exactly the interest due on the outstanding principal.  
81. Establishment of sinking fund. —(1) In respect of every loan raised by a Board under this Act, 
which is not repayable before the expiration of one year from the date of the loan, the Board shall set 
apart half -yearly out of its income as a sinking fund a sum sufficient to liquidate the loan within a period 
which shall not in any case, unless the previous consent of the Central Government has been obtained, 
exceed thirt y years; but the maximum period shall not in any case exceed sixty years:  
Provided that a sinking fund need not in the absence of any stipulation to that effect be established in 
the case of loans taken by the Board from the Central Gove rnment or any State  Government.  
(2) Where any sinking fund has, before the appointed day, been established by any authority in 
respect of a loan raised by it for which loan the Board is liable under this Act, the sinking fund so 
established by that authority shall be deemed to have been established by the Board under this section.  
82. Investment and application of sinking fund .—(1) The sums so set apart by a Board under             
sub-section ( 1) of section 81 and the sums forming part of any sinking fund referred to in sub -section ( 2) 
of that section shall be invested in public securities or in such other securities as the Central Government 
may approve in this behalf, and shall be held in trust for the purposes of this Act 1[by the Board].  
(2) A Board may apply the whole or  any part of the sums accumulated in any sinking fund in or 
towards the discharge of the moneys for the repayment of which  the fund has been established:  
Provided that it pays into the fund in each year, and accumulates until the whole of the moneys 
borrow ed are discharged, a sum equivalent to the interest which would have been produced by the sinking 
fund, or the part of the sinking fund so applied.  
83. Examination of sinking fund .—(1) A sinking fund established for the liquidation of any loan 
shall be sub ject to annual examination by such person as may be appointed by the Central Government in 
this behalf, and the person so appointed shall ascertain whether the cash and the current market value of 
the securities at the credit of the fund are actually equal  to the amount which would have been 
accumulated had investments been regularly made and had the rate of interest as originally e stimated been 
obtained thereon.  
(2) A Board shall pay forthwith into the sinking fund any amount which the person appointed und er 
sub-section ( 1) to conduct the annual examination of the fund may certify to be deficient, unless the 
Central Government specifically sa nctions a gradual readjustment.  
(3) If the cash and the current market value of the securities at the credit of a sin king fund are in 
excess of the amount which should be at its credit, the person appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall certify 
the amount of this excess, and the Board may, with the previous sanct ion of the Central Government, —  
(a) withdraw the whole or any part of the certified excess in which case the Trustees in whose 
names the sinking fund is invested under sub -section ( 1) of section 82, shall forthwith transfer 
securities of the requisite current market value, or cash and securities of the requisite current  market 
value, to the Board, or  
(b) reduce or discontinue the half -yearly contributions to the sinking fund required under           
section 81, or  
(c) adopt a combination of these measures.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 29, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  34 
 84. Power of Board to raise loans on short -term bills .—Nothing contained in this Act shall be 
deemed to affect the power of the Board to raise loans under the Local Authorities Loans Act,                   
1914 (9 of 1914).  
85. Power of Board to take temporary loans or overdrafts .—Notwithstanding anything contai ned 
in this Act, a Board may borrow moneys by means of temporary overdraft or otherwise by pledging the 
securities held by the Board in its reserve funds or on the security of the fixed depo sits of the Board in its 
banks:  
Provided that such tempo rary overd rafts or other loans — 
(a) shall not at any time have a longe r currency than six months; and  
(b) shall not be taken, without the previous sanction of the Central Government, if at any time in 
any year the amount of such overdrafts or other loans exceeds 1[such amount as the Central 
Government may fix in this behalf and different amounts may be fixed wit h respect to different 
Boards]:  
Provided further that all moneys so borrowed by temporary overdrafts or otherwise shall be expended 
for the purposes of this  Act. 
86. Power s of Board to borrow money from International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development or other foreign institutions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force, a Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government 
and on such terms and conditions as may be approved by that Government, raise for the purposes  of this 
Act loans in any currency or currencies from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
or from any ot her bank or institution in any country outside India; and no other provision of this Chapter 
shall apply to or in relation to any such loan unless the terms and conditions of the loan or the approval 
thereof by the Central Government otherwise provide.  
CHA PTER VIII  
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE  
87. General account of port .—All moneys received by or on behalf of a Board under the provisions 
of this Act, and all moneys received by it as the Conservator of the port and of the port approaches or as 
the body appointed  under sub -section ( 1) of section 36 of the Indian Ports Act 2*** shall be credited to a 
fund called the general account of the port.  
88. Application of moneys in general account .—(1) The moneys credited to the general account 
under section 87, shall, subj ect to the provisions of section 89 of this Act and of section 36 of the Indian 
Ports Act, be applied by the Board in payment of t he following charges, namely: — 
(a) the interest and instalments of principal due in respect of any loan that may have been rai sed 
or obtained by the Board or for the repayment of which the Board may be liable, and payments to the 
sinking fund established for such loan;  
(b) the salaries, fees, allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate all owances or other moneys 
due to — 
(i) the Chairman, Depu ty Chairman and other Trustees;  
(ii) the employees of the Board; and  
(iii) the surviving relati ves, if any  of such employees;  
(c) the contributions, if any, payable to the Central Government or any State Government on 
account of the pension and leave allowance of any officer lent t o the Board by such Government;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 14, for “such amount not exceeding ten lakhs of rupees, as the Central Government may fix in this 
behalf” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
2. The words, brackets, figure and letter  “excluding all fees and all fines and penalties creditable to the pilotage account of the 
port u nder sub -section ( 5a) of that section ” omitted by Act 23 of 1992, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23 -1-1994).  35 
 (d) the cost and expenses, if any, incurred by the Board in the conduct and administration of any 
provident or welfare fund or loan or special  fund established by the Board;  
(e) the contributions, if any, duly authorised to be made by regulations made under this Act to any 
such fund as is referred to in clause ( d); 
(f) any charges for which the Board may be liable under section 108 or section 109;  
1[(g) such sums as may, from time to time, be agreed upon by the Board and a State Government 
or the Central Government or any other authority, as a reasonable contribution payable by the Board 
towards the expenses in connection with the watch and ward functions of the police force or  the 
Central Industrial Security Force or any other force which the State Government or the Central 
Government or the other authority, as the case may be, may establish and maintain for the protection 
of the port and the docks, warehouses and other propert y of the Board;]  
(h) the cost of repairs and maintenance of the property belonging to or vested in the Board and all 
charges upon the  same and all working expenses;  
(i) the cost of the execution and provision of any new work or appliance specified in secti on 35 
which the Board may determine to charge to revenue;  
(j) any expendi ture incurred under section 36;  
(k) any other expenditure which may be incurred by the Board generally for the purposes of this 
Act;  
(l) any other charge which may on the application  of the Board 2[or otherwise] be specially 
sanctioned by the Central Government or for which t he Board may be legally liable.  
(2) 3[Subject to such general or special directions as the Central Government may, for the purpose of 
maintenance or development of major ports in the country or generally for the development of shipping 
and navigation, give in this behalf, all moneys standing at the credit of the Board] which cannot 
immediately be applied in the manner or for the purposes specified in sub -section ( 1) shall — 
(a) be deposited in the State Bank of India or in such 4[corresponding new bank or banks], and 
subject to such conditions as may, from time to time, be specifie d by the Central Government; or  
(b) be invested in public securities or in such other securities as the Central Government may 
approve in this behalf; and the said securities shall be held in trust by the Board for t he purposes of 
this Act ; 5[or].  
6[(c) be given as a loan to the Board of another port fo r the development of that port.  
7[(d) be invested, in any manner, in an arrangement referred to in sub -section ( 3A) of section 42;  
 (e) be invested, in any manner, in the development or management of any port including a port 
other than a major port on such terms and conditions as may be appr oved by the Central 
Government.]  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “corresponding new bank ” means a 
corresponding new bank as defined in the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970)  or the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 1980) .]  
6[(3) Every direction issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2) shall be complied with 
by the Board and shall not be called in quest ion in any court  on any ground.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 30, for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Ins. by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1988, s. 2, for “All moneys standing at the credit of the Board” (w.e.f. 28 -1-1988).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “scheduled bank or banks” (w.e.f. 28 -1-1988).  
5. Added by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1988).  
6. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1988).  
7. Ins  by Act 22 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e. f. 1-9-2000).  36 
 (4) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, the Board or any 
officer or other employee of the Board authorised  by it in this behalf for any loss or damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any 
direction issued under sub -section ( 2).] 
89. [Power to transfer moneys from general account to pilotage account and vice  versa .] Omitted by 
Act, 1992 (23 of 1992), s. 8 (w.e.f.  23-1-1994).  
90. Establishment of reserve funds .—(1) A Board may, from time to time, set apart such sums out 
of its surplus income as it thinks fit, as a reserve fund or funds  for the purpose of expanding existing 
facilities or creating new facilities at the port or for the purpose of providing against any temporary 
decrease of revenue or increase of expenditure from transient causes or for purposes of replacement or for 
meetin g expenditure arising from loss or damage from fire, cyclones, shipwreck or other accident or for 
any other emergency arising in the ordinary cond uct of its work under this Act:  
Provided that the sums set apart annually in respect of, and the aggregate at any time of, any such 
reserve fund or funds shall not exceed such amounts as may, from time to time, be fixed in that be half by 
the Central Government.  
(2) Any such reserve fund or funds may be invested in public securities or in such other securities as 
the Central Government may approve in this behalf.  
91. Power to reserve Port Trust securities for Board ’s own investments .—(1) For the purposes of 
any investment which a Board is authorised  to make by this Act, it shall be lawful for every Board to 
reserve and set apart any securities to be issued by it on account of any loan to which the consent of the 
Central Government has been given, provided that the intention to so reserve and set apar t such securities 
has been notified as a cond ition to the issue of the loan.  
(2) The issue by any Board of any such securities direct to and in the name of the Board shall not 
operate to extinguish or cancel such securities, but every security so issued sh all be valid in all respects as 
if issued to, and in  the name of, any other person.  
(3) The purchase by a Board, or the transfer, assignment or indorsement to a Board or to the Trustees 
of the sinking fund set up by a Board, of any security issued by the B oard, shall not operate to extinguish 
or cancel any such security but the same shall be valid and negotiable in the same manner and to the same 
extent as if held by, or transferred or assigned or indorsed to, any other person.  
92. Prior sanction of Centra l Government to charge expenditure to capital. —(1) No expenditure 
shall be charged by a Board to capital without the previous sanc tion of the Central Government:  
Provided that a Board may without such sanction charge to capital expenditure not exceeding su ch 
limit as may be specified, and subject to such conditions as may be imposed, by the Central Government.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to require the further sanction of the Central 
Government in any case where the actual expenditure in curred as a charge to capital exceeds the 
expenditure sanctioned in this behalf by the Central Government unless the excess is more than ten                        
per cent . of the expenditure so sanctioned.  
93. Works requiring sanction of Board or Central  Government .—(1) No new work or appliance, 
the estimated cost of which exceeds such amount as may be fixed by the Central Government in this 
behalf, shall be commenced or provided by a Board, nor shall any contract be entered into by a Board in 
respect of any such new work or appliance until a plan  of and estimate for, such work  or appliance has 
been submittted to , and approved by, the Board; and, in case the estimated cost of any such new work or 
appliance exceeds such amount as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central Government in this 
behalf, the sanction of the Central Government to the plan and estimate  shall be obtained before such 
work is c ommenced or appliance provided.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to require the further sanction of the Central 
Government in any case where the actual expenditure incurred does not ex ceed by more than ten per cent.  
the estimated cost so sanctioned.  37 
 94. Powers of Chairman as to execution of works .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
93, the Chairman may direct the execution of any work the cost of which does not exceed such maximum 
limit as may  be fixed by the Central Government in this behalf, and may enter into contracts for the 
execution of such works but in every such case the Chairman shall, as soon as possible, make a report to 
the Board of any such directions given or contracts entered in to by him.  
95. Power of Board to compound or compromise claims .—Every Board may compound or 
compromise any claim or demand or any action or suit instituted by or against it for such sum of money 
or other compe nsation as it deems sufficient:  
Provided that n o settlement shall be made under this section without the previous sanction of the 
Central Government if such settlement involves the payment by the Board of a sum exceeding such 
amount as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.  
96. Writ ing off of losses. —(1) Subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Central 
Government, where a Board is of opinion that any amount due to or any loss, whether of money or of 
property, incurred by, the Board is irrecoverable, the Board may, with t he previous approval of the 
Central Government, sanction the writing off finally of the said amount or loss:  
1[Provided that no such approval of the Central Government shall be necessary where such 
irrecoverable amount or loss does not exceed, in any indi vidual case and in the aggregate in any year, 
such amounts as the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix and different amounts may 
be fixed wit h respect to different Boards.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), wher e the Chairman is of opinion that any 
amount due to, or any loss, whether of money or of property, incurred by the Board is irrecoverable, the 
Chairman may sanction the writing off finally of such amount or loss provided that 2[such amount or loss 
does not  exceed, in any individual case and in the aggregate in any year, such amounts as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, by order, fix and different amounts may be fixed with respect to 
different Boards.]  
3[(3) In every case in which the Chairman sanctions the writting off of any amount or loss under            
sub-section ( 2), he shall make a report to the Board giving reasons for such sanction.]  
97. Powers, etc., of Board as Conservator or body appointed unde r section 36 of Indian Ports 
Act.—All the powers, authorities and restrictions contained in this Act in respect of the works by this Act 
authorised, shall apply to the works which may be executed by the Board as the Conservator of the port or 
as the body a ppointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 36 of the Indian Ports Act 4*** and also to the 
sanction of such works, the estimates therefor, and the expenditure thereunder.  
98. Budget estimates. —(1) A Board shall, on or before the thirty -first day of January in each year, 
hold a special meeting at which the Chairman of the Board shall submit an estimate of the income and 
expenditure of the Board for the next financial year, in such form as the Central Government may specify.  
(2) A copy of such estimates shall  be sent by post or otherwise to each Trustee so as to reach him not 
less than ten clear days prior to the date appointed for the spec ial meeting referred to in sub -section ( 1).  
(3) The Board shall consider the estimate at such meeting and may provisional ly approve of it  with or 
without modifications.  
(4) The Board shall, on or before the tenth day of February, cause a copy of such estimate as 
provisionally approved by it, to be sent to the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may sanction the es timate or may return it with remarks and may call for 
such additional information as it may deem necessary.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 15 , for the proviso  (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
3. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
4. The words, brackets, figure and letter “, not being works the cost of which is chargeable to th pilotage account of the port 
under sub -section ( 5b) of that section” omitted by Act 23 of 1992, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23 -1-1994).  38 
 (6) When an estimate is returned under sub -section ( 5), the Board shall proceed to reconsider the 
estimate with reference to such remarks and shall furnish such additional information as the Central 
Government may call for and shall, if necessary, modify or alter the estimate and resubmi t it to the 
Central Government.  
(7) The Central Government shall sanction the estimate  with or without modifications.  
(8) Where any such estimate is not sanctioned by the Central Government before the commencement 
of the financial year to which it relates, the Central Government may authorise the Board to incur such 
expenditure as may be ne cessary in the opinion of the Central Government until such time as the approval 
of the estimate by the Central Government is communicated to the Board.  
99. Preparation of supplemental estimate .—A Board may in the course of any year for which an 
estimate h as been sanctioned by the Central Government cause one or more supplemental estimates for 
the residue of such year to be prepared, and the provisions of section 98 shall, so far as may be, apply to 
such estimate as if it were an original annual estimate.  
100. Re -appropriation of amounts in estimate .—Subject to any directions which the Central 
Government may give in this behalf, any sum of money or part thereof of which the expenditure has been 
authorised in an estimate for the time being in force sanctioned  by the Central Government and which has 
not been so spent, may at any time be re -appropriated by the Board to meet any excess in any other 
expenditure authorised in the said estimate:  
Provided that no such reappropriation shall be made from one major hea d of expenditure to another 
such head without the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
101. Adherence to estimate except in emergency .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 100,          
no sum exceeding such amount as the Central Government may fix in this behalf shall, save in cases of 
pressing emergency, be expended by, or on behalf of, any Board unless such sum is included in some 
estimate of the Board at the time in force which has be en finally sanctioned by the Central Government.  
(2) If any sum exceeding such limit as may have been fixed in this behalf under sub -section ( 1) is so 
expended by any Board on a pressing emergency, the circumstances shall be forthwith reported by the 
Chai rman to the Central Government, together with an explanation of the way in which it is proposed by 
the Board to cover such extra expenditure.  
102. Accounts and audit .—(1) A Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare the ann ual statement of accounts , including the balance -sheet in such form as may be 
specified by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
1[(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited — 
(i) once in every year; and 
(ii) if so required by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, concurrently with the 
compilation of such accounts,  
by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or such other persons as may be appointed by him in 
this behalf and any amount pay able to him by the Board in respect of such audit shall be debitable to the  
general account of the Board.]  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of a Board shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with 
such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books of 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents of the Board.  
103. Publication of audit report. —(1) Within fourteen days after the audit and examination of the 
accounts of a Board have been completed, the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India shall forwa rd 
copies of the audit report to the Centr al Government and to the Board.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 31, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  39 
 (2) The Central Government shall cause every audit report to be laid for not less than thirty days 
before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after such report is received by that Government.  
104. Board to remedy defects and irregularities pointed out in audit report .—Every Board shall 
forthwith take into consideration any defects or irregularities that may be pointed out by the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India in the a udit report on the income and expenditure of the Board and shall 
take such action thereon as the Board may think fit and shall also send a report of the action so taken to 
the Central Government.  
105. Central Government to decide difference between Board a nd auditors .—If there is a 
difference of opinion between any Board and the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India on any point 
included in the audit report, and the Board is unable to accept and implement the recommendations, if 
any, made by him on such point, the matter shall forthwith be referred to the Central Government which 
shall pass final orders thereon and the Board shall be bound to give effect to such orders.  
CHAPTER IX  
SUPERVISION AND CONTROL OF CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
106. Administration report. —As soon as may be after the first day of April in every year and not 
later than such date as may be fixed in this behalf by the Central Government, every Board shall submit to 
the Central Government a detailed report of the administration of the port durin g the preceding year 
ending on the thirty -first day of March, in such form as the Central Government may direct.  
107. Submission of statements of income and expenditure to Central Government .—(1) Every 
Board shall annually, or oftener if directed by the Central Government so to do, submit statements of its 
income and expenditure in such form and at such time  as that Government may direct.  
(2) A copy of all such statements shall be open to the inspection of the public at the office of the 
Board during offi ce hours on payment of such fee for each inspection as may from time to time be fixed 
by the Board.  
108. Power of Central Government to order survey or examination of works of Board. —The 
Central Government may, at any time, order a local survey or examinat ion of any works of a Board, or the 
intended site  thereof and the cost of such survey and examination shall be borne and paid by the Board 
from and out of the moneys credited to the general account of the port.  
109. Power of Central Government to restore or complete works at the cost of Board. —If, at any 
time, any Board — 
(a) allows any work or appliance constructed or provided by, or vested in, the B oard to fall into 
disrepair; or  
(b) does not, within a reasonable time, complete any work commenced by the B oard or included 
in any estimate sanctioned by the Centr al Government; or  
(c) does not, after due notice in writing, proceed to carry out effectually any work or repair or to 
provide any appliance which is necessary in the opinion of the Central Government  for the purposes 
of this Act,  
the Central Government may cause such work to be restored or completed or carried out, or such repairs 
to be carried out or such appliance to be provided and the cost of any such restoration, completion, 
construction, repair  or provision shall be paid by the Board from and out of the moneys credited to the 
general account of the port.  
110. Power of Central Government to supersede Board .—(1) If, at any time, the Cen tral 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, any Board is unable to perform the duties imposed on it 
by or under the provisions of t his Act or of any other law, or  40 
 (b) that the Board has persistently made default in the performance of the duties imposed upon it 
by or under the provisions o f this Act or of any other law and as a result of such default, the financial 
position of the Board or the administration of the  port has greatly deteriorated,  
the Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette supersede the Board for suc h period, 
not exceeding six months at a time, as may be  specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing  a notification under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in                     
clause ( b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable time of not less than three months to the Board 
to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and object ions, if any, 
of the Board.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding  the Board, — 
(a) all the Trustees shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such Trustees;  
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act or of any other 
law, be exercised or performed by or on behalf  of the Board, shall until the Board is reconstituted 
under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) be exercised and performed by such person or persons 
as the  Central Government may direct;  
(c) all property vested in the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under c lause ( b) or 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3), vest in  the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under                  
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further  term, not exceeding six months  as it may 
consider necessary, or  
(b) reconstitute the Board by fresh appointment and fresh election, and in such case, any persons 
who vacated their offices under clause  (a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified for 
appointment or election, as t he case may be, or  
(c) reconstitute the Board by appointment only for such period as it may consider necessary and 
in such a case, the persons who vacated their offic es under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be 
deemed disqualified for such appointment merely because they were Trustees when the Board was 
superseded:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, whether as originally specified under sub -section ( 1) or as extended under this sub -section, 
take action under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of Parliament at the earliest possible opportunity.  
1[110A. Power of Central Government to supersede the Authority. —(1) If the Central 
Government is of the opinion that the Authority is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in 
the performance of, the duty imposed on it by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers, or 
has willfully or without sufficient c ause, failed to comply with any direction issued by the Central 
Government under section 111, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
supersede the Authority for such period as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that, before issuing a notification under this sub -section, the Central Government shall give 
reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider 
the explanation and objection s, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section (1) superseding the Authority, — 
(a) the chairperson and the Members of the Authority shall, notwithstanding that their term of 
office has not expired as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such Chairperson or 
Members as the case may be;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 24 (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  41 
 (b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or 
performed by or on behalf of the Authority shall, during the period of supersession, be exerci sed and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under                   
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may — 
(a) extend the p eriod of supersession for such further period as it may consider necessary; or  
(b) reconstitute the Authority in the manner provided in section 47A.]  
111. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Board .—1[(1) Without prejudice to the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the Authority and every Board shall, in the discharge of its functions 
under this Act be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may gi ve in 
writing from time to time:  
Provided that the Authorit y or the Board, as the case may be, shall be given Opportunity to express its 
views before any direction is  given under this sub -section.]  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
CHAPTER X  
PENAL TIES 
2[112. Every person employed by the authority of this Act to be a public servant .—Every person 
employed by the Authority or by a Board under this Act shall, for the purposes of sections 166 to 171 
(both inclusive), 184, 185 and 409 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ), and for the purpose of 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 19 88), be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
section 21 of  the said Code.]  
113. Penalty for contravention of sections 37,  38, 40 and 41 .—Whoever contravenes the provisions 
of any order issued under section 37 or section 38 or section 41 or f ails to comply with any condition 
imposed under section 40 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 3[ten thousand rupees], and 
where the contravention or failure is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to 4[one 
thousand rupees] for every day after the first during which such contravention or failure continues.  
114. Penalty for setting up wharves , quays, etc., without permission .—Any person who 
contravenes the provisions of section 46 shall be punishable with fine which may extend  to 5[ten thousand 
rupees] for the first contravention, and with a further fine which may extend to 6[one thousand rupees] for 
every day after the first during which the contravention continues.  
115. Penalty for evading rates, etc. —Any person who, with the  intention of evading payment of the 
rates lawfully due, in respect of any goods or vessel ca rrying any goods, to the Board — 
(a) understates or incorrectly gives the weight, quantity, value or description of such goods or the 
tonnage of such vessel in any document presented to any employee of the Board for the purpose of 
enabling him to determine such rates; or  
(b) removes or attempts to remove or abets the remova l of such goods or such vessel;  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 7[ten times] the amount of rates so due subject to a 
minimum of 8[five hundred rupees].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 25, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for section 112 (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 16, for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 31-5-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 16,  ibid., for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
6. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
7. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for “twice” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
8. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  42 
 116. Recovery of value of damage to property of Board .—If, through the negligence of any person 
having the guidance or command of any vessel, or of any of the mariners o r persons employed on such 
vessel, any damage is caused to any dock, wharf, quay, mooring, stage, jetty, pier or other work in the 
possession of any Board 1[or any movable property belonging to any Board] the amount of such damage 
shall, on the application  of the Board be recoverable, together with the cost of 2[such recovery  in 
accorda nce with the provisions of Part -XA of the Merchant Shipping Act , 1958 (44 of 1958) ]: 
117. Other offences .—Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of a ny rule, 
regulation or order made thereunder, for the contravention of which no penalty is expressly provided 
thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 3[two thousand rupees].  
4[117A. Person interested in contracts, etc.,  with the Board  to be deemed to have committed an 
offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code. —Any person who, being a Trustee or an 
employee of the Board, acquires, directly or indirectly, any share or interest in any contract or 
employment with, by or on behalf of, any Board, shall be deemed to have committed an offence under 
section 168 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who deemed not to have a share or 
interest in any contract or employment unde r the proviso to clause ( d) of section 6].  
118. Cognizance of offences .—No court inferior to that of a 5[Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class] shall try any offence punishable under this Act or any rule or regulation made 
thereunder.  
119. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of business of the co mpany, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to such 
punishment prov ided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary, or other offic er of the company, such director, manager, secretary, or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 32 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
2. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 28, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 19, for “two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
4. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
5. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for “magistrate of the first class” ( w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  43 
 CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
120. Limitation of proceedings in respec t of things done under the Act. —No suit or other 
proceeding shall be commenced against a Board or any member or employee thereof for anything done, 
or purporting to have been done, in pursuance of this Act until the expiration of one month after notice in 
writing has been given to the Board  or him stating the cause of action, or after six months after the accrual 
of the cause of action.  
121. Protection of acts done in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie 1[against the 
Authority , a Board  or any member ] or employee thereof i n respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, or for any damage 
sustained by any vessel in consequence of any defect in any of the moorings, hawsers or other things 
belong ing to or under the control of the Board.  
122. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for all or any of t he following purposes, namely: — 
(a) the times and places of the  meetings of a Board and the procedure to be followed for the 
transactio n of business at such meetings;  
(b) the fees and allowances payable to the members of a Board or of its committees;  
2[(ba) the salaries, allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of the Chairperson 
and members of the Authority;]  
(c) any other matter in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government.  
(2) The power to make rules under this section is subject to the condition of the rules being m ade after 
previous publication.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more success ive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session 3[immediately following the 
session] or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall  thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
123. General power of Bo ard to make regulations .—Without prejudice to any power to make 
regulations contained elsewhere in this Act, a Board may make regulations consistent with this Act for all 
or any of th e following purposes, namely: — 
(a) for the times and places of the meetings of its committees and for the procedure to be 
followed for the transactio n of business at such meetings;  
(b) for the form and manner in which contra cts shall be made by the Board;  
(c) for the form of receipt to be given under sub -section ( 2) of se ction 42;  
(d) for the period within which notice may be given under  sub-section ( 2) of section 43;  
(e) for the guidance of persons employ ed by the Board under this Act;  
4[(f) for the safe, efficient and convenient use, management and control of the docks, wharves,  
quays, jetties, railways, tramways, buildings and other works constructed or acquired by, or vested in, 
the Board, or of any land or foreshore acquired by, or vest ed in, the Board under this Act] ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 27, for “against a Board or any member” (w.e.f. 9-1-1997).  
2. Ins. by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 35, for “in which it is so laid” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
4. Subs. by s. 36, ibid., for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
 44 
 (g) for the reception, porterage, storage and removal of goods brought within the premises of the 
Board, for the exclusive conduct of these operations by the Board or persons employed by the Board; 
and for declaring the procedure to be followed for taking charge of goods which may have been 
damaged before landing, or may be alleged to have been so dama ged; 
(h) for keeping clean the port, river or basins or the bank of the river and the works of the Board, 
and for preventi ng filth or rubbish b eing thrown therein or thereon;  
(i) for the mode of payment of rates leviab le by the Board under this Act;  
(j) for regulating, declaring and defining the docks, wharves, quays, jetties, stages and piers 
vested in the Board on which goo ds shall be landed from vessel s and shipped on board vessels;  
(k) for regulating the manner in which, and the conditions under which, the loading and unloading 
of all vessels within the port or port a pproaches shall be carried out;  
(l) for regulating the l ighterage of cargo between ships or between ships and sh ore or between 
shore and ships;  
(m) for the exclusion from the premises of the Board of disorderly or other undesira ble persons 
and of trespassers;  
(n) for e nsuring the safety of the port;  
(o) general ly, for the efficient and proper administration of the port.  
1[123A. Power of Authority to make regulations .—The Authority may make regulation consistent 
with this Act for all or any of t he following purposes, namely: — 
(a) the times and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed at such 
meeting under section 47E;  
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of officers and other 
employees of the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 47H.]  
124. Provisions with respect to regulations .—(1) No regulation made by the Board under this Act 
2[, other than a regulation made under sub -section ( 2) of section 17 ,] shall have effect until it has been 
approved by the Central Government and until such approval has been published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) No such regulation 3[other than a regulation made under section 28,] shall be approved by the 
Central Governme nt until the same has been published by the Board for two weeks successively in the 
Official Gazette and until fourteen days have expired from the date on which the same had been f irst 
published in that Gazette.  
(3) Any regulation made under this Act other  than a regulation made under section 28 may provide 
that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 4[two thousand rupees] , and 
where the breach is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to 5[five hundred rupees] for 
every day after the first during which such breach continues.  
6[(4) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which ma y be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive ses sions, and if, before the expir y of the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both 
Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done u nder that regulation].  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 29 (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
2. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 37 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
3. Ins. by Act 17 of 1982, s. 20 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for “two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for “fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  
6. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1982).  45 
 125. Power of Central Government to direct regulations to be made or to make             
regulations .—(1) Whenever the Central Government considers necessary in the public interest so to do, it 
may, by order in writing together with a statement of reasons therefor, direct any Board to make any 
regulations for all or any of the matters specified in section 28 or section 76 or section 123 or to amend 
any regulations, within such period as the Central Governm ent may specify in this behal f: 
Provided that the Central Government may extend the period specified by it by such period or periods 
as it may conside r necessary.  
(2) If any Board, against whom a direction is issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), 
fails or neglects to  comply with such direction within the period allowed under sub -section ( 1), that 
Government may make the regulations or amend the regulations, as the case may be, either in the form 
specified in the direction or with such modifications thereof as the Cent ral Government may think fit:  
Provided that before so making or amending the regulations the Central Government shall consider 
any objection or suggestion made by th e Board within the said period.  
(3) Where in pursuance of sub -section ( 2), any regulations  have been made or amended, the 
regulations so made or amended shall be published by the Central Government in the Official Gazette and 
shall thereupon have effect accordingly.  
126. Power of Central Government to make first regulations .—Notwithstanding any thing 
contained in this Act, the first regulations under this Act shall be made by the Central Government and 
shall have effect on being published in the Official Gazette.  
127. Posting of certain regulations, etc .—The text of the regulations made under cla uses ( e) to ( n) 
of section 123 and the scale of rates together with a statement of conditions framed by any Board under 
Chapter VI shall be prominently posted by the Board in English, in Hindi and in the regional language on 
special boards to be maintained  for the purpose at the wharves, docks, piers and other convenient places 
on the premises of the Board.  
128. Saving of right of Central Government and municipalities to use wharves, etc ., for 
collecting duties an d of power of Customs Officers .—Nothing in this Act shall affect — 
(1) the right of the Central Government to collect customs duties or of any municipality to collect 
town duties at any dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier i n the possession of a Board, or  
(2) any power or authority vested in the customs authorities under any law for the time being in 
force.  
129. Application of certain provisions of the Act to aircraft. —The provisions of sections 35, 37, 
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 48, 49, 50, 64, 65, 115, 121, 123 and 124 shall apply in relation t o all aircraft making 
use of any port while on water as they apply in relation to vessels.  
130. Power to evict certain persons from the premises of Board. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, if a Board in ex ercise of the powers conferred on it 
by regulations made under this Act cancel the allotment of any premises made to any employee of the 
Board, the Board may, by notice in writing, order such allottee or any other person who may be in 
occupation of the who le or any part of the premises to surrender or deliver possession thereof to the Board 
or a person appointed by the Board in that behalf within such period as may be specified in the notice.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “premises ” means any building or p art of a building 
and includes — 
(i) the gardens, grounds and out -houses, if any, appertaining to such building or part of a 
building;  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for the more beneficial enjoyment 
thereof; and  
(iii) any furniture, books or other things belonging to the Board and found in such building or part 
of a build ing. 46 
 (2) If any allottee or other p erson refuses or fails to comply with an order made under sub -section ( 1), 
any magistrate of the first class may, on application made by or on behalf of the Board, order any police 
officer, with proper assistance, to enter into the premises and evict any p erson from, and take possession 
of, the premises and to deliver the same to the Board or a person appointed by the Board in that behalf 
and the police officer may for the purpose, use such force as may be necessary.  
(3) Any such notice as is referred to in  sub-section ( 1) may be served — 
(a) by delivering or tendering it to the allottee or any other person who may be in occupation of 
the whole or any part of the premises, or  
(b) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it on the outer door or some other 
consp icuous part of the premises, or  
(c) by registered post.  
131. Alternative remedy by suit. —Without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under 
this Act, a Board may recover by suit any rates, damages, expenses, costs, or in the case  of sale the 
balance thereof, when the proceeds of sale are insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or recoverable by, 
the Board under this Act or under any regulations made in pursuance thereof.  
132. Requirements as to publication of notifications, ord ers, etc ., in the Official                    
Gazette. —(1) Any requirement in this Act that a notification, order, rule or regulation issued or 1[made 
by a Board or the Authority or the Central Gov ernment ] shall be published in the Official Gazette, shall,  
unless otherwise expressly provided in this Act, be construed as a requirement that the notification, o rder, 
rule or regulation shall —  
(a) where it is issued or made by the Board, be published in the Official Gazette of the State in 
which the port is sit uated, and  
(b) where it is issued or 2[made by the authority or the Central Government ], be pub lished in the 
Gazette of India.  
(2) Any notification, order, rule or regulation issued or 2[made by the Authority or the Central 
Government ] shall, for general information, be also republished in the Official Gazette of the State in 
which the port is situated.  
133. Repeal. —(1) On the application of this Act to the port of Kandla, the Bombay Landi ng and 
Wharfage Fees Act, 1882 (Bombay Act  7 of 1882)  shall cease to have force in relation to that port.  
(2) On the application of this Act to the ports of Cochin and Vishakhapatnam, the Madras Outputs 
Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885 (Madras Act 3 of 1885) shall cease to have forc e in relation to 
those ports.  
3[(2A) On the application of this Act to the port of Bombay, the Bombay Port Trust Act, 1879  
(Bombay Act 6 of 1879) , except the provisions thereof relating to municipal assessment of the properties 
of the port of Bombay and matters connect ed therewith, shall cease to have force in relation to that port.  
(2B) On the application of this Act to the port of Calcut ta, the Calcutta Port Act, 1890                      
(Bengal Act 3 of 1890) , except the provisions thereof relating to municipal asse ssment of the properties of 
the port of Calcutta and matters connected therewith, shall cease to have force in relation to that port.  
(2C) On the application of this Act to the port of Madras, the Madras Port Trust Act, 1905                
(Madras Act 2 o f 1905) , shall cease to have force in relation to that port.  
(2D) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 2A), (2B) and ( 2C),— 
(a) every Trustee of the Board of Trustees of the port of Bombay or Madras holding office as 
such immediately before the application of this Act to the port of Bombay or Madras, as the case may 
be, shall be deemed to have been appointed or elected as such un der this Act and shall continue to 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1997, s. 30, for “made by a Board or by the Central Government” (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “made by the Central Government” (w.e.f. 9 -1-1997).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 1974, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  47 
 hold such office after such application until a Board of Trustees in respect of that port is constituted 
under the provisions of this Act;  
(b) every Commissioner of the port of Calcutta holding office as such immediately  before the 
application of this Act to that port shall be deemed to have been appointed or elected as a Trustee 
under the provisions of this Act and shall continue to hold such office after such application until a 
Board of Trustees in respect of that port  is constituted under the provisions of this Act;  
(c) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken (including any rule, 
regulation, bye -law, notification, order or notice made or issued or any resolution passed or any 
appointm ent or declaration made or any licence, permission or exemption granted or any rates, 
charges or duties levied or any penalty or fine imposed) under the Acts referred to in                             
sub-sections ( 2A), (2B) and  (2C) shall, in so far as i t is not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(2E) Upon the cesser of operation of the provisions of the Acts referred to in sub -section s (2A), (2B) 
and ( 2C), the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall apply as if the 
provisions first -mentioned were provisions contained in a Central Act and such cesser of operation were a 
repeal; and the mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2D) shall not be held to prejudice or affect 
the general application of the said section 6 with regard to the effect of repeals].  
(3) If immediately before the application of this Act to any other port, there is in force in that port any 
law which c orresponds to this Act or to any provision thereof, that corresponding law shall, on such 
application, cease to have force in relation to that port 1[and section 6 o f the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897),  shall apply as if such corresponding law were  a Central Act and such cesser of operation 
were a repeal].  
134. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, particularly in relation to the transition from the enactments repealed by this Act to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order, do anything not inconsistent with such 
provisions which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpo se of removing the difficulty:  
2[Provided that no such orde r shall  be made in respect of a port a fter the expiry of a period of two 
years from the appointed day.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1978 , s. 3  (w.e.f. 4 -5-1980). 
2. The proviso added by Act 29 of 1974, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
--------------------------The Marine Insurance Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE MARINE INSURANCE  ACT, 196 3                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
MARINE INSURANCE  
3. Marine insurance defined.  
4. Mixed sea and land risks. 
5. Lawful marine adventure.  
INSURABLE INTEREST  
6. Avoidance of wagering contracts.  
7. Insurable interest defined.  
8. When interest must attach.  
9. Defeasible or contingent interest.  
10. Partial interest.  
11. Reinsurance.  
12. Bottomry.  
13. Master’s and seamen’s wages.  
14. Advance freight.  
15. Charges of insurance.  
16. Quantum of interest.  
17. Assignment of interest.  
INSURABLE VALUE  
18. Measure of insurable value.  
DISCLOSURE AND REPRESENTATIONS  
19. Insurance is uberrimae fidei.  
20. Disclosure by assured.  
21. Disclosure by agent effecting insurance.  
22. Representations pending negotiation of contract . 
23. When contract is deemed to be concluded.  
THE POLICY  
24. Contract must be embodied in policy.  
25. What policy must specify.  
26. Signature of insurer.  
27. Voyage and time policies.  
28. Designation and subject -matter.  
29. Valued policy.  2 
 SECTIONS  
30. Unvalued policy.  
31. Floating policy by ship or ships.  
32. Construction of terms in policy.  
33. Premium to be arranged.  
DOUBLE INSURANCE  
34. Double insurance.  
WARRANTIES, ETC.  
35. Nature of warranty.  
36. When breach of warranty excused.  
37. Express warranties.  
38. Warranty of neutrality.  
39. No implied warranty of nationality.  
40. Warranty of good safety.  
41. Warranty of seaworthiness of s hip. 
42. No implied warranty that goods are seaworthy.  
43. Warranty of legality.  
THE VOYAGE  
44. Implied condition  as to commencement of risk.  
45. Alteration of port of departure.  
46. Sailing for different destination.  
47. Change of voyage.  
48. Deviation.  
49. Several ports of discharge.  
50. Delay in voyage.  
51. Excuse for deviation or delay.  
ASSIGNMENT OF POLICY  
52. When and how policy is assignable.  
53. Assured who has no interest cannot assign.  
THE PREMIUM  
54. When premium payable.  
LOSS AND ABANDONMENT  
55. Included and excluded losses.  
56. Partial and total loss.  
57. Actual total loss.  
58. Missing ship.  
59. Effect of transhipment, etc.  
60. Constructive total loss defined.  3 
 SECTIONS  
61. Effect of constructive total loss.  
62. Notice of abandonment.  
63. Effect of abandonment.  
PARTIAL LOSSES (INCLUDING SALVAGE AND GENERAL AVERAGE AND PARTICULAR CHARGES)  
64. Particular average loss.  
65. Salvage charges.  
66. General average loss.  
MEASURE OF INDEMNITY  
67. Extent of liability of insurer for loss.  
68. Total loss. 
69. Partial loss of ship.  
70. Partial loss of freight.  
71. Partial loss of goods, merchandise, etc.  
72. Apportionment of valuation.  
73. General average contributions and salvage charges.  
74. Liabilities to third parties.  
75. General provisions as to measure of indemnity.  
76. Particular average warranties.  
77. Successive losses.  
78. Suing and labouring clause.  
RIGHTS OF INSURER ON PAYMENTS  
79. Right of subrogation.  
80. Right of contribution.  
81. Effect of under -insurance.  
RETURN OF PREMIUM  
82. Enforcement of return.  
83. Return by agreement.  
84. Return for failure of consideration.  
SUPPLEMENTAL  
85. Ratification by assured.  
86. Implied obligation varied by agreement or usage.  
87. Reasonable time, etc., a question of fact.  
88. Covering note as evidence.  
89. Power to apply Act with modifications , etc., in certain cases.  
90. Certain provisions to override Transfer of Property Act, 1882.  
91. Savings.  
92. [Repealed. ] 
SCHEDULE .—FORM OF POLICY.  
  4 
 THE MARINE INSURANCE ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 11 OF 1963  
[18th April, 1963 .] 
An Act to codify the law relating to marine insurance.  
BE it enacted by Parliament i n the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Marine Insurance Act, 1963.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “contract of marine insurance ” means a contract of marine insu rance as defined by section 3;  
(b) “freight ” includes the profit derivable by a ship -owner from the employment of his ship to 
carry his own goods or other movables, as well as freight payable by a third party, but does not 
include passage money;  
(c) “insur able property ” means any ship, goods or other movables which are exposed to maritime 
perils;  
(d) “marine adventure ” includes any adventure where — 
(i) any insurable property is exposed to maritime perils;  
(ii) the earnings or acquisition of any freight, passage money, commission, profit or other 
pecuniary benefit, or the security for any advances, loans , or disbursements is endangered by the 
exposure of insurable property to maritime perils;  
(iii) any liability to a third party may be incurred by the owne r of, or other person interested 
in or responsible for, insurable property by reason of maritime perils;  
(e) “maritime perils ” means the perils consequent on, or incidental to, the navigation of the sea, 
that is to say, perils of the sea s, fire, war perils , pirates, rovers, thieves, captures, seizures, restraints 
and detainments of princes and peoples, jettisons, barratry and any other perils which are either of the 
like kind or may be designated by the policy;  
(f) “movables ” means any movable tangible prop erty, other than the ship, and includes money, 
valuable securities and other documents;  
(g) “policy ” means a marine policy;  
(h) “ship” includes every description of vessel used in navigation;  
(i) “suit” includes counter -claim and set -off. 
MARINE INSURANCE  
3. Marine insurance defined .—A contract of marine insurance is an agreement whereby the insurer 
undertakes to indemnify the assured, in the manner and to the extent thereby agreed, against marine 
losses, that is to say, the losses incidental to marine adve nture.  
4. Mixed sea and land risks.—(1) A contract of marine insurance may, by its express terms, or by 
usage of trade, be extended so as to protect the assured against losses on inland waters or on any land risk 
which may be incidental to any sea voyage.  
(2) Where a ship in course of building or the launch of a ship, or any adventure analogous to a marine 
adventure, is covered by a policy in the form of a marine policy, the provisions of this Act, in so far as 
applicable, shall apply thereto, but except as  by this section provided, nothing in this Act shall alter or 
                                                           
1. 1st August, 1963, vide notification No . S.O. 1925, dated 8th July, 1963, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 5 
 affect any rule of law applicable to any contract of insurance other than a contract of marine insurance as 
by this Act defined.  
Explanation. —“An adventure analogous to a marine adventure ” includes an adventure where any 
ship, goods or other movables are exposed to perils incidental to local or inland transit.  
5. Lawful marine adventure .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, every lawful marine adventure 
may be the subject of a contract of  marine insurance.  
INSURABLE INTEREST  
6. Avoidance of wagering contracts .—(1) Every contract of marine insurance by way of wagering is 
void.  
(2) A contract of marine insurance is deemed to be a wagering contract :— 
(a) where the assured has not an insurable  interest as defined by this Act, and the contract is 
entered into with no expectation of acquiring such an interest; or  
(b) where the policy is made “interest or no interest ”, or “without further proof of interest than the 
policy itself, or “without benefit of salvage to the insurer ”, or subject to any other like term:  
Provided that, where there is no possibility of salvage, a policy may be effected without benefit of 
salvage to the insurer.  
7. Insurable interest defined .—(1) Subject to the provisions  of this Act, every person has an 
insurable interest who is interested in a marine adventure.  
(2) In particular a person is interested in a marine adventure where he stands in any legal or equitable 
relation to the adventure or to any insurable property at  risk therein, in consequence of which he may 
benefit by the safety or due arrival of insurable property, or may be prejudiced by its loss, or by damage 
thereto, or by the detention thereof, or may incur liability in respect thereof.  
8. When interest must attach .—(1) The assured must be interested in the subject -matter insured at 
the time of the loss, though he need not be interested  when the insurance is effected : 
Provided that, where the subject -matter is insured “lost or not lost ”, the assured may recove r although 
he may not have acquired his interest until after the loss, unless at the time of effecting the contract of 
insurance the assured was aware of the loss, and the insurer was not.  
(2) Where the assured has no interest at the time of the loss, he c annot acquire interest by any act or 
election after he is aware of the loss.  
9. Defeasible or contingent interest .—(1) A defeasible interest is insurable, as also is a contingent 
interest.  
(2) In particular, where the buyer of goods has insured them, he ha s an insurable interest, 
notwithstanding that he might, at his election, have rejected the goods, or have treated them as at the 
seller ’s risk, by reason of the latter ’s delay in making delivery or otherwise.  
10. Partial interest .—A partial interest of any nature is insurable.  
11. Reinsurance .—(1) The insurer under a contract of marine insurance has an insurable interest in 
his risk, and may reinsure in respect of it.  
(2) Unless the policy otherwise provides, the original assured has  no right or interest in respect of 
such reinsurance.  
12. Bottomry .—The lender of money on bottomry or respondentia has an insurable interest in respect 
of the loan.  
13. Master’s and seamen’s wages.—The master or any member of the crew of a ship has an 
insurable interest in respect of his wages.  
14. Advance freight .—In the case of advance freight, the person advancing the freight has an 
insurable interest, in so far as such freight is not repayable in ca se of loss.  6 
 15. Charges of insurance .—The assured has an insurable interest in the charges of any insurance 
which he may effect.  
16. Quantum of interest .—(1) Where the subject -matter insured is mortgaged, the mortgagor has an 
insurable interest in the full  value thereof, and the mortgagee has an insurable interest in respect of any 
sum due or to become due under the mortgage.  
(2) A mortgagee, consignee, or other person having an interest in the subject -matter insured may 
insure on behalf and for the benefit  of other persons interested as well as for his own benefit.  
(3) The owner of insurable property has an insurable interest in respect of the full value thereof, 
notwithstanding that some third person may have agreed, or be liable to indemnify him in case o f loss.  
17. Assignment of interest .—Where  the assured assigns or otherwise parts with his interest in the 
subject -matter insured, he does not thereby transfer to the assignee his rights under the contract of 
insurance, unless there be an express or implied agreement with the assignee to that effe ct. 
But the provisions of this section do not affect transmission of interest by operation of law.  
INSURABLE VALUE  
18. Measure of insurable value .—Subject to any express provision or valuation in the policy, the 
insurable value of the subject -matter insure d must be ascertained as follows :— 
(1) In insurance on ship, the insurable value is the value, at the commencement of the risk, of the 
ship, including her outfit , provisions, and stores for the officers and crew, money advanced for 
seamen ’s wages, and othe r disbursements (if any ) incurred to make the ship fit for the voyage or 
adventure contemplated by the policy, plus the charges of insurance upon the whole . 
The insurable value, in the case of a steamship, includes also the machinery, boilers, and coals 
and engine stores if owned by the assured; in the case of a ship driven by power other than steam 
includes also the machinery and fuels and engine stores, if owned by the assured; and in the case of a 
ship engaged in a special trade, includes also the ordina ry fittings requisite for that trade . 
(2) In insurance on freight, whether paid in advance or otherwise, the insurable value is the gross 
amount of the freight at the risk of the assured, plus the charges of insurance . 
(3) In insurance on goods or merchand ise, the insurable value is the prime cost of the property 
insured, plus the expenses of and incidental to shipping and the char ges of insurance upon the whole.  
(4) In insurance on any other subject -matter, the insurable value is the amount at the risk of the 
assured when the policy attaches, plus the charges of insurance.  
DISCLOSURE AND REPRESENTATIONS  
19. Insurance is uberrimae fidei .—A contract of marine insurance is a contract based upon the 
utmost good faith, and if the utmost good faith be not observed by either party, the contract may be 
avoided by the other party.  
20. Disclosure by assured .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the assured must disclose to 
the insurer, before the contract is concluded, every material circumstance which, is known to the assured, 
and the assured is deemed to know every circumstance which, in the ordinary course of business, ought to 
be kno wn to him. If the assured fails to make such disclosure, the insurer may avoid the contract.  
(2) Every circumstance is material which would influence the judgment of a prudent insurer in fixing 
the premium, or determining whether he will take the risk.  
(3) In the absence of inquiry the following circumstances need not be disclosed, namely: — 
(a) any circums tance which diminishes the risk;  
(b) any circumstance which is known or presumed to be known to the insurer. The insurer is 
presumed to know matters of co mmon notoriety or knowledge, and matters which an insurer in the 
ordinary course of his business as such ought to know;  7 
 (c) any circumstance as to which information is waived by the insurer;  
(d) any circumstance which it is superfluous to disclose by reaso n of any express or implied 
warranty.  
(4) Whether any particular circumstance, which is not disclosed, be material or not is, in each case, a 
question of fact.  
(5) The term “circumstance ” includes any communication made to, or information received by, the 
assured.  
21. Disclosure by agent effecting insurance .—Subject to the provisions of the preceding section as 
to circumstances which need not be disclosed, where an insurance is effected for the assured by an agent, 
the agent must disclose to the insurer — 
(a) every material circumstance which is known to himself, and an agent to insure is deemed to 
know every circumstance which in the ordinary course of business ought to be known by, or to have 
been communicated to, him; and  
(b) every material circumstance wh ich the assured is bound to disclose, unless it comes to his 
knowledge too late to communicate it to the agent.  
22. Representations pending negotiation of contract .—(1) Every material representa tion made by 
the assured or his agent to the insurer during t he negotiations for the contract, and before the contract is 
concluded, must be true. If it be untrue the insurer may avoid the contract.  
(2) A representation is material which would influence the judgment of a prudent insurer in fixing the 
premium, or det ermining whether he will take the risk.  
(3) A representation may be either as to a matter of fact, or as to a matter of expectation or belief.  
(4) A representation as to a matter of fact is true, if it be substantially correct, that is to say, if the 
diffe rence between what is represented and what is actually correct would not be considered material by a 
prudent insurer.  
(5) A representation as to a matter of expectation or belief is true if it be made in good faith.  
(6) A representation may be withdrawn or  corrected before the contract is concluded.  
(7) Whether a particular representation be material or not, is, in each case, a question of fact.  
23. When contract is deemed to be concluded .—A contract of marine insurance is deemed to be 
concluded when the proposal of the assured is accepted by the insurer, whether the policy be then issued 
or not; and for the purpose of showing when the proposal was accepted, reference may be made to the 
slip, covering note or other customary memorandum of the contract, alt hough it be unstamped.  
THE POLICY  
24. Contract must be embodied in policy .—A contract of marine insurance shall not be admitted in 
evidence unless it is embodied in a marine policy in accordance with this Act. The policy may be 
executed and issued either at the time when the contract is concluded, or afterwards.  
25. What policy mu st specify .—A marine policy must specify — 
(1) the name of the assured, or of some person who effects the insurance on his behalf;  
(2) the subject -matter insured and the risk insured against;  
(3) the voyage, or period of time, or both, as the case may be, c overed by the insurance;  
(4) the sum or sums insured;  
(5) the name or names of the insurer or insurers.  
  8 
 26. Signature of insurer .—(1) A marine policy must be signed by or on behalf of the insurer.  
(2) Where a policy is subscribed by or on behalf of two or more insurers, each subscription, unless the 
contrary be expressed, constitute s a distinct contract with the assured.  
27. Voyage and time policies .—(1) Where the contract is to insure the subject -matter at and from, or 
from one place to another or other s, the policy is called a “voyage policy ”, and, where the contract is to 
insure the subject -matter for a definite period of time, the policy is called a “time policy ”. A contract for 
both voyage and time may be included in the same policy.  
(2) A time polic y which is made for any time exceeding twelve months is invalid.  
28. Designation and subject -matter .—(1) The subject -matter insured must be designat ed in a 
marine policy with reasonable certainty.  
(2) The nature and extent of the interest of the assured in the subject -matter insured need not be 
specified in the policy.  
(3) Where the policy designates the subject -matter insured in general terms, it shall be construed to 
apply to the interest intended by the assured to be covered.  
(4) In the application of this section regard shall be had to any usage regulating the designation of the 
subject -matter insured.  
29. Valued policy .—(1) A policy may be either valued or unvalued.  
(2) A valued policy is a policy which specifies the agreed value of the subject -matter  insured.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and in the absence of fraud, the value fixed by the policy is, 
as between the insurer and assured, conclusive of the insurable value of the subject intended to be insured, 
whether the loss be total or pa rtial. 
(4) Unless the policy otherwise provides, the value fixed by the policy is not conclusive for the 
purpose of determining whether there has been a constructive total loss.  
30. Unvalued policy .—An unvalued policy is a policy which does not specify the value of the 
subject -matter insured, but subject to the limit of the sum insured, leaves the insurable value to be 
subsequently ascertained, in the manner hereinbefore explained.  
31. Floating policy b y ship or ships .—(1) A floating policy is a policy which describes the insurance 
in general terms, and leaves the name or names of the ship or ships and other particulars to be defined by 
subsequent declaration.  
(2) The subsequent declaration or declaratio ns may be made by endorsement on the policy, or in other 
customary manner.  
(3) Unless the policy otherwise provides, the declarations must be made in the order of dispatch or 
shipment. They must, in the case of goods, comprise all consignments within the t erms of the policy, and 
the value of the goods or other property must be honestly stated, but an omission or erroneous declaration 
may be rectified even after loss or arrival, provided the omission or declaration was made in good faith.  
(4) Unless the poli cy otherwise provides, where a declaration of value is not made until after notice of 
loss or arrival, the policy must be treated as an unvalued policy as regards the subject -matter of that 
declaration.  
32. Construction of terms in policy .—(1) A policy may be in the form in the Schedule.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and unless the context of the policy otherwise requires, the 
terms and expressions mentioned in the Schedule shall be construed as having the scope and meaning 
assigned to them in the Schedule.  
33. Premium to be arranged .—(1) Where an insurance is effected at a premium to be arranged, and 
no arrangement is made, a reasonable premium is payable.  9 
 (2) Where an insurance is effected on the terms that an additional premium is to be arranged in a 
given event, and that event happens but no arrangement is made, then a reasonable additional premium is 
payable.  
DOUBLE INSURANCE  
34. Double insurance .—(1) Where two or more policies are effected by or on behalf of the assured 
on the sa me adventure and interest or any part thereof, and the sums insured exceed the indemnity 
allowed by this Act, the assured is said to be over -insured by double insurance.  
(2) Where the assured is over -insured by double insurance — 
(a) the assured, unless the  policy otherwise provides, may claim payment from the insurers in 
such order as he may think fit, provided that he is not entitled to receive any sum in excess of the 
indemnity allowed by this Act;  
(b) where the policy under which the assured claims is a valued policy, the assured must give 
credit as against the valuation, for any sum received by him under any other policy, without regard to 
the actual value of the subject -matter insured;  
(c) where  the policy under which the assured claims is an unvalued policy he must give credit, as 
against the full insurable value, for any sum received by him under any other policy;  
(d) where the assured receives any sum in excess of the indemnity allowed by this  Act, he is 
deemed to hold such sum in trust for the insurers, according to their right of contribution among 
themselves.  
WARRANTIES, ETC.  
35. Nature of warranty .—(1) A warranty, in the following sections relating to warranties, means a 
promissory warranty , that is to say a warranty by which the assured undertakes that some particular thing 
shall or shall not be done, or that some condition shall be fulfilled, or whereby he affirms or negatives the 
existence of a particular state of facts.  
(2) A warranty ma y be express or implied.  
(3) A warranty, as above defined, is a condition which must be exactly complied with, whether it be 
material to the risk or not. If it be not so complied with, then, subject to any express provision in the 
policy , the insurer is di scharged from liability as from the date of the breach of warranty , but without 
prejudice to any liability incurred by him before that date.  
36. When breach of warranty excused .—(1) Non -compliance with a warranty is excused when, by 
reason of a change of c ircumstances, the warranty ceases to be applicable to the circumstances of the 
contract, or when compliance with the warranty is rendered unlawful by any subsequent law.  
(2) Where a warranty is broken, the assured cannot avail himself of the defence  that the breach has 
been remedied, and the war ranty complied with before loss.  
(3) A breach of warranty may be waived by the insurer.  
37. Express warranties .—(1) An express warranty may be in any form of words from which the 
intention to warrant is to be inferred.  
(2) An express warranty must be included in, or written upon, the policy, or must be contained in 
some document incorporated by reference into the policy.  
(3) An express warranty does not exclude implied warranty, unless it be inconsistent therew ith. 
38. Warranty of neutrality .—(1) Where insurable property, whether ship or goods, is expressly 
warranted neutral, there is an implied condition that the property shall have a neutral character at the 
commencement of the risk, and that, so far as the as sured can control the matter, its neutral character shall 
be preserved during the risk.  
  10 
 (2) Where a ship is expressly warranted “neutral ”, there is also an implied condition that, so far as the 
assured can control the matter, she shall be properly docume nted, that is to say, that she shall carry the 
necessary papers to establish her neutrality, and that she shall not falsify or suppress her papers, or use 
simulated papers. If any loss occurs through breach of this condition, the insurer may avoid the cont ract. 
39. No implied warranty of nationality .—There is no implied warranty as to the nationality of a 
ship, or that her nationality shall not be changed during the risk.  
40. Warranty of good safety .—Where the subject -matter insured is warranted “well” or “in good 
safety ” on a particular day, it is sufficient if it be safe at any time during that day.  
41. Warranty of seaworthiness of ship .—(1) In a voyage policy there is an implied warranty that at 
the commencement of the voyage the ship shall be seaworthy f or the purpose of the particular adventure 
insured.  
(2) Where the policy attaches while the ship is in port, there is also an implied warranty that she shall, 
at the commencement of the risk, be reasonably fit to encounter the ordinary perils of the port.  
(3) Where the policy relates to a voyage which is performed in different stages, during which the ship 
requires different kinds of or further preparation or equipment, there is an implied warranty that at the 
commencement of each stage the ship is seaworth y in respect of such preparation or equipment for the 
purposes of that stage.  
(4) A ship is deemed to be seaworthy when she is reasonably fit in all respects to encounter the 
ordinary perils of the seas of the adventure insured.  
(5) In a time policy there is no implied warranty that the ship shall be seaworthy at any stage of the 
adventure, but where, with the privity of the assured, the ship is sent to sea in an unseaworthy state, the 
insurer is not liable for any loss attributable to unseaworthiness.  
42. No implied warranty that goods are seaworthy .—(1) In a policy on goods or other moveable 
there is no implied warranty that the goods or movables are seaworthy.  
(2) In a voyage policy on goods or other movables there is an implied warranty that at the 
comme ncement of the voyage the ship is not only seaworthy as a ship, but also that she is reasonably fit 
to carry the goods or other movables to the destination contemplated by the policy.  
43. Warranty of legality .—There is an implied warranty that the adventure insured is a lawful one, 
and that, so far as the assured can control the matter, the adventure shall be carried out in a lawful 
manner.  
THE VOYAGE  
44. Implied condition  as to commencement of risk .—(1) Where the subject -matter is insured by a 
voya ge policy “at and from ” or “from ” a particular place, it is not necessary that the ship should be at that 
place when the contract is concluded, but there is an implied condition that the adventure shall be 
commenced within a reasonable time, and that if th e adventure be not so commenced the insurer may 
avoid the contract.  
(2) The implied condition may be negatived by showing that the delay was caused by circumstances 
known to the insurer before the contract was concluded, or  by showing that he waived the condition.  
45. Alteration of port of departure .—Where the place of departure is specified by the policy, and 
the ship instead of sailing from that place sails from any other place, the risk does not attach.  
46. Sailing for diffe rent destination .—Where the destination is specified in the policy, and the ship, 
instead of sailing for that destination, sails for any other destination, the risk does not attach.  
47. Change of voyage .—(1) Where, after the commencement of the risk, the d estination of the ship is 
voluntarily changed from the destination contemplated by the policy, there is said to be a change of 
voyage.  
  11 
 (2) Unless the policy otherwise provides, where there is a change of voyage, the insurer is discharged 
from liability as from the time of change, that is to say, as from the time when the determination to 
change it is manifested ; and it is immaterial that the ship may not in fact have left the course of voyage 
contemplated by the policy when the loss occurs.  
48. Deviation .—(1) Where a ship, without lawful excused, deviates from the voyage contemplated by 
the policy, the insured is discharged from liability as from the time of deviation, and it is immaterial that 
the ship may have regained her route before any loss occurs.  
(2) There is a deviation from the voyage contemplated by the policy — 
(a) where the course of the voyage is specifically designated by the policy, and that course is 
departed from; or  
(b) where  the course of the voyage is not specifically designated by the policy, but the usual and 
customary course is departed from.  
(3) The intention to deviate is immaterial; there must be a deviation in fact to discharge the insurer 
from his liability under the  contract.  
49. Several ports of discharge .—(1) Where several ports of discharge are specified by the policy, 
the ship may proceed to all or any of them, but, in the absence of any usage or sufficient cause to the 
contrary, she must proceed to them, or such  of them as she goes to, in the order designated by the policy. 
If she does not , there is a deviation.  
(2) Where the policy is to “ports of discharge ”, within a given area, which are not named, the ship 
must, in the absence of any usage or sufficient cause  to the contrary, proceed to them, or such of them as 
she goes to, in their geographical order. If she does not , there is a deviation.  
50. Delay in voyage .—In the case of a voyage policy, the adventure insured must be prosecuted 
throughout its course with reasonable dispatch, and, if without lawful excuse it is not so prosecuted, the 
insurer is discharged from liability as from the time when the delay became unreasonable.  
51. Excuse for deviation or delay .—(1) Deviation or delay in prosecuting the voyage co ntemplated 
by the policy is excused — 
(a) where authorised by any special term in the policy; or  
(b) where caused by circumstances beyond the control of the master and his employer; or  
(c) where reasonably necessary in order to comply with an express or imp lied warranty; or  
(d) where reasonably necessary for the safety of the ship or subject -matter insured; or  
(e) for the purpose of saving human life or aiding a ship in distress where human life may be in 
danger; or  
(f) where reasonably necessary for the pur pose of obtaining medical or surgical aid for any person 
on board the ship; or  
(g) where caused by the barratrous conduct of the master or crew, if barratry be one of the perils 
insured against.  
(2) When the cause excusing the deviation or delay ceases to operate, the ship must resume her 
course, and prosecute her voyage with reasonable dispatch.  
ASSIGNMENT OF POLICY  
52. When and how policy is assignable .—(1) A marine policy may be transferred by assignment 
unless it contains terms expressly prohibiting assignment. It may be assigned either before or after loss.  
(2) Where a marine policy has been assigned so as to pass the beneficial interest in such policy, the  
assignee of the policy is entitled to sue thereon in his own name; and the defendant is entitled to make any 
defence arising out of the contract which he would have been entitled to make if the suit had been brought 
in the name of the person by  or on beha lf of whom the policy was effected.  12 
 (3) A marine policy may be assigned by endorsement thereon or in other customary manner.  
53. Assured who has no interest cannot assign .—Where the assured has parted with or lost his 
interest in the subject -matter insured , and has not , before or at the time of so doing expressly or impliedly 
agreed to assign the policy, any subsequent assignment of the policy is inoperative:  
Provided that nothing in this section affects the assignment of a policy after loss.  
THE PREMIUM  
54. When premium payable .—Unless otherwise agreed, the duty of the assured or his agent to pay 
the premium, and the duty of the insurer to issue the policy to the assured or his agent, are concurrent 
conditions, and the insurer is not bound to issue the poli cy until payment or tender of the premium.  
LOSS AND ABANDONMENT  
55. Included and excluded losses .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and unless the policy 
otherwise provides, the insurer is liable for any loss proximately caused by a peril insured against, but, 
subject as aforesaid, he is not liable for any loss which is not proximately caused by a peril insured 
against.  
(2) In particular — 
(a) the insurer is not liable for any loss attributable to the wilful misconduct of the assured, but, 
unless th e policy otherwise provides, he is liable for any loss proximately caused by a peril insured 
against, even though the loss would not have happened but for the misconduct or negligence of the 
master or crew;  
(b) unless the policy otherwise provides, the ins urer on ship or goods is not liable for any loss 
proximately caused by delay, although the delay be caused by a peril insured against;  
(c) unless the policy otherwise provides, the insurer is not liable for ordinary wear and tear, 
ordinary leakage and breakage, inherent vice or nature of the subject -matter insured, or for any loss 
proximately caused by rats or vermin, or for any injury to machinery not proximately caused by 
maritime perils.  
56. Partial and total loss .—(1) A loss may be either total or p artial. Any loss other than a total loss, 
as hereinafter defined, is a partial loss.  
(2) A total loss may be either an actual total loss, or a constructive total loss.  
(3) Unless a different intention appears from the terms of the policy, an insurance agai nst total loss 
includes a constructive, as well as an actual, total loss.  
(4) Where the assured brings a suit for a total loss and the evidence proves only a partial loss, he may, 
unless the policy otherwise provides, recover for a partial loss.  
(5) Where goods reach their destination in specie, but by reason of obliteration of marks, or 
otherwise, they are incapable of identification, the loss, if any , is partial and not total.  
57. Actual total loss .—(1) Wher e the subject -matter insured is destroyed, or so damaged as to cease 
to be a thing of the kind insured, or where the assured is irretrievably deprived thereof, there is an actual 
total loss.  
(2) In the case of an actual total loss no notice of abandonment n eed be given.  
58. Missing ship .—Where the ship concerned in the adventure is missing, and after the lapse of a 
reasonable time no news of her has been received, an actual total loss may be presumed.  
59. Effect of transhipment, etc. —Where, by a peril insured against, the voyage is interrupted at 
intermediate port or place, under such circumstances as,  a part from any special stipulation in the contract 
of a freightment , to justify the master in landing and reshipping the goods or other movables, or in 
transhipping them, and sending them on to their destination, the liability of the insurer continues, 
notwithstanding the landing or transhipment.  13 
 60. Constructive total loss defined .—(1) Subject to any express provision in the policy, there is a 
constructi ve total loss where the subject -matter insured is reasonably abandoned on account of its actual 
total loss appearing to be unavoidable, or because it could not be preserved from actual total loss without 
an expenditure which would exceed its value when the  expenditure had been incurred.  
(2) In particular, there is a constructive total loss — 
(i) where the assured is deprived of the possession of his ship or goods by a peril insured    
against, and  
(a) it is unlikely that he can recover the ship or goods, as the case may be, or  
(b) the cost of recovering the ship or goods, as the case may be,  
would exceed their value when recovered; or  
(ii) in the case of damage to a ship, where she is so damaged by a peril insured against that the 
cost of repairing the damage  would exceed the value of the ship when repaired.  
In estimating the cost of repairs, no deduction is to be made in respect of general average 
contributions to those repairs payable by other interests, but account is to be taken of the expense of 
future sa lvage operations and of any future general average contributions to which the ship would be 
liable if required; or  
(iii) In the case of damage to goods, where the cost of repairing the damage and forwarding the 
goods to their destination would exceed their  value on arrival.  
61. Effect of constructive total loss .—Where there is a constructive total loss the assured may either 
treat the loss as a partial loss, or abandon the subject -matter insured to the insurer and treat the loss as if it 
were an actual tota l loss.  
62. Notice of abandonment .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, where the assured elects 
to abandon the subject -matter insured to the insurer, he must give notice of abandonment. If he fails to do 
so the loss can only be treated as a partial loss.  
(2) Notice of abandonment may be given in writing, or by word of mouth, or partly in writing and 
partly by word of mouth, and may be given in any terms which indicate the intention of the assured to 
abandon his insured interest in the subject -matter insured unconditionally to the insurer.  
(3) Notice of abandonment must be given with reasonable diligence after the receipt of reliable 
information of the loss, but where the information is of a doubtful character the assured is entitled to a 
reaso nable time to make enquiry.  
(4) Where notice of abandonment is properly given, the rights of the assured are not prejudiced by the 
fact that the insurer refuses to accept the abandonment.  
(5) The acceptance of an abandonment may be either express or implie d from the conduct of the 
insurer. The mere silence of the insurer after notice is not a n acceptance.  
(6) Where notice of abandonment is accepted the abandonment is irrevocable. The acceptance of the 
notice conclusively admits liability for the loss and th e sufficiency of the notice.  
(7) Notice of abandonment is unnecessary where at the time when the assured receives information of 
the loss, there would  be no possibility of benefit to  the insurer if notice were given to him.  
(8) Notice of abandonment may be  waived by the insurer.  
(9) When an insurer has reinsured his risk, no notice of abandonment need be given by him.  
63. Effect of abandonment .—(1) Where there is a valid abandonment the insurer is entitled to take 
over the interest of the assured in whateve r may remain of the subject -matter insured, and all proprietary 
rights incidental thereto.  
  14 
 (2) Upon the abandonment of a ship, the insurer thereof is entitled to any freight in course of being 
earned, and which is earned by her subsequent to the casualty  causing the loss, less the expenses of 
earning it incurred after the casualty; and, where the ship is carrying the owner ’s goods, the insurer is 
entitled to a reasonable remuneration for the carriage of them subsequent to the casualty causing the loss.  
PARTIAL LOSSES (INCLUDING SALVAGE AND GENERAL AVERAGE AND PARTICULAR CHARGES)  
64. Particular average loss .—(1) A particular average loss is a partial loss of the subject -matter 
insured, caused by a peril insured against, and which is not a general average lo ss. 
(2) Expenses incurred by or on behalf of the assured for the safety or preservation of the           
subject -matter insured, other than general average and salvage charges, are called particular charges. 
Particularly charges are not included in particu lar average.  
65. Salvage charges .—(1) Subject to any express provision in the policy, salvage charges incurred in 
preventing a loss by perils insured against may be recovered as a loss by those perils.  
(2) “Salvage charges ” means the charges recoverable un der maritime law by a salvor independently 
of contract. They do not include the expenses of services in the nature of salvage rendered by the assured 
or his agents, or any person employed for hire by them, for the purpose of averting a peril insured agains t. 
Such expenses, where properly incurred, may be recovered as particular charges or as a general average 
loss, according to the circumstances under which they were incurred.  
66. General average loss .—(1) A general average loss is a loss caused by or directly consequential 
on a general average act. It includes a general average expenditure as well as a general average sacrifice.  
(2) There is a general average act where any extraordinary sacrifice or expendit ure is voluntarily and 
reasonably made or incurred in time of peril for the purpose of preserving the property imperilled in the 
common adventure.  
(3) Where there is a general average loss, the party on whom it falls is entitled, subject to the 
conditions imposed by maritime law, to a rateable contribution from the other parties interested, and such 
contribution is called  a general average contribution.  
(4) Subject to any express provision in the policy, where the assured has incurred a general average or 
expenditure, he may recover from the insurer in respect of the proportion of the loss which falls upon 
him; and in the case of a general average sacrifice, he may recover from the insurer in respect of the 
whole loss without having enforced his right of con tribution from the other parties liable to contribute.  
(5) Subject to any express provision in the policy, where the assured has paid, or is liable to pay, a 
general average contribution in respect of the interest i nsured, he may recover therefor  from the insurer.  
(6) In the absence of express stipulation, the insurer is not liable for any general average loss or 
contribution where the loss was not incurred for the purpose of avoiding, or in connection with the 
avoidance of a peril insured against . 
(7) Where ship, freight, and cargo, or any two of those interests, are owned by the same assured, the 
liability of the insurer in respect of general average losses or contributions is to be determined as if those 
interests were owned by different persons . 
MEASURE OF INDEMNITY  
67. Extent of liability of insurer for loss .—(1) The sum which the assured can recover in respect of 
a loss on a policy by which he is insured, in the case of an unvalued policy to the full extent of the 
insurable value , or, in the case of a valued policy to the full extent of the value fixed by the policy, is 
called the measure of indemnity.  
(2) Where there is a loss recoverable under the policy, the insurer , or each insurer if there be more 
than one, is liable for such prop ortion of the measure of indemnity as the amount of his subscription bears 
to the value fixed by the policy in the case of a valued policy, or to the insurable value in the case of an 
unvalued policy.  15 
 68. Total loss .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, and to any express provision in the policy, 
where there is a total loss of the subject -matter insured — 
(1) if the policy be a valued policy, the measure of indemnity is the sum fixed by the policy;  
(2) if the policy be an unvalued policy, the measure of in demnity is the insurable value of the   
subject -matter insured.  
69. Partial loss of ship .—Where a ship is damaged, but is not totally lost, the measure of indemnity 
subject to any express provision in the policy, is as follows — 
(1) where the ship has been repaired, the assured is entitled to the reasonable cost of the repairs, 
less the customary deductions, but not exceeding the sum insured  in respect of any one casualty;  
(2) where the ship has been only partially repaired, the assured is entitled to the reasonable cost of 
such repairs, computed as above, and also to be indemnified for the reasonable depreciation, if any, 
arising from the unrepaired damage, provided that the aggregate amount shall not exceed the cost of 
repairing the whole damage, computed  as above;  
(3) where the ship has not been repaired, and has not been sold in her damaged state during the 
risk, the assured is entitled to be indemnified for the reasonable depreciation arising from the 
unrepaired damage, but not exceeding the reasonable cost of repairing such damage, computed as 
above;  
(4) where the ship has not been repaired, and has been sold in her damaged state during the risk, 
the assured is entitled to be indemnified for the reasonable cost of repairing the damage, computed as 
above , but not exceeding the depreciation in value as ascertained by the sale.  
70. Partial loss of freight .—Subject to any express provision in the policy, where there is a partial 
loss of freight, the measure of indemnity is such proportion of the sum fixed by  the policy in the case of a 
valued policy or of the insurable value in the case of an unvalued policy, as the proportion of freight lost 
by the assured bears to the whole freight at the risk of the assured under the policy.  
71. Partial loss of goods, merc handise, etc. —Where there is a partial loss of goods, merchandise, or 
other movable, the measure of indemnity, subject to any express provision in the policy, is as follows: — 
(1) where part of the goods, merchandise or other movable insured by a valued pol icy is totally 
lost, the measure of indemnity is such proportion of the sum fixed by the policy as the insurable value 
of the part lost bears to the insurable value of the whole, ascertained as in the case of an unvalued 
policy;  
(2) where part of the goods, merchandise or other movable insured by an unvalued policy is 
totally lost, the measure of indemnity is the insurable value of the part lost, ascertained as in case of 
total loss;  
(3) where the whole or any part of the goods or merchandise insured h as been delivered damaged 
at its destination, the measure of i demnity is such proportion of the sum fixed by the policy in the 
case of a valued policy, or of the insurable value in the case of an unvalued policy, as the difference 
between the gross sound a nd damaged values at the place of arrival bears to the gross sound value;  
(4) “Gross value ” means the wholesale price, or, if there be no such price, the estimated value, 
with, in either case, freight, landing charges, and duty paid beforehand; provided that, in the case of 
goods or merchandise customarily sold in bond, the bonded price is deeme d to be the gross value. 
“Gross proceeds ” means the actual price obtained at a sale where all charges on sale are paid by the 
sellers.  
72. Apportionment of valuation .—(1) Where different species of property are insured under a single 
valuation, the valuati on must be apportione d over the different species in  proportion to their respective 
insurable values, as in the case of an unvalued policy. The insured value of any part of a species is such 
proportion of the total insured value of the same as the insurabl e value of the part bears to the insurable 
value of the whole, ascertained in both cases as provided by this Act.  16 
 (2) Where a valuation has to be apportioned, and particulars of the prime cost of each separate 
species, quality, or description of goods cann ot be ascertained, the division of the valuation may be made 
over the net arrived sound values of the different species, qualities, or descriptions of goods.  
73. General average contributions and salvage charges .—(1) Subject to any express provision in 
the policy, where the assured has paid, or is liable for, any general average contribution, the measure of 
indemnity is the full amount of such contribution if the subject -matter liable to contribution is insured for 
its full contributory value; but, if such subject -matter be not insured for its full contributory value, or if  
only part of it be insured, the indemnity payable by the insurer must be reduced in proportion to the 
under -insurance, and where there has been a particular average loss which constitute s a deduction from 
the contributory value, and for which the insurer is liable, that amount must be deducted from the insured 
value in order to ascertain what the insurer is liable to contribute.  
(2) Where the insurer is liable for salvage charges the exte nt of his liabilities must be determined on 
the like principle . 
74. Liabilities to third parties .—Where  the assured has effected an insurance in express terms 
against any liability to a third party, the measure of indemnity, subject to any express provision in the 
policy, is the amount paid or payable by him to such third party in respect of such liability.  
75. General provisions as to measure of indemnity .—(1) Where there has been a loss in respect of 
any subject -matter not expressly provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Act, the measure of 
indemnity shall be ascertained as nearly as may be, in a ccordance with those provisions, in so far as 
applicable to the particular case.  
(2) Nothing in the provisions of this Act relating to the measure of indemnity shall affect the rules 
relating to double insurance, or prohibit the insurer from disproving int erest wholly or in part, or from 
showing that at the time of the loss the whole or any part of the subject -matter insured was not at risk 
under the policy.  
76. Particular average warranties .—(1) Where the subject -matter insured is warranted free from 
particular average, the assured cannot recover for a loss of part, other than a loss incurred by a general 
average sacrifice, unless the contract contained in the policy be apportionable; but, if the contract be 
apportionable, the assured may recover for a tota l loss of any apportionable part.  
(2) Where the subject -matter insured is warranted free from particular average, either wholly or under 
a certain percentage, the insurer is nevertheless liable for salvage charges, and for particular charges and 
other expe nses properly incurred pursuant to the provisions of the suing and labouring clause in order to 
avert a loss insured against.  
(3) Unless the policy otherwise provides , where the subject -matter insured is warranted free from 
particular average under a speci fied percentage, a general average loss cannot be added to a particular 
average loss to make up the specified percentage.  
(4) For the purpose of ascertaining whether the specified percentage has been reached, regard shall be 
had only to the actual loss suf fered by the subject -matter insured. Particular charges and the expenses of 
and incidental to ascertaining and proving the loss must be excluded.  
77. Successive losses .—(1) Unless the policy otherwise provides, and subject to the provisions of this 
Act, th e insurer is liable for successive losses, even though the total amount of such losses may exceed the 
sum insured.  
(2) Where, under the same policy, a partial loss, which has not been repaired or otherwise made good, 
is followed by a total loss, the assure d can only recover in respect of the total loss:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the liability of the insurer under the suing and 
labouring clause.  
78. Suing and labouring clause .—(1) Where the policy contains a suing and labouring  clause, the 
engagement thereby entered into is deemed to be supplementary to the contract of insurance, and the 
assured may recover from the insurer any expenses properly incurred pursuant to the clause, 17 
 notwithstanding that the insurer may have paid for a total loss, or that the subject -matter may have been 
warranted free from particular average, either wholly or under a certain percentage.  
(2) General average losses and contributions and salvage charges, as defined by this Act, are not 
recoverable under the suing and labouring clause.  
(3) Expenses incurred for the purpose of averting or diminishing any loss not covered by the policy 
are not recoverable under the suing and labouring clause.  
(4) It is the duty of the assured and his agents, in all cases, to  take such measures as may be 
reasonable for the purpose of averting or  minimising a loss.  
RIGHTS OF INSURER ON PAYMENTS  
79. Right of subrogation .—(1) Where the insurer pays for a total loss, either of the whole, or in the 
case of goods of any apportionabl e part, of the subject -matter insured, he thereupon becomes entitled to 
take over the interest of the assured in whatever may remain of the subject -matter so paid for, and he is 
thereby subrogated to all the rights and remedies of the assured in and in res pect of that subject -matter as 
from the time of the casualty causing the loss.  
(2) Subject to the foregoing provisions, where the insurer pays for a partial loss, he acquires no title to 
the subject -matter insured, or such part of it as may remain, but he is thereupon subrogated to all rights 
and remedies of the assured in and in respect of the subject -matter insured as from the time of the casualty 
causing the loss, in so far as the assured has been indemnified, according to this Act, by such payment for 
the loss.  
80. Right of contribution .—(1) Where the assured is over -insured by double insurance, each insurer 
is bound, as between himself and the other insurers, to contribute rateably  to the loss in proportion to the 
amount for which he is liable under his contract.  
(2) If any insurer pays more than his proportion of the loss, he is entitled to maintain a suit for 
contribution against the other insurers, and is entitled to the like rem edies as a surety who has paid more 
than his proportion of the debt.  
81. Effect of unde r-insurance .—Where the assured is insured for an amount less than the insurable 
value, or, in the case of  a valued policy, for an amount less than the policy valuation, he is deemed to be 
his own insurer in respect of the uninsured balance.  
RETURN OF PREMIUM  
82. Enforcement of return .—Where the premium, or a proportionate part thereof, is, by this Act, 
declared to be returnable — 
(a) if already paid, it may be recovered by the assured from the insurer, and,  
(b) if unpaid, it may be retained by the assured or his agent.  
83. Return by agreement .—Where the policy contains a stipulation for the return of the premium, or 
a proportionate part thereof, on the happening of a certain event, and that event happens, the premium, or, 
as the case may be, the proportionate part thereof, is thereupon returnable to the assured.  
84. Return for failure of consideration .—(1) Where the consideration for the payment of the 
premium totally fails, and there has been no fraud or illegality on the part of the assured or his agents, the 
premium is thereupon returnable to the assured.  
(2) Where the consideration for the payment of the premium is apportionable and th ere is a total 
failure of any apportionable part of the consideration, a proportionate part of the premium is, under the 
like conditions, thereupon returnable to the assured.  
(3) In particular: — 
(a) where the policy is void, or is avoided by the insurer as  from the commencement of the risk, 
the premium is returnable, provided there has been no fraud or illegality on the part of the assured; 
but if the risk is not apportionable, and has once attached, the premium is not returnable;  18 
 (b) where  the subject -matter insured, or part thereof, has never been inperilled the premium, or, as 
the case may be, a proportionate part thereof, is returnable:  
Provided that where the subject -matter has been insured “lost or not lost ”, and has arrived in 
safety at the time when the contract is concluded, the premium is not returnable unless, at such time, 
the insurer knew of the safe arrival;  
(c) where the assured has n o insurable interest throughout  the currency of the risk the premium is 
returnable, provided th at the rule does not apply to a policy effected by way of wagering;  
(d) where the assured has a defeasible interest which is terminated during the currency of the risk,  
the premium is not returnable;  
(e) where the assured has over -insured under an unvalued  policy, a proportionate part of the 
premium is returnable;  
(f) subject to the foregoing provisions, where the assured has over -insured by double insurance, a 
proportionate part of the several premiums is returnable:  
Provided that, if the policies are effe cted at different times, and any earlier policy has at any time 
borne the entire risk, or if a claim has been paid on the policy in respect of the full sum insured 
thereby, no premium is returnable in respect of that policy, and when the double insurance i s effected 
knowingly by the assured no premium is returnable.  
SUPPLEMENTAL  
85. Ratification by assured .—Where  a contract of marine insurance is in good faith effected by one 
person on behalf of another, the person on whose behalf it is effected may ratify the contract even after he 
is aware of a loss.  
86. Implied obligation varied by agreement or usage .—(1) Where  any right, duty, or lia bility 
would  arise under a contract of marine insurance by implication of law, it may be negatived or varied by 
express agreement, or by usage, if the usage be such as to bind both parties to the contract.  
(2) The provisions of this  section extend to any right, duty, or liability declared by this Act which 
may be lawfully modified by agreement.  
87. Reasonable time, etc., a question of fact .—Where by this Act any reference is made to 
reasonable time, reasonable premium, or reasonable diligence, the question what is reasonable is a 
question of fact.  
88. Covering note as evidence .—Where there is a duly stamped policy, reference may be made, as 
heretofore, to the slip or covering note, in any legal proceeding.  
89. Power to apply Act with modifications , etc., in certain cases .—The Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this Act shall, in their application to 
contracts of marine insurance relating to any class of ships exclusively used in inland navigation, be 
subject to such conditions, exceptions and modifications as it may specify in the notification.  
90. Certain provisions to override Transfer of Property Act, 1882 .—Nothing in clause ( e)            
of section 6 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882) , shall affect the provisions of             
sections 17, 52, 53 and 79.  
91. Savings .—The rules of law, including the law merchant, which applied to contracts of marine 
insurance immediately before the commencement of this Act , save in so far as they are inconsistent with 
the express provisions of this Act, shall continue to apply to contracts of marine insurance.  
92. [Repeals. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974  (56 of 1978), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
 
 
 19 
 SCHEDULE  
FORM OF POLICY  
(See section 24)  
BE IT KNOWN THAT ………..….…….….. as well in ……..…………… own name as for and in the name   
and names of all and every other person or persons to whom the same doth, may, or shall appertain,        
in part or in all doth make assurance and cause …………………………. and them, and every of them, to 
be insured lost or not lost, at and from upon any kind of goods and merchandises, and also upon the   
body, tackle, apparel, ordnance, munition, artillery, boat and other furnit ure, of and in the good ship        
or vessel called the …………………………. whereof is master for this present voyage ……………… …or 
whosoever else shall go for master in the said ship or by whatsoever other name or names the said       
ship, or the master thereof, is or  shall be named or called; beginning the adventure upon the said       
goods and merchandises from the loading thereof aboard the said ship ………………. upon the said ship, 
etc………………………… and so shall continue and endure, during her abode there, upon the said ship 
etc………………. And further, until the said ship , with all her ordnance, tackle, apparel, etc., and goods 
and merchandises whatsoever shall be arrived at ………………. upon the said ship, etc., until she hath 
moored at anchor twenty -four hours in good safety; and upon the goods and merchandises, until the    
same be there discharged and safely landed. And it shall be lawful for the said ship, etc., in this           
voyage to proceed and sail to and touch and stay at any ports or plac es whatsoever without prejudice        
to this insurance. The said ship, etc., goods and merchandises, etc., for so much as concerned the      
assured by agreement between the assured and assurers in this policy, are and shall be ……………. valued 
at………… …. 
Touching the adventures and perils which we the assurers are contended to bear , and do take upon us 
in this voyage; they are of the seas, men of war, fire, enemies, pirates, rovers, thieves, jettisons, letter of 
mart and countermart, surprisals, takings at  sea, arrests, restraints, and detainments of all kings, princes, 
and people, of what n ation, condition, or quality so ever, barratry of the master and mariners, and of all 
other perils , losses, and misfortunes that have or shall come to the hurt, detriment , or damage of the said 
goods and merchandises, and ship, etc., or any part thereof.  
And in case of any loss or misfortune it shall be lawful to the assured, their factors, servants and 
assigns, to sue, labour, and travel for, in and about the defence, saf eguards and recovery of the said goods 
and merchandises and ship , etc., or any part thereof, without prejudice to this Insurance; to the charges 
whereof we, the assurers, will contribute each one according to the rate and quantity of his sum herein 
assured . 
And it is especially declared and agreed that no acts of the insurer or insured in recovering, saving, or 
preserving the property insured shall be considered as a waiver, or acceptance of abandonment. And so 
we, the assurers, are contended, and do hereby  promise and bind ourselves, each one for his own part, our 
heirs, executors, and goods to the assured, their executors, administrators, and assigns, for the true 
performance of the premises, confessing ourselves paid the consideration due into us for this  assurance by 
the assured, at and after the rate of ………………  
In witness whereof we, the assurers, have subscribed our names and sums assured in ……….....  
MEMORANDUM N.  B.—Corn, fish, salt, fruit, flour, and seed are warranted free from average, 
unless general o r the ship be stranded, —sugar, tobacco, hemp, flax, hides and skins are warranted free 
from average, under five per cent. and all other goods , also the ship and freight, are warranted free from 
average, under three per cent . unless general , or the ship be stranded.  
RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF POLICY  
The following are the rules referred to by this Act for the construction of a policy in the above or 
other like form, where the context does n ot otherwise require :— 
1. Lost and not lost. —Where the subject -matter is insured “lost or not lost ” and the loss has occurred 
before the contract is concluded, the risk attaches unless, at such time the assured was aware of the loss, 
and the insurer was not.  20 
 2. From.—Where the subject -matter is insur ed “from ” a particular place, the risk does not attach until 
the ship starts on the voyage insured.  
3. At and from. —(a) Where a ship is insured “at and from ” a particular place, and she is at that place 
in good safety when the contract is concluded, the ri sk attaches immediately.  
(b) If she be not at that place when the contract is concluded, the risk attaches as soon as she arrives 
there in good safety, and, unless the policy otherwise provides, it is immaterial that she is covered by 
another policy for a specified time after arrival.  
(c) Where chartered freight is insured “at and from ” a particular place, and the ship is at that place in 
good safety when the contract is concluded, the risk attaches immediately. If she be not there when the 
contract is conc luded, the risk attaches as soon as she arrives there in good safety.  
(d) Where freight, other than chartered freight, is payable without special conditions and is insured “at 
and from ” a particular place, the risk attaches pro rata  as the goods or merchan dise are shipped; provided 
that if there be cargo in readiness which belongs to the ship -owner, or which some other person has 
contracted with him to ship, the risk attaches as soon as the ship is ready to receive such cargo.  
4. From the loading thereof. —Where goods or other movables are insured “from the loading 
thereof ”, the risk does not attach until such goods or movables are actually on board, and the insurer is not 
liable for them while in transit from the shore to the ship.  
5. Safe ly landed. —Where  the risk on goods or other movables continues until they are “safely 
landed ”, they must be landed in the customary manner and within a reasonable time after arrival at the 
port of discharge, and if they are not so landed the  risk ceases.  
6. Touch and stay .—In the absence of any further license or usage, the liberty to touch and stay “at 
any port or place whatsoever ” does not authorise the ship to depart from the course of her voyage from 
the port of departure to the port of destination.  
7. Perils of the seas.—The term “perils of the seas ” refers only to fortuitous accidents or casualties of 
the seas. It does not include the ordinary action of the winds and waves.  
8. Pirates. —The term “pirates ” includes passengers who mutiny and rioters who attack the ship from 
the shore.  
9. Thieves. —The term “thieves ” does not cover clandestine theft or a theft committed by any one of 
the ship ’s company, whether crew or passengers.  
10. Restraint of Princes. —The term “arrests, etc., of kings, princes, and people ” refers to p olitical or 
executive acts, and does not include a loss caused by riot or by ordinary judicial process.  
11. Barratry. —The term “barratry ” includes every wrongful act wilfully committed by the master of 
crew to the prejudice of the owner , or, as the case ma y be, the charterer.  
12. All other perils. —The term “all other perils ” includes only perils similar in kind to the perils 
specifically mentioned in the policy.  
13. Average unless general.—The term “average unless general ” means a partial loss of the    
subject -matter insured other than a general average loss, and does not include “particular charges ”. 
14. Stranded. —Where the ship has stranded, the insurer is liable for the excepted losses although the 
loss is not attributable to the stranding, provided t hat when the standing takes place the risk has attached 
and, if the policy be on goods, that the damaged goods are on board.  
15. Ship. —The term “ship” includes the hull, material and outfit, stores and provisions for the 
officers and crew, and, in the case  of vessels engaged in a special trade, the ordinary fittings requisite for 
the trade, and also , in the case of a steamship, the machinery, boilers, and coals and engine stores, if 
owned by the assured and also in the case of a ship driven by power other t han steam, the machinery and 
fuels and engine stores, if owned by the assured.  21 
 16. Freight. —The term “freight ” includes  the profit derivable by a ship -owner from the employment 
of his ship to carry his own goods or movables as well as freight payable by a third party, but does not 
include passage money.  
17. Goods. —The term “goods ” means goods in the nature of merchandise, and does not include 
personal effects or provisions and stores for use on board.  
In the absence of any usage to the contrary, deck cargo and living animals must be insured 
specifically, and not under the general denomination of goods.  
 
--------------------------The Official Languages Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1963  
[10th May, 1963 .] 
An Act to provide for the languages which may be used for the official purposes of the Union, 
for transaction of business in Parliament, for Central and State Acts and for certain purposes 
in High Courts.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Official Languages Act, 1963.  
(2) Section 3 shall come into force on the 26th day of January, 1965 and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ”, in relation to section 3, means the 26th day of January, 1965 and in relation 
to any other provision of this Act, means the day  on which that provision comes into force;  
(b) “Hindi” means Hindi in Devanagari Script.  
2[3. Continuance of English language for official purposes of the Union and for use in 
Parliament .—(1) Notwithstanding the expiration of the period of fifteen years from the commencement 
of the Constitution, the English language may, as from the appointed day, continue to be used, in addition 
to Hindi,— 
(a) for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before that 
day; and  
(b) for the transaction of business in Parliament:  
Provided that the English language shall be used for purposes of communication between the Union 
and a State which has not adopted Hindi as its official language:  
Provided further that where Hindi is used for purposes of communication between one State whi ch 
has adopted Hindi as its official language a nd another State which has not adopted Hindi as its official 
language, such communication in Hindi shall be accompanied by a translation of t he same in the English 
language : 
Provided also that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing a State which has not 
adopted Hindi as its official language from using Hindi for purposes of communication with the Union or 
with a State which has adopted Hindi as its official language, or by agreement with a ny other State, and in 
such a case, it shall not be obligatory to use the English language for purposes of communication with 
that State.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where Hindi or the English language is 
used for purposes of  communication — 
(i) between one Ministry or Department or office of the Central Government and another;  
                                                           
1. 10th January , 196 5, vide notification No. S.O. 94, dated 4th January , 196 5, in respect of section 5(1), see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
19th May, 1969, vide notification No. S.O. 1945 , dated the 14th May, 1969, in respect of section 6, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary,   Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
7th March , 1970, vide notification No. S.O. 841, dated the 26th February , 1970, in respect of section 7, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary,   Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st October , 1976, vide notification No. S.O. 655(E) , dated the 5th October,  1976, in respect of section 5( 2), see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary,  Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1968, s. 2, for section 3 (w.e.f.  8-1-1968 ). 2 
 (ii) between one Ministry or Department or office of the Central Government and any corporation 
or company owned or controlled by the Central Government  or any office thereof;  
(iii) between any corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or any 
office thereof and another,  
a translation of such communication in the English language or, as the case may be, in Hindi shall also be 
provided till such date as the staff of the concerned Ministry, Department, office or corporation or 
company aforesaid have acquired a working knowledge of Hindi.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), both Hindi and the English languag e shall 
be used for — 
(i) resolutions, general orders, rules, notifications, administrative or other reports or press 
communiques issued or made by the Central Government or by a Ministry, Department or office 
thereof or by a corporation or company owned or  controlled by the Central Government or by any 
office of such corporation or company;  
(ii) administrative and other reports and official papers laid before a House or the Houses of 
Parliament;  
(iii) contracts and agreements executed, and licences, permits , notices and forms of tender issued, 
by or on behalf of the Central Government or any Ministry, Department or office thereof or by a 
corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or by any office of such 
corporation or company.  
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), the 
Central Government may, by rules made under section 8, provide for the language or languages to be 
used for the official purpose of the Union, including the w orking of any Ministry, Department, section or 
office, and in making such rules, due consideration shall be given to the quick and efficient disposal of the 
official business and the interests of the general public and in particular, the rules so made shal l ensure 
that persons serving in connection with the affairs of the Union and having proficiency either in Hindi or 
in the English language may function effectively and that they are not placed at a disadvantage on the 
ground that they do not have proficie ncy in both the languages.  
(5) The provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), and the provisions of sub -section ( 2),                  
sub-section ( 3) and sub -section ( 4) shall remain in force until resolutions for the discontinuance of the use 
of the Eng lish language for the purposes mentioned therein have been passed by the Legislatures of all the 
States which have not adopted Hindi as their official language and until after considering the resolutions 
aforesaid, a resolution for such discontinuance has been passed by each House of Parliament.]  
4. Committee on Official Language .—(1) After the expiration of ten years from the date on which 
section 3 comes into force, there shall be constituted a Committee on Official Language, on a resolution 
to that effect being moved in either House of Parliament with the previous sanction of the President and 
passed by both Houses.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of thirty members of whom twenty shall be members of the House of 
the People and ten shall be members of  the Council of States, to be elected respectively by the members 
of the House of the People and the members of the Council of States in accordance with the system of 
proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.  
(3) It shall be the  duty of the Committee to review the progress made in the use of Hindi for the 
official purposes of the Union and submit a report to the President making recommendations thereon and 
the President shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parli ament , and sent to all the State 
Governments.  
(4) The President may, after consideration of the report referred to in sub -section ( 3), and the views, if 
any, expressed by the State Governments thereon, issue directions in accordance with the whole or any 
part of that report : 3 
 1[Provided that the directions so issued shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of section 3.]  
5. Authorised Hindi translation s of Central Acts, etc .—(1) A translation in Hindi published under 
the authority of the President in the Official Gazette on and after the appointed day, — 
(a) of any Central Act or of any Ordinance promulgated by the President, or  
(b) of any order, rule, regulation or bye -law issued under the Constitution or under any Central 
Act, 
shall  be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in Hindi.  
(2) As from the appointed day , the authoritative text in the English language of all Bills to be 
introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either House of Parliament shall be accompanied by a 
translation of the same in Hindi authorised in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this 
Act. 
6. Authorised Hindi translation of State Acts in  certain cases .—Where the Legislature of a State 
has prescribed any language other than Hindi for use in Acts passed by the Legislature of the State or in 
Ordinances pro mulgated by the Governor of the State, a translation of the same in Hindi, in addition to a 
translation thereof in the English language as required by clause ( 3) of article 348  of the Constitution, 
may be published on or after the appointed day under the authority of the Governor of the State in the 
Official Gazette of that State and in such  a case, the translation in Hindi of any such Act or Ordinance 
shall be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the Hindi language.  
7. Optional use of Hindi or other official language in judgments, etc., of High Courts .—As from 
the appointed day or any day thereafter the Governor of a State may, with the previous consent of the 
President, authorise the use of Hindi or the official language of the State, in addition to the English 
language, for the purposes of any judgment, decree or order passed or m ade by the High Court for that 
State and where any judgment, decree or order is passed or made in any such language (other than the 
English language), it shall be accompanied by a translation of the same in the English language issued 
under the authority o f the High Court.  
8. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is mad e, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  2[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so , however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
9. Certain provisions not to apply to Jammu and Kashmir .—The provisions of section 6 and 
section 7 shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
 
                                                           
1. The p roviso added by Act 1 of 1968, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8-1-1968 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f.  15-5-1986 ). 
--------------------------The Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE PERSONAL INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE) ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1963  
[8th October, 1963 .] 
An Act to impose on employers a liability to pay compensation to workmen sustaining personal 
injuries and to provide for the insurance of employe rs against such liability . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINRY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Personal In juries 
(Compensation Insurance)  Act, 1963.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may by notification appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “employer ” includes any body  of persons whether incorporated or not and any managing 
agent of an employer and the legal representative of a deceased employer, and when the service of a 
workman are temporarily lent or let on hire to another person by the person with whom the workman 
has entered into a contract of service or apprenticeship , means the later person while the workman is 
working for that other person;  
(b) the “Fund ” means the Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Fund constituted under 
section 13;  
(c) “gainfully occupied person ” and “personal injury ” have the meanings respectively assigned to 
those expressions in the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962);  
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “partial disablement ” means, where the disablement is of a temporary nature, such 
disablement as reduces the earning capacity of a workman in any employment in which he was 
engaged at the time the injury was sustained, and where the disablement is of a permanen t nature, 
such disablement as reduces his earning capacity in any employment which he was capa ble of 
undertaking at that time : 
Provided that permanent partial disablement shall be deemed to result from every injury , or from 
any combination of injuries, spe cified in the Schedule, where the percentage, or the aggregate 
percentage, of disability as specified in the Schedule against such injury , or combination of injuries 
amounts to less than one hundred per cent;  
2[(f) “period of emergency ” means, in relation to the Proclam ation of Emergency issued under 
clause  (1) of article  352 of the Constitution ,—  
(i) on the 26th day of October, 1962, the period beginning with the 26th day of October, 
1962, and ending with the 10th day of January , 1968, that is to say, the date on which the said 
Emergency was declared, by notification of the Government of India i n the Ministry of Home 
Affairs,  No. G.S.R. 93, dated the 10th January, 1968 , to have come to an end;  
(ii) on the 3rd day of December, 1971 , the period beginning with the 3rd day of        
December, 1971, and ending with such date as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare to be the date on which the said emergency shall come to an end;]  
                                                           
1. 1st November , 196 5, vide notification No. S.O. 3382 , dated 18th October , 196 5, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 75 of 1971, s. 2, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 25 -12-1971).  2 
 (g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under section  22; 
(h) “total disablement ” means such disablement whether of a temporary or permanent nature , as 
incapacitates a workman for all work which he was capable of performing at the time the injury was 
sustained:  
Provided that permanent total disablement shall be deemed to result from every injury, or from 
any combination of injuries, specified in the Schedule, where the percentage, or the aggregate 
percentage, of disability as specified in the Schedule against such injury, or combination of injuries, 
amounts to one hundred per cent . or more;  
(i) the “Scheme ” means the Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Scheme referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 8;  
(j) “wages ” means wages as defined in the Workmen ’s Comp ensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), and 
“monthly wages ” has the meaning assigned to that expression by section  5 of the Workmen ’s 
Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), and shall be calculated for the purposes of this Act in the 
manner laid down in that section;  
(k) “workman ” means any person (other than a person whose employment is of a casual nature 
and who is employed otherwise than for the purposes of the employer ’s trade or business) who is 
employed in any of the employments specified in section 3.  
CHAPTER II  
COMPENSATION PAYABLE UNDER THE ACT 
3. Workmen to whom the Act applies .—The workmen to whom this Act applies are — 
(a) workmen employed in any employment or class of employment which is, or has been declared 
to be an essential service under rule 126AA of  the 1[Defence of India Rules, 1962 or under rule 119 
of the Defence of India Rules, 1971];  
(b) the workmen employed in any factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Factories 
Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  
(c) workmen employed in any mine within the me aning of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(d) workmen employed in major port;  
(e) workmen employed in any plantation as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Plantation s 
Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951);  
(f) workmen employed in any employment specified in this behalf by the Central Government by 
notification.  
4. Compensation payable under the Act, by whom and how payable .—(1) There shall, subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the Scheme, be payable by an employe r in respect of personal 
injury sustained by a gainfully occupied person who is a workman to whom this Act applies, 
compensation , in addition to any relief provided under the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions)     
Act, 1962 (59 of 1962), of the amoun t and kind provided by section 7 : 
Provided that where an employer has taken out a policy of  insurance, as required by sub -section ( 1) of 
section  9, and has made all payments by way of premium thereon which are subsequently due from him 
in accordance with t he provisions of the Scheme or where by the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section  9 
or of sub -section ( 2) of section 10 the employer is not required to insure, the Central Government shall 
assume and discharge on behalf of the employer the employer ’s liability to pay compensation under this 
sub-section.  
(2) The compensation payable under this Act shall be payable in accordance with the provisions made 
in this behalf in the Scheme.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 75 of 1971, s. 3, for “Defence of India Rules, 1962” (w.e.f. 25 -12-1971).  3 
 (3) This section shall be binding on the Government.  
 5. Limitation on right to receive compensation otherwise than under this Act and Act 59 of 
1962 .—Where any person has a right apart from the provisions of this Act and of the Personal Injuries 
(Emergency Provision s) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962), to receive compens ation (whether in the form of gratuity, 
pension, compassionate payment or otherwise) or damages from an employer in respect of a personal 
injury in respect of which compensation is payable under this Act, the right shall extend only to so much 
of such comp ensation or damages as exceeds the amount of compensation payable under this Act.  
6. Special provisions in relation to employees of Government .—Where any person in the employ 
of Government has under the rules regulating the conditions of his service a right apart from the 
provisions of this Act or of the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962), to 
receive any sum, whether as extraordinary pension, gratuity, compassionate payment or damages, from 
the Government in respect of a per sonal injury in respect of which compensation is payable under this 
Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) 
Act, 1962, that person shall have the right to receive the sum admissible under th ose rules and if the sum 
so admissible is less than the amount payable as compensation under this Act and the Personal Injuries 
(Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962, then, he shall have a further right to receive an amount equal to the 
difference between the s um admissible under those rules and the amount of compensation payable under 
this Act.  
7. Amount of compensation .—(1) The compensation payable under this Act shall be as follows: — 
(a) where death results from the injury, the amount payable in a like case u nder the Workmen ’s 
Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), reduced by the value in lump sum of the amount payable under 
the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962);  
(b) where permanent total disablement results from the injury, the amou nt payable in a like case 
under the Workmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), reduced by the value in lump sum of the 
amount payable under the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962);   
(c) where permanent partial disablement results from the injury — 
(i) in the case of an injury specified in the Schedule —such percentage of the compensation 
which would have been payable in the case of permanent total disablement as is specified therein 
as being the percentage of disablement;  
(ii) in the case of an injury not specified in the Schedule —the percentage of such 
compensation specified in the Schedule for disablement held by a competent medical authority 
acting under the Scheme made under the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions)                     
Act, 1962 (59 of 1962), to be of corresponding degree;  
(iii) where more injuries than one are sustained —the aggregate of the compensation payable 
in respect of those injuries, so however as not to exceed in any case the compensation which 
would have been payable if permanent total disability has resulted from the injuries;  
(d) where temporary disablement, whether total or partial, results from the injury, the              
half-monthly payments payable in a like case under the Workmen ’s Comp ensation                          
Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), reduced in each case, so long as he receives any payment under the        
Scheme made under the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962), by          
the amount payable under th e said Scheme.  
(2) Where the monthly wages of a workman are more than five hundred rupees, the compensation 
payable under this Act shall be the amount payable under the provisions of sub -section ( 1) in the case of a 
workman whose monthly wages are more than four hundred rupees.  
CHAPTER III  
PERSONAL INJURIES (COMPENSATION INSURANCE ) SCHEME  
8. Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Scheme .—(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification, put into operation a Scheme to be called the Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) 4 
 Scheme whereby provision is made for all matters necessary to give effect to the purposes of this Act and 
whereby the C entral Government undertakes, in relation to employers of workmen to whom this Act 
applies, the liabilities of insuring such employers against liabilities incurred by them to workmen under 
this Act and the Scheme:  
1[Provided that different Scheme shall be put into operation in relation to different period s of 
emergency.]  
(2) The Scheme shall secure  that any liability of the Central Government as insurer under the Scheme 
is determined by a policy of insurance issued in the prescribed form by a person acting on behalf of the 
Central Government.  
(3) The Scheme may provide that it shall come into operation or shall be deemed to have come into 
operation on such date as may be specified therein.  
(4) The scheme may be amended at any time by the Central Government.  
(5) Without prejudice to the gener ality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Scheme may — 
(a) make provisions regulating the payment of the compensation payable under this Act and the 
Scheme, including provisions for punishment by fine not exceeding tw o thousand rupees for the 
contravention of any requirement of the Scheme;  
(b) make provisions specifying the persons to whom and the proportions and manner in which 
payments  under this Act shall be made;  
(c) make provisions for determining the value in lump sum of the amount payable under the 
Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962);  
(d) specify conditions or circumstances which will disentitle a workman to the compensation 
payable under this Act, and make it an express or implied condition of any policy of insurance issued 
under the Scheme that the payment of compensation in defiance of such specification is not covered 
by the policy;  
(e) specify the conditions or circumstances under which the compensation payable to a workman 
may be withheld, cancelled, reduced or reviewed if the award made under the Scheme made under the 
Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962), is withheld, cancelled, reduced or 
reviewed;  
(f) provide for cases in which an employer has of hi s own accord undertaken a part or the whole 
of the liability imposed by this Act;  
(g) provide for the final assessment of the total premium due on a policy of insurance under the 
Scheme either as the equivalent of all advance payments of premium already ma de by an employer, 
or as a percentage of the total wages bill s of an employer for the periods with reference to which the 
amount of any advance payments made by him was fixed or as a percentage of the total wages bill of 
an employer for a period of not les s than twelve or more than fifteen months immediately preceding 
the expiry of the period of the emergency, and for the assessment of the total premium due on a 
policy which has ceased to be in force before the expiry of the period of the emergency owing to  the 
employer having gone out of business;  
(h) provide for the recovery from an employer of the total premium due on a policy of insurance 
including provision for its recovery by periodic advance payments of an amount based on a 
percentage of his total wag es bill for any prescribed period, the separate funding of the payments so 
made by each employer, and the eventual adjustment of the total premium as finally assessed against 
the total of such periodic payments:  
Provided that where the amount of the period ic payment based on the total wages bill of the 
prescribed period is less than eight rupees, it shall be increased to eight rupees:  
                                                           
1. The p roviso adde d by Act 75 of 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -12-1971).  5 
 Provided further that the first of such periodic payments shall, subject to the aforesaid minimum 
of eight rupees, be at suc h rate as the Central Government may specify in this behalf:  
Provided further that such periodic payments shall not be more frequent than once in each quarter 
of a year:  
Provided further that the rate of any periodic payment after the first shall, subject to the aforesaid 
minimum of eight rupees, be such as the Central Government may, after considering its liabilities 
under this Act, fix from time to time, and the Central Government may, where the total amount in the 
Fund so ” requires, either waive or postp one any periodic payment.  
9. Compulsory insurance .—(1) Every employer of workmen to whom this Act applies or is 
subsequently made applicable except an employer whose total wages bill for any quarter after the 
commencement of this Act has never exceeded fif teen hundred rupees, shall, before such date as may be 
prescribed, or before the expiry of such period as may be prescribed after his having first become such an 
employer, take out a policy of insurance issued in accordance with the Scheme, whereby he is i nsured 
until the expiry of the period of the emergency or until the date, if any, prior to the expiry of the period of 
the emergency at which he ceases to be an employer to whom this section applies, against all liabilities 
imposed on him by this Act.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), or, having taken out a policy of insurance 
as required by that sub -section, fails to make any payment by way of premium thereon which is 
subsequently due from him in accordance with the provisions of the Scheme, shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and shall also be punishable with a further fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees for every day after having been so convicted on which the contravention or 
failure co ntinues.  
(3) This section shall not bind the Government.  
10. Principals and contractors .—(1) Where a person (in this section referred to as the principal) 
uses, in the course of or for the purposes of his trade or business, the services of workmen temporar ily 
lent or let on hire to him by arrangement with another person with whom the workmen have entered into 
contracts of service or apprenticeship, or in the course of or for the purpose of his trade or business, 
contracts with any other person for the execu tion by or under such other person of the whole or any part 
of any work which is ordinarily part of the trade or business of the principal (either such other person 
being in this section referred to as the contractor) the principal shall obtain from the co ntractor the name 
of the agent of the Central Government acting under section 11 with whom he intends to insure, and shall 
report to the agent the existence of his agreement or contract with the contractor.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything elsewhere contained in this Act, in any such case as is referred to in 
sub-section ( 1), it shall not be necessary for the contractor to insure against the liabilities imposed on him 
by this Act in respect of workmen employed by him whose services are lent or let on hire on su ch an 
arrangement or used in the execution of work on such a contract as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), where 
the arrangement or contract is for a term of less than one month.  
(3) The Scheme may make provision for the supply by a contractor to a princi pal of any information 
necessary to enable the purposes of this section to be carried out including provision for punishment by 
fine not exceeding two thousand rupees for the contravention of any requirement of the Scheme.  
11. Employment of agents by the C entral Government .—The Central Government may by 
notification employ or authorise the employment of any person to act as its agent for any of the purposes 
of this Act and to pay to the person so employed such remuneration as it may think fit.  
12. Prohibiti on of certain insurance business .—(1) After the date on which the Scheme is put into 
operation, no person shall, except as a person authorised by the Central Government as its agent to issue 
policies in pursuance of the Scheme, carry on the business or ins uring employers in India against the 
liabilities for insurance against which the Scheme provides.  6 
 (2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) applies to any policy of insurance entered into before the date on which 
the Scheme is put into operation and current after that date or to any policy of insurance covering 
liabilities undertaken in excess of the liabilities imposed by this Act.  
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees and w ith a further fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for every 
day after the first on which the contravention continues.  
13. Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Fund.—(1) The Central Government may, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, transfer in each financial year to a fund to be 
called the Personal Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Fund ”) such 
sums, as  may be considered necessary, not exceeding the sums received by the Central Government by 
way of insurance premiums under the Scheme, or by way of payments made on compensation of offences 
under section 18 or by way of expenses or compensation awarded by a court under section  545 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), out of any fine imposed in any prosecution  under this Act 
or by way of penalties imposed under the Scheme.  
(2) There shall be paid from out of the Fund all sums required for the  discharge by the Central 
Government of any of its liabilities under this Act or the Scheme or for the payment by the Central 
Government of the remuneration and expenses of agents employed for the purposes of the Scheme or for 
the payment by the Central Go vernment of the cost of administering the Scheme : 
Provided that no payment from the Fund shall be made in discharge of any liability of the 
Government to pay compensation to workmen employed by it.  
(3) If at any time when a payment is to be made out of the  Fund, the sum standing to the credit of the 
Fund is less than the sum required for the making of that payment, an amount equal to the deficiency 
shall , after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, be paid into the Fund as an advance out of the 
Conso lidated Fund of India.  
(4) If at any time the amount standing to the credit of the Fund exceeds the sum which, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, is likely to be required for the making of payments out of the Fund, the excess 
shall be disposed of in  such manner as the Central Government may think fit.  
(5) The Central Government shall prepare in such form and manner as may be prescribed and shall 
publish either annually or at such shorter intervals as may be specified therein, an account of all , sums 
received into and paid out of the Fund.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. Power of Central Government to obtain information .—(1) Any person authorised  in this 
behalf by the Central Government may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the requirements of this 
Act and of the Scheme have been complied with , require any employer to submit to him such accounts , 
books or other documents or to furnish to hi m such information or to give such certificates as he may 
reasonably think necessary.  
(2) Whoever wi lfully obstructs any person in the exercise of the powers under this section or fails 
without reasonable excuse to com ply with any request made there under s hall, in respect of each occasion 
on which any such obstruction or failure takes place , be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
(3) Whoever in purporting to comply with his obligations under this section knowingly or recklessly 
makes a statement false in a material particular shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
15. Recovery of premium unpaid .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of 
section  9, where any person has failed to insure as or to the full amount required by this Act and the 
Scheme and has thereby evaded the payment by way of premium of any money which he would have had 
to pay in accordance with the provisions of the Scheme but for such failure, an officer authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government, may determine the amount payment of which has been so evaded and 7 
 the amount so determined shall be payable by such person and shall be recoverable from him as provided 
in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) Any sum payable in accordance with the provisions of the Scheme by way of premium on a policy 
of insurance issued under the Scheme and any amount determined as payable under sub -section ( 1) shall 
be recoverable as an ar rear of land -revenue.  
(3) Any person against whom a determination is made under sub -section ( 1) may, within the 
prescribed period, appeal against such determination to the Central Government whose decision shall be 
final.  
16. Payment of compensation where an employer has failed to insure .—Where an employer has 
failed to take out a policy of insurance as required by sub -section ( 1) of section  9, or having taken out a 
policy of insurance as required by that sub -section, has failed to make the payments by way of premium 
thereon which are subsequently due from him in accordance with the provisions of the Scheme, payment 
of any compensation for th e payment of which he is liable under this Act may be made out of the Fund, 
and the sum so paid together with a penalty of such amount not exceeding the sum so paid as may be 
determined by an officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government shal l be recoverable from 
the employer as an arrear of land -revenue for payment into the Fund.  
17. Limitation of prosecution s.—No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be 
instituted against any person except by or with the consent of the Central Government or an authority 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.  
18. Composition of offences .—Any offence punishable under sub -section ( 2) of section  9 may , 
either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by the Central Government or by 
any authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Government on payment for credit to the Fund of 
such sum as the Central Government or such auth ority, as the case may be , thinks fit.  
19. Power of magistrate to impose any sentence .—Where any offence against this  Act is tried by a 
Presidency Magistrate or a magistrate of the first class, then , notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of  1898), the magistrate trying the offence may pass any  sentence 
authorised by this Act.  
20. Bar of legal proceedings .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in goo d faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit shall be maintainable in any civil court against the Central Government or a person acting 
as its agent under section 11 for the refund of any money paid or purporting to have been paid by way  of 
premium on a policy of insurance taken out or purporting to have been taken out under this Act.  
 21. Power to exempt employers .—The Central Government shall exempt any employer from the 
provisions of this Act on the employer ’s request, if satisfied tha t he has before the commencement of this 
Act entered into a contract with insurers substantially covering the liabilities imposed on him by this Act, 
for so long as that contract continues.  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may by notific ation make rules to carry into 
effect the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may prescribe — 
(a) the principles to be followed in ascertaining the total wages bill of an employer, including 
provision for the  exclusion there from of certain categories of wages or of certain elements included in 
the definition of  wages;  
(b) the form of the policies of insurance referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(c) the period referred to in clause  (g) of sub -section ( 5) of section  8; 
(d) the date and the period referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section  9; 
(e) the form of and the manner of preparing and publishing the account referred to in                
sub-section ( 5) of section  13;  8 
 (f) the periods referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section  15; 
(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
23. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, and in particular, if any doubt arises as to whether any compensation is payable under this Act or as 
to the amount thereof the Central Government may, by order , make such provision o r give such direction, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the 
removal of the doubt or difficulty; and the decision of the Central Government, in such cases, shall be 
final.  
24. 1[Every s cheme and rule to be laid before  Parliament ].—Every Scheme and every rule made 
under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while, it 
is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Scheme or the rule or both Houses agree 
that the Sch eme or the rule should not be made, the Scheme or the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be ; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under that Scheme or the 
rule. 
 
 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule for “Scheme to be laid before both Houses of Parliament” (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  9 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section s 2 and 7( 1)] 
 
Description of injury  Percentage 
of 
disablement  
Upper Limb    
Loss of both hands or of all fingers and thumbs .    .      .      .       .        .       .  100 
Amputation of R ight arm through shoulder .       .       .       .       .         .       .        90 
Amputation of Left arm through shoulder .       .        .         .        .        .      .              90 
Amputation below shoulder stump exceedin g 6 inches from tip of acromion  
(Right) .     .       .       .       .       .        .      .        .       .       .       .         .     .        80 
Amputation below shoulder stump not exceeding 6 inches (Right) .        .      .                 90 
Amputation below shoulder stump not exceeding 6 inches ( left).    .       .     .              80 
Amputation below shoulder from tip of acromion stump exceeding 6 inches  
(Left) .  .       .       .       .       .        .      .        .       .       .       .       .       .      . 70 
Amputation through elbow or below elbow with stump not exceeding 5 inches  
(Right) .  .       .       .       .       .        .      .        .       .       .         .         .       .  80 
Amputation through elbow or below elbow with stump not exceeding 5 inches  
(Left) .   .       .       .       .       .        .      .        .        .       .          .        .       .    70 
Amputation below elbow stump exceeding 5 inches (Right) .        .        .       . 70 
Amputation below elbow stump exceeding 5 inches (Left) .        .         .        .               50 
Loss of thumb (Right) .        .       .       .       .       .        .      .         .        .     .             50 
Loss of thumb (Left) .        .       .       .       .       .        .       .        .       .       .                     40 
Loss of 4 fingers (Right) .        .        .       .       .        .         .       .       .       .   50 
Loss of 4 f ingers (Left) .      .       .       .       .       .       .       .        .       .      . 40 
Loss of 2 fingers on either hand .        .       .       .       .       .        .        .      .  20 
Lower Limb  
Loss of 2 or more limbs .      .       .       .       .       .       .      .        .        .      .         100 
Amputation of both feet .       .      .       .       .       .      .       .       .       .       .   100 
Amputation of one leg at hip or below hip with stump not exceeding 5 inches .         90 
Lisfranc’ s Operation both feet .      .       .      .       .       .       .        .        .      .  80 
Lower Limb —Contd.   
Amputation below hip with stump exceeding 5 inches .       .       .        .        .  80 
Amputation through both feet proximal to the metatarso -phalangeal joint .      .   80 
Loss of all toes of both feet through  the metatarso -phalangeal joint .        .      .  40 
Loss of all toes of both feet proximal to the proximal inter -phalangeal joints .  . 30 
Loss of all toes of both feet distal to the proximal inter -phalangeal joint .    .    . 20 10 
 Description of injury  Percentage 
of 
disablement  
Amputation of leg below middle thigh through knee or below knee with  
 stump not exceeding 4 inches .        .       .       .       .       .        .     .      .       70 
Amputation of leg b elow knee with stump exceeding 4  inches .        .      .     60 
Lisfanc ’s amputation of one foot .        .       .       .       .       .       .      .    .     40 
Amputation through one foot proximal to the metatarso -phalangeal joint .   .      30 
Loss of all toe s of one foot proximal to the proximal inter -phalangeal  
joint including amputations through the metatarso -phalangeal joint .    .      .              20 
Other specific injury    
Loss of hand and foot .     .       .       .       .       .        .        .       .       .      .        100%  
Other disablements   
Very severe facial disfigurement .     .      .       .        .        .       .       .      .         100%  
Total loss of speech .    .       .       .       .        .       .        .        .        .       .              70% 
 Limited retriction of movement, of joint through  injury without penetration,  
 or limited function of lim b through fracture, or compound fracture of thumb  
 or 2 or more fingers  of either hand with impaired function .       .       .       .  20% 
Ankyloses in optimum position, i.e., the position of greatest usefulness  
 Right  Left 
Arm   
 Shoulder .        .       .       .       .       .        .      .        .       .       .       .       .         40% 30% 
 Elbow .        .       .       .       .       .        .      .        .       .       .       .       .        .       40% 30% 
 Wrist .        .       .       .       .       .        .      .       .       .       .       .       .        .       30% 20% 
Leg 
Hip.        .       .       .       .       .        .      .        .       .       .       .       .        .       60% 
Knee .        .       .       .       .       .        .      .      .        .       .       .       .       .        40% 
Ankle .        .       .       .       .       .        .      .       .        .       .       .       .     .               30% 
Defective Vision   
Loss of sight .        .       .       .       .       .        .      .        .       .       .       .      .               100% 
Loss one eye without complications, the other eye being normal .      .      .      .              40% 
Loss of vision of one eye with complications or disfigurement, the other eye  
being normal.        .       .       .       .       .        .      .    .        .       .       .       .        40% 
Loss of vision of one eye without complications or disfigurement, the other  
eye being normal .        .       .       .       .       .        .      .    .        .       .       .        30% 11 
  
Other degree of defective vision  
 
 When best obtainable actuity 
is in  
 
 
Assessment  
Per cent.  When one eye 
removed —best 
obtainable actuity in 
remaining eye, with 
or without glasses is   
 One eye  the other  Assessment  
Per cent.  
1. 6/6 6/24 15.19  1. 6/6  
 or 6/36  2. 6/9 40 
2. 6/9 6/60 20 3. 6/12  
 or 3/60    
3. 6/12 Nil 30 4. 6/18 50 
4. 6/18 6/18 15.19  5. 6/24 70 
5. 6/18 6/24 30 6. 6/36 80 
6. 6/18 6/36    
7. 6/18 3/60 40 7. 6/60 
90 
8. 6/18 6/60  8. 3/60 
9. 6/18 Nil 50   
10. 6/24 6/24 30 9. Nil 100 
11. 6/24 6/3 40   
12. 6/24 6/60 50   
13. 6/24 3/60    
14. 6/24 Nil 70   
15. 6/36 6/36 50   
16. 6/36 6/60 60   
17. 6/36 3/60    
18. 6/36 Nil 80   
19. 6/60 6/60 80   
20. 6/60 3/60    
21. 6/60 Nil 90   
22. 3/60 3/60 80   
23. 5/60 Nil 90   
24. Nil Nil 100   
  12 
 Defective hearing  
Assessment should be based on the Grade “attained using both ears together; the percentage 
assessment appropriate to the Grade thus attained is given in the last column.  
 
Grade of hearing attained  Assessment of 
both ears used 
together  
1. Total deafness.    .        .        .       .       .       .       .       .       .        .        .      .             80% 
2. Shout not beyond 3 feet .        .        .       .       .      .       .        .       .        .      .       70% 
3. Conversational voice not over 1 foot .     .       .       .        .        .       .       .      .  60% 
4. Conversational voice not over 3 feet .      .        .        .        .         .       .       .      .  40% 
5. Conversational voice not over 6 fe et.     .       .        .       .        .       .       .      .  20% 
6. Conversational voice not over 9 feet —  
 (a) one ear totally deaf .      .       .        .        .       .       .      .      .       .        .         20% 
 (b) otherwise  less than 20% 
A case in which the right ear attained grade 4, the left ear grade 2 and both ear together grade 3 
should, therefore, be recorded thus:  
R4 L2 R Plus L 3 Assessment 60 per cent.  
The assessment given above take into account minor ailments such as headache, vertigo tinnitus, 
sleeplessness, etc., which generally accompany deafness.  
 
 
--------------------------The Specific Relief Act, 1963--------------------------
1 THE SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 1963
_______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                      
________ 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Savings. 
4. Specific relief to be granted only for enforcing individual civil rights and not for enforcing penal 
laws. 
PART II 
SPECIFIC RELIEF 
CHAPTER I 
RECOVERING POSSESSION OF PROPERTY 
5. Recovery of specific immovable property. 
6. Suit by person dispossessed of immovable property. 
7. Recovery of specific movable property. 
8. Liability of person in possession, not as owner, to deliver to persons entitled to immediate 
possession. 
CHAPTER II 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS
9. Defences respecting suits for relief based on contract. 
CONTRACTS WHICH CANNOT BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
10. Specific performance in respect of contracts. 
11. Cases in which specific performance of contracts connected with trusts enforceable. 
12. Specific performance of part of contract. 
13. Rights of purchaser or lessee against person with no title or imperfect title. 
CONTRACTS WHICH CANNOT BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
14. Contracts not specifically enforceable. 
14A. Power of court to engage experts. 
PERSONS FOR OR AGAINST WHOM CONTRACTS MAY BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
15. Who may obtain specific performance. 
16. Personal bars to relief. 
17. Contract to sell or let property by one who has no title, not specifically enforceable. 
18. Non-enforcement except with variation. 
19. Relief against parties and persons claiming under them by subsequent title. 2 Substituted performance of contracts, etc. 
SECTIONS
20. Substituted performance of contract. 
20A. Special provisions for contract relating to infrastructure project. 
20B. Special Courts. 
20C. Expeditious disposal of suits. 
21. Power to award compensation in certain cases. 
22. Power to grant relief for possession, partition, refund of earnest money, etc. 
23. Liquidation of damages not a bar to specific performance. 
24. Bar of suit for compensation for breach after dismissal of suit for specific performance. 
ENFORCEMENT OF AWARDS AND DIRECTIONS TO EXECUTE SETTLEMENTS
25. Application of preceding sections to certain awards and testamentary directions to execute 
settlements. 
CHAPTER III 
RECTIFICATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
26. When instrument may be rectified. 
CHAPTER IV 
RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS 
27. When rescission may be adjudged or refused. 
28.  Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for the sale or lease of immovable property, the 
specific performance of which has been decreed. 
29. Alternative prayer for rescission in suit for specific performance. 
30. Court may require parties rescinding to do equity. 
CHAPTER V 
CANCELLATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
31. When cancellation may be ordered. 
32. What instruments may be partially cancelled. 
33.  Power to require benefit to be restored or compensation to be made when instrument is cancelled 
or is successfully resisted as being void or voidable. 
CHAPTER VI 
DECLARATORY DECREES 
34. Discretion of court as to declaration of status or right. 
35. Effect of declaration. 
PART III 
PREVENTIVE RELIEF 
CHAPTER VII 
INJUNCTIONS GENERALLY 
36. Preventive relief how granted. 3 SECTIONS
37. Temporary and perpetual injunctions. 
CHAPTER VIII 
PERPETUAL INJUNCTIONS
38. Perpetual injunction when granted. 
39. Mandatory injunctions. 
40. Damages in lieu of, or in addition to, injunction. 
41. Injunction when refused. 
42. Injunction to perform negative agreement. 
43. [Repealed. ]. 
44. [Repealed. ]. 
THE SCHEDULE.4 THE SPECIFIC RELIEF ACT, 1963 
ACT NO. 47 OF 1963 
[13th December, 1963.] 
An Act to define and amend the law relating to certain kinds of specific relief. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follow:— 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Specific Relief Act, 
1963. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official   Gazette, appoint. 
2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “obligation” includes every duty enforceable by law; 
(b) “settlement” means an instrument (other than a will or codicil as defined by the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), whereby  the destination or devolution of successive interests in  
movable or immovable property is disposed of or is agreed  to be disposed of; 
(c) “trust” has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), and 
includes an obligation in the nature  of a trust within the meaning of Chapter IX of that Act; 
(d) “trustee” includes every person holding property in trust; 
(e) all other words and expressions used herein but not defined, and defined in the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), have the  meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
3. Savings.— Except as otherwise provided herein, nothing in this Act shall be deemed— 
(a) to deprive any person of any right to relief, other than specific performance, which he may 
have under any contract; or 
(b) to affect the operation of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), on documents. 
4. Specific relief to be granted only for enforcing individual civil rights and not for enforcing 
penal laws.— Specific relief can be  granted only for the purpose of enforcing individual civil rights and 
not for the mere purpose of enforcing a penal law. 
PART II 
SPECIFIC RELIEF 
CHAPTER I 
RECOVERING POSSESSION OF PROPERTY 
5. Recovery of specific immovable property.— A person entitled to the possession of specific 
immovable property may recover it in the manner provided by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908                 
(5 of 1908). 
6. Suit by person dispossessed of immovable property.— (1) If any person is dispossessed without 
his consent of immovable property otherwise than in due course of law, he or any person2[through whom 
1. 1st March, 1964, vide notification No. S.O. 189, dated 13th January, 1964, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,                 
sec. 3( ii).
2. Ins. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 5 he has been in possession  or any person] claiming through him may, by suit , recover possession thereof, 
notwithstanding any other title that may be set up in such suit. 
(2) No suit under this section shall be brought— 
(a) after the expiry of six months from the date of dispossession; or 
(b) against the Government. 
(3) No appeal shall lie from any order or decree passed in any suit instituted under this section, nor 
shall any review of any such order or decree be allowed. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall bar any person from suing to establish his title to such property and to 
recover possession thereof. 
7. Recovery of specific movable property.— A person entitled to the possession of specific movable 
property may recover it in the manner provided by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). 
Explanation 1.—A trustee may sue under this section for the possession of movable property to the 
beneficial interest in which the person for whom he is trustee is entitled. 
Explanation 2.—A special or temporary right to the present possession of movable property is 
sufficient to support a suit under this section. 
8. Liability of person in possession, not as owner, to deliver to persons entitled to immediate 
possession.— Any person having the possession or control of a particular article of movable property, of 
which he is not the owner, may be compelled specifically to deliver it to the person entitled to its 
immediate possession, in any of the following cases:— 
(a) when the thing claimed is held by the defendant as the agent or trustee of the plaintiff; 
(b) when compensation in money would not afford the plaintiff adequate relief for the loss of the 
thing claimed; 
(c) when it would be extremely difficult to ascertain the actual damage caused by its loss; 
(d) when the possession of the thing claimed has been wrongfully transferred from the plaintiff. 
Explanation. —Unless and until the contrary is proved, the court shall, in respect of any article of 
movable property claimed under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this section, presume— 
(a) that compensation in money would not afford the plaintiff adequate relief for the loss of the 
thing claimed, or, as the case may be; 
(b) that it would be extremely difficult to ascertain the actual damage caused by its loss. 
CHAPTER II 
SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS
9. Defences respecting suits for relief based on contract.— Except as otherwise provided herein 
where any relief is claimed under this Chapter in respect of a contract, the person against whom the relief 
is claimed may plead by way of defence any ground which is available to him under any law relating to 
contracts. 
CONTRACTS WHICH CAN BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
1[10. Specific performance in respect of contracts.— The specific performance of a contract shall 
be enforced by the court subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 2) of section 11, section 14 
and section 16.] 
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2018, s 3, for section 10 (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 6 11. Cases in which specific performance of contracts connected with trusts enforceable.— (1) 
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, specific performance of a 1[contract shall], be enforced when 
the act agreed to be done is in the performance wholly or partly of a trust. 
(2) A contract made by a trustee in excess of his powers or in breach of trust cannot be specifically 
enforced. 
12. Specific performance of part of contract.— (1) Except as otherwise hereinafter provided in this 
section, the court shall not direct the specific performance of a part of a contract. 
(2) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole of his part of it, but the part which must 
be left unperformed be a only a small proportion to the whole in value and admits of compensation in 
money, the court may, at the suit of either party, direct the specific performance of so much of the 
contract as can be performed, and award compensation in money for the deficiency. 
(3) Where a party to a contract is unable to perform the whole of his part of it, and the part which 
must be left unperformed either— 
(a) forms a considerable part of the whole, though admitting of compensation in money; or 
(b) does not admit of compensation in money; 
he is not entitled to obtain a decree for specific performance; but the court may, at the suit of the other 
party, direct the party in default to perform specifically so much of his part of the contract as he can 
perform, if the other party— 
(i) in a case falling under clause ( a), pays or has paid the agreed consideration for the whole of 
the contract reduced by the consideration for the part which must be left unperformed and in a case 
falling under clause ( b) 2[pays or has paid] the consideration for the whole of the contract without any 
abatement; and 
(ii) in either case, relinquishes all claims to the performance of the remaining part of the contract 
and all right to compensation, either for the deficiency or for the loss or damage sustained by him 
through the default of the defendant. 
(4) When a part of a contract which, taken by itself, can and ought to be specifically performed, 
stands on a separate and independent footing from another part of the same contract which cannot or 
ought not to be specifically performed the court may direct specific performance of the former part. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, a party to a contract shall be deemed to be unable to 
perform the whole of his part of it if a portion of its subject-matter existing at the date of the contract has 
ceased to exist at the time of its performance. 
13. Rights of purchaser or lessee against person with no title or imperfect title.— (1) Where a person 
contracts to sell or let certain immovable property having no title or only an imperfect title, the purchaser 
or lessee (subject to the other provisions of this Chapter), has the following rights, namely:— 
(a) if the vendor or lessor has subsequently to the contract acquired any interest in the property, 
the purchaser or lessee may compel him to make good the contract out of such interest; 
(b) where the concurrence of other person is necessary for validating the title, and they are bound 
to concur at the request of the vendor or lessor, the purchaser or lessee may compel him to procure 
such concurrence, and when a conveyance by other persons is necessary to validate the title and they 
are bound to convey at the request of the vendor or lessor, the purchaser or lessee may compel him to 
procure such conveyance; 
(c) where the vendor professes to sell unencumbered property, but the property is mortgaged for 
an amount not exceeding the purchase money and the vendor has in fact only a right to redeem it, the 
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 4, for “contract may, in the discretion of the court” (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 
2. Ins. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 29-12-1964).7 purchaser may compel him to redeem the mortgage and to obtain a valid discharge, and, where 
necessary, also a conveyance from the mortgagee; 
(d) where the vendor or lessor sues for specific performance of the contract and the suit is 
dismissed on the ground of his want of title or imperfect title, the defendant has a right to a return of 
his deposit, if any, with interest thereon, to his costs of the suit, and to a lien for such deposit, interest 
and costs on the interest, if any, of the vendor or lesser in the property which is the subject-matter of 
the contract. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall also apply, as far as may be, to contracts for the sale or hire 
of movable property. 
CONTRACTS, WHICH CANNOT BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
1[14. Contracts not specifically enforceable.— The following contracts cannot be specifically 
enforced, namely:— 
(a) where a party to the contract has obtained substituted performance of contract in accordance 
with the provisions of section 20; 
(b) a contract, the performance of which involves the performance of a continuous duty which the 
court cannot supervise; 
(c) a contract which is so dependent on the personal qualifications of the parties that the court 
cannot enforce specific performance of its material terms; and 
(d) a contract which is in its nature determinable. 
14A. Power of court to engage experts.— (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions 
contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in any suit under this Act, where the court 
considers it necessary to get expert opinion to assist it on any specific issue involved in the suit, it may 
engage one or more experts and direct to report to it on such issue and may secure attendance of the 
expert for providing evidence, including production of documents on the issue. 
(2) The court may require or direct any person to give relevant information to the expert or to 
produce, or to provide access to, any relevant documents, goods or other property for his inspection. 
(3) The opinion or report given by the expert shall form part of the record of the suit; and the court, or 
with the permission of the court any of the parties to the suit, may examine the expert personally in open 
court on any of the matters referred to him or mentioned in his opinion or report, or as to his opinion or 
report, or as to the manner in which he has made the inspection. 
(4) The expert shall be entitled to such fee, cost or expense as the court may fix, which shall be 
payable by the parties in such proportion, and at such time, as the court may direct.] 
PERSONS FOR OR AGAINST WHOM CONTRACTS MAY BE SPECIFICALLY ENFORCED 
15. Who may obtain specific performance.— Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, the 
specific performance of a contract may be obtained by— 
(a) any party thereto; 
(b) the representative in interest or the principal, of any party thereto: 
Provided that where the learning, skill, solvency or any personal quality of such party is a 
material ingredient in the contract, or where the contract provides that his interest shall not be 
assigned, his representative in interest or his principal shall not be entitled to specific performance of 
the contract, unless such party has already performed his part of the contract, or the performance 
thereof by his representative in interest, or his principal, has been accepted by the other party; 
(c) where the contract is a settlement on marriage, or a compromise of doubtful rights between 
members of the same family, any person beneficially entitled thereunder; 
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 5, for section 14 (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 8 (d) where the contract has been entered into by a tenant for life in due exercise of a power, the 
remainderman; 
(e) a reversioner in possession, where the agreement is a covenant entered into with his 
predecessor in title and the reversioner is entitled to the benefit of such covenant; 
(f) a reversioner in remainder, where the agreement is such a covenant, and the reversioner is 
entitled to the benefit thereof and will sustain material injury by reason of its breach; 
1[(fa) when a limited liability partnership has entered into a contract and subsequently becomes 
amalgamated with another limited liability partnership, the new limited liability partnership which 
arises out of the amalgamation.] 
(g) when a company has entered into a contract and subsequently becomes amalgamated with 
another company, the new company which arises out of the amalgamation; 
(h) when the promoters of a company have, before its incorporation, entered into a contract for 
the purposes of the company, and such contract is warranted by the terms of the incorporation, the 
company: 
Provided that the company has accepted the contract and has communicated such acceptance to 
the other party to the contract. 
16. Personal bars to relief.— Specific performance of a contract cannot be enforced in favour of a 
person— 
2[(a) who has obtained substituted performance of contract under section 20; or] 
(b) who has become incapable of performing, or violates any essential term of, the contract that 
on his part remains to be performed, or acts in fraud of the contract, or wilfully acts at variance with, 
or in subversion of, the relation intended to be established by the contract; or 
(c) 3[who fails to prove] that he has performed or has always been ready and willing to perform 
the essential terms of the contract which are to be performed by him, other than terms of the 
performance of which has been prevented or waived by the defendant. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( c),— 
(i) where a contract involves the payment of money, it is not essential for the plaintiff to 
actually tender to the defendant or to deposit in court any money except when so directed by the 
court; 
(ii) the plaintiff 4[must prove] performance of, or readiness and willingness to perform, the 
contract according to its true construction. 
17. Contract to sell or let property by one who has no title, not specifically enforceable.— (1) A 
contract to sell or let any immovable property cannot be specifically enforced in favour of a vendor or 
lessor— 
(a) who, knowing himself not to have any title to the property, has contracted to sell or let the 
property; 
(b) who, though he entered into the contract believing that he had a good title to the property, 
cannot at the time fixed by the parties or by the court for the completion of the sale or letting, give the 
purchaser or lessee a title free from reasonable doubt. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall also apply, as far as may be, to contracts for the sale or hire 
of movable property. 
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 
3.Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “ who fails to aver and prove ” (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 
4. Subs by s. 7, ibid., for “ must aver ” (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 9 18. Non-enforcement except with variation.— Where a plaintiff seeks specific performance of a 
contract in writing, to which the defendant sets up a variation, the plaintiff cannot obtain the performance 
sought, except with the variation so set up, in the following cases, namely:— 
(a) where by fraud, mistake of fact or mis-representation, the written contract of which 
performance is sought is in its terms or effect different from what the parties agreed to, or does not 
contain all the terms agreed to between the parties on the basis of which the defendant entered into 
the contact; 
(b) where the object of the parties was to produce a certain legal result which the contract as 
framed is not calculated to produce; 
(c) where the parties have, subsequently to the execution of the contract, varied its terms. 
19. Relief against parties and persons claiming under them by subsequent title.— Except as 
otherwise provided by this Chapter, specific performance of a contract may be enforced against— 
(a) either party thereto; 
(b) any other person claiming under him by a title arising subsequently to the contract, except a 
transferee for value who has paid his money in good faith and without notice of the original contract; 
(c) any person claiming under a title which, though prior to the contract and known to the 
plaintiff, might have been displaced by the defendant; 
1[(ca) when a limited liability partnership has entered into a contract and subsequently becomes 
amalgamated with another limited liability partnership, the new limited liability partnership which 
arises out of the amalgamation.] 
(d) when a company has entered into a contract and subsequently becomes amalgamated with 
another company, the new company which arises out of the amalgamation; 
(e) when the promoters of a company have, before its incorporation, entered into a contract for 
the purpose of the company and such contract is warranted by the terms of the incorporation, the 
company: 
Provided that the company has accepted the contract and communicated such acceptance to the other 
party to the contract. 
2[Substituted performance of contracts, etc. ]
3[20. Substituted performance of contract.— (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the 
provisions contained in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), and, except as otherwise agreed upon 
by the parties, where the contract is broken due to non-performance of promise by any party, the party 
who suffers by such breach shall have the option of substituted performance through a third party or by 
his own agency, and, recover the expenses and other costs actually incurred, spent or suffered by him, 
from the party committing such breach. 
(2) No substituted performance of contract under sub-section ( 1) shall be undertaken unless the party 
who suffers such breach has given a notice in writing, of not less than thirty days, to the party in breach 
calling upon him to perform the contract within such time as specified in the notice, and on his refusal or 
failure to do so, he may get the same performed by a third party or by his own agency: 
Provided that the party who suffers such breach shall not be entitled to recover the expenses and costs 
under sub-section ( 1) unless he has got the contract performed through a third party or by his own agency. 
(3) Where the party suffering breach of contract has got the contract performed through a third party 
or by his own agency after giving notice under sub-section ( 1), he shall not be entitled to claim relief of 
specific performance against the party in breach. 
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “ Discretion and powers of Court ”(w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for section 20 (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 10 (4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the party who has suffered breach of contract from claiming 
compensation from the party in breach. 
20A. Special provisions for contract relating to infrastructure project.— (1) No injunction shall 
be granted by a court in a suit under this Act involving a contract relating to an infrastructure project 
specified in the Schedule, where granting injunction would cause impediment or delay in the progress or 
completion of such infrastructure project. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, section 20B and clause ( ha) of section 41, the 
expression “infrastructure project” means the category of projects and infrastructure Sub-Sectors 
specified in the Schedule. 
(2) The Central Government may, depending upon the requirement for development of infrastructure 
projects, and if it considers necessary or expedient to do so, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Schedule relating to any Category of projects or Infrastructure Sub-Sectors. 
(3) Every notification issued under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be made, 
the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that notification. 
20B. Special Courts.— The State Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High 
Court, shall designate, by notification published in the Official Gazette, one or more Civil Courts as 
Special Courts, within the local limits of the area to exercise jurisdiction and to try a suit under this Act in 
respect of contracts relating to infrastructure projects. 
20C. Expeditious disposal of suits.— Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), a suit filed under the provisions of this Act shall be disposed of by the court 
within a period of twelve months from the date of service of summons to the defendant: 
Provided that the said period may be extended for a further period not exceeding six months in 
aggregate after recording reasons in writing for such extension by the court.] 
21. Power to award compensation in certain cases.— (1) In a suit for specific performance of a 
contract, the plaintiff may also claim compensation for its breach 1[in addition to] such performance. 
(2) If, in any such suit, the court decides that specific performance ought not to be granted, but that 
there is a contract between the parties which has been broken by the defendant, and that the plaintiff is 
entitled to compensation for that breach, it shall award him such compensation accordingly. 
(3) If, in any such suit, the court decides that specific performance ought to be granted, but that it is 
not sufficient to satisfy the justice of the case, and that some compensation for breach of the contract 
should also be made to the plaintiff, it shall award him such compensation accordingly. 
(4) In determining the amount of any compensation awarded under this section, the court shall be 
guided by the principles specified in section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872). 
(5) No compensation shall be awarded under this section unless the plaintiff has claimed such 
compensation in his plaint: 
Provided that where the plaintiff has not claimed any such compensation in the plaint, the court shall, 
at any stage of the proceeding, allow him to amend the plaint on such terms as may be just, for including 
a claim for such compensation. 
Explanation. —The circumstances that the contract has become incapable of specific performance 
does not preclude the court from exercising the jurisdiction conferred by this section. 
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 11, for “, either in addition to, or in substitution of, ” (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 11 22. Power to grant relief for possession, partition, refund of earnest money, etc.— (1) 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,1908 (5 of 1908), any 
person suing for the specific performance of a contract for the transfer of immovable property may, in an 
appropriate case, ask for— 
(a) possession, or partition and separate possession, of the property in addition to such 
performance; or 
(b) any other relief to which he may be entitled, including the refund of any earnest money or 
deposit paid or 1[made by] him, in case his claim for specific performance is refused. 
(2) No relief under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall be granted by the court unless it 
has been specifically claimed: 
Provident that where the plaintiff has not claimed any such relief in the plaint, the court shall, at any 
stage of the proceeding, allow him to amend the plaint on such terms as may be just for including a claim 
for such relief. 
(3) The power of the court to grant relief under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall be without prejudice 
to its powers to award compensation under section 21. 
23. Liquidation of damages not a bar to specific performance.— (1) A contract, otherwise proper 
to be specifically enforced, may be so enforced, though a sum be named in itas the amount to be paid in 
case of its breach and the party in default is willing to pay the same, if the court, having regard to the 
terms of the contract and other attending circumstances, is satisfied that the sum was named only for the 
purpose of securing performance of the contract and not for the purpose of giving to the party in default 
an option of paying money in lieu of specific performance. 
(2) When enforcing specific performance under this section, the court shall not also decree payment 
of the sum so named in the contract. 
24. Bar of suit for compensation for breach after dismissal of suit for specific performance.—
The dismissal of a suit for specific performance of a contract or part thereof shall bar the plaintiff’s right 
to sue for compensation for the breach of such contract or part, as the case may be, but shall not bar his 
right to sue for any other relief to which he may be entitled, by reason of such breach. 
ENFORCEMENT OF AWARDS AND DIRECTIONS TO EXECUTE SETTLEMENTS 
25. Application of preceding sections to certain awards and testamentary directions to execute 
settlements.— The provisions of this Chapter as to contracts shall apply to awards to which 2[the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996)], does not apply and to directions in a will or codicil 
to execute a particular settlement. 
CHAPTER III 
RECTIFICATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
26. When instrument may be rectified.— (1) When, through fraud or a mutual mistake of the parties 
a contract or other instrument in writing [not being the articles of association of a company to which the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), applies] does not express their real intention, then— 
(a) either party or his representative in interest may institute a suit to have the instrument 
rectified; or 
(b) the plaintiff may, in any suit in which any right arising under the instrument is in issue, claim 
in his pleading that the instrument be rectified; or 
(c) a defendant in any such suit as is referred to in clause ( b), may, in addition to any other 
defence open to him, ask for rectification of the instrument. 
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3, and the Second Schedule, for “made to” (w.e.f. 29-12-1964). 
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 12, for “the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)” (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 12 (2) If, in any suit in which a contract or other instrument is sought to be rectified under                   
sub-section ( 1), the court finds that the instrument, through fraud or mistake, does not express the real 
intention of the parties, the court may in its discretion, direct rectification of the instrument so as to 
express that intention, so far as this can be done without prejudice to rights acquired by third persons in 
good faith and for value. 
(3) A contract in writing may first be rectified, and then if the party claiming rectification has so 
prayed in his pleading and the court thinks fit, may be specifically enforced. 
(4) No relief for the rectification of an instrument shall be granted to any party under this section 
unless it has been specifically claimed: 
Provided that where a party has not claimed any such relief in his pleading, the court shall, at any 
stage of the proceeding, allow him to amend the pleading on such terms as may be just for including such 
claim. 
CHAPTER IV 
RESCISSION OF CONTRACTS 
27. When rescission may be adjudged or refused.— (1) Any person interested in a contract may sue 
to have it rescinded, and such rescission may be adjudged by the court in any of the following cases, 
namely:— 
(a) where the contract is voidable or terminable by the plaintiff; 
(b) where the contract is unlawful for causes not apparent on its face and the defendant is more to 
blame than the plaintiff. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the court may refuse to rescind the 
contract— 
(a) where the plaintiff has expressly or impliedly ratified the contract; or 
(b) where, owing to the change of circumstances which has taken place since the making of the 
contract (not being due to any act of the defendant himself), the parties cannot be substantially 
restored to the position in which they stood when the contract was made; or 
(c) where third parties have, during the subsistence of the contract, acquired rights in good faith 
without notice and for value; or 
(d) where only a part of the contract is sought to be rescinded and such part is not severable from 
the rest of the contract. 
Explanation. —In this section “contract” in relation to the territories to which the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), does not extend, means a contract in writing. 
28. Rescission in certain circumstances of contracts for the sale or lease of immovable property, 
the specific performance of which has been decreed.— (1) Where in any suit a decree for specific 
performance of a contract for the sale or lease of immovable property has been made and the purchaser or 
lessee does not, within the period allowed by the decree or such further period as the court may allow, pay 
the purchase money or other sum which the court has ordered him to pay, the vendor or lessor may apply 
in the same suit in which the decree is made, to have the contract rescinded and on such application the 
court may, by order, rescind the contract either so far as regards the party in default or altogether, as the 
justice of the case may require. 
(2) Where a contract is rescinded under sub-section ( 1), the court— 
(a) shall direct the purchaser or the lessee, if he has obtained possession of the property under the 
contract, to restore such possession to the vendor or lessor; and 
(b) may direct payment to the vendor or lessor of all the rents and profits which have accrued in 
respect of the property from the date on which possession was so obtained by the purchaser or lessee 
until restoration of possession to the vendor or lessor, and, if the justice of the case so requires, the 13 refund of any sum paid by the vendee or the lessee as earnest money or deposit in connection with the 
contract. 
(3) If the purchase or lessee pays the purchase money or other sum which he is ordered to pay under 
the decree within the period referred to in sub-section ( 1), the court may, on application made in the same 
suit, award the purchaser or lessee such further relief as he may be entitled to, including in appropriate 
cases all or any of the following reliefs, namely:— 
(a) the execution of a proper conveyance or lease by the vendor or lessor; 
(b) the delivery of possession, or partition and separate possession, of the property on the 
execution of such conveyance or lease. 
(4) No separate suit in respect of any relief which may be claimed under this section shall lie at the 
instance of a vendor, purchaser, lessor or lessee, as the case may be. 
(5) The costs of any proceedings under this section shall be in the discretion of the court. 
29. Alternative prayer for rescission in suit for specific performance.— A plaintiff instituting a 
suit for the specific performance of a contract in writing may pray in the alternative that, if the contract 
cannot be specifically enforced, it may be rescinded and delivered up to be cancelled; and the court, if it 
refuses to enforce the contract specifically, may direct it to be rescinded and delivered up accordingly. 
30. Court may require parties rescinding to do equity.— On adjudging the rescission of a contract, 
the court may require the party to whom such relief is granted to restore, so far as may be, any benefit 
which he may have received from the other party and to make any compensation to him which justice 
may require. 
CHAPTER V 
CANCELLATION OF INSTRUMENTS 
31. When cancellation may be ordered.— (1) Any person against whom a written instrument is void 
or voidable, and who has reasonable apprehension that such instrument, if left outstanding may cause him 
serious injury, may sue to have it adjudged void or voidable; and the court may, in its discretion, so 
adjudge it and order it to be delivered up and cancelled. 
(2) If the instrument has been registered under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), the 
court shall also send a copy of its decree to the officer in whose office the instrument has been so 
registered; and such officer shall note on the copy of the instrument contained in his books the fact of its 
cancellation. 
32. What instruments may be partially cancelled.— Where an instrument is evidence of different 
rights or different obligations, the court may, in a proper case, cancel it in part and allow it to stand for the 
residue. 
33. Power to require benefit to be restored or compensation to be made when instrument is 
cancelled or is successfully resisted as being void or voidable.— (1) On adjudging the cancellation of 
an instrument, the court may require the party to whom such relief is granted, to restore, so far as may be 
any benefit which he may have received from the other party and to make any compensation to him which 
justice may require. 
(2) Where a defendant successfully resists any suit on the ground— 
(a) that the instrument sought to be enforced against him in the suit is voidable, the court may if 
the defendant has received any benefit under the instrument from the other party, require him to 
restore, so far as may be, such benefit to that party or to make compensation for it; 
(b) that the agreement sought to be enforced against him in the suit is void by reason of his not 
having been competent to contract under section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), the 
court may, if the defendant has received any benefit under the agreement from the other party, require 
him to restore, so far as may be, such benefit to that party, to the extent to which he or his estate has 
benefited thereby .14 CHAPTER VI 
DECLARATORY DECREES 
34. Discretion of court as to declaration of status or right.— Any person entitled to any legal 
character, or to any right as to any property, may institute a suit against any person denying, or interested 
to deny, his title to such character or right, and the court may in its discretion make therein a declaration 
that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief: 
Provided that no court shall make any such declaration where the plaintiff, being able to seek further 
relief than a mere declaration of title, omits to do so. 
Explanation. —A trustee of property is a “person interested to deny” a title adverse to the title of some 
one who is not inexistence, and for whom, if in existence, he would be a trustee. 
35. Effect of declaration.— A declaration made under this Chapter is binding only on the parties to 
the suit, persons claiming through them respectively, and, where any of the parties are trustees, on the 
persons for whom, if in existence at the date of the declaration, such parties would be trustees. 
PART III 
PREVENTIVE RELIEF 
CHAPTER VII 
INJUNCTIONS GENERALLY 
36. Preventive relief how granted.— Preventive relief is granted at the discretion of the court by 
injunction, temporary or perpetual. 
37. Temporary and perpetual injunctions.— (1) Temporary injunctions are such as are to continue 
until a specific time, or until the further order of the court, and they maybe granted at any stage of a suit, 
and are regulated by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). 
(2) A perpetual injunction can only be granted by the decree made at the hearing and upon the merits 
of the suit; the defendant is thereby perpetually enjoined from the assertion of a right, or from the 
commission of an act, which would be contrary to the rights of the plaintiff. 
CHAPTER VIII 
PERPETUAL INJUNCTIONS
38. Perpetual injunction when granted.— (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in or 
referred to by this Chapter, a perpetual injunction may be granted to the plaintiff to prevent the breach of 
an obligation existing in his favour, whether expressly or by implication. 
(2) When any such obligation arises from contract, the court shall be guided by the rules and 
provisions contained in Chapter II. 
(3) When the defendant invades or threatens to invade the plaintiff’s right to, or enjoyment of, 
property, the court may grant a perpetual injunction in the following cases, namely:— 
(a) where the defendant is trustee of the property for the plaintiff; 
(b) where there exists no standard for ascertaining the actual damage caused, or likely to be 
caused, by the invasion; 
(c) where the invasion is such that compensation in money would not afford adequate relief; 
(d) where the injunction is necessary to prevent a multiplicity of judicial proceedings. 
39. Mandatory injunctions.— When, to prevent the breach of an obligation, it is necessary to compel 
the performance of certain acts which the court is capable of enforcing, the court may in its discretion 
grant an injunction to prevent the breach complained of, and also to compel performance of the requisite 
acts. 15 40. Damages in lieu of, or in addition to, injunction.— (1) The plaintiff in a suit for perpetual 
injunction under section 38, or mandatory injunction under section 39, may claim damages either in 
addition to, or in substitution for, such injunction and the court may, if it thinks fit, award such damages. 
(2) No relief for damages shall be granted under this section unless the plaintiff has claimed such 
relief in his plaint: 
Provided that where no such damages have been claimed in the plaint, the court shall, at any stage of 
the proceedings, allow the plaintiff to amend the plaint on such terms as may be just for including such 
claim. 
(3) The dismissal of a suit to prevent the breach of an obligation existing in favour of the plaintiff 
shall bar his right to sue for damages for such breach. 
41. Injunction when refused.— An injunction cannot be granted— 
(a) to restrain any person from prosecuting a judicial proceeding pending at the institution of the 
suit in which the injunction is sought, unless such restraint is necessary to prevent a multiplicity of 
proceedings; 
(b) to restrain any person from instituting or prosecuting any proceeding in a court not             
sub-ordinate to that from which the injunction is sought; 
(c) to restrain any person from applying to any legislative body; 
(d) to restrain any person from instituting or prosecuting any proceeding in a criminal matter; 
(e) to prevent the breach of a contract the performance of which would not be specifically 
enforced; 
(f) to prevent, on the ground of nuisance, an act of which it is not reasonably clear that it will be a 
nuisance; 
(g) to prevent a continuing breach in which the plaintiff has acquiesced; 
(h) when equally efficacious relief can certainly be obtained by any other usual mode of 
proceeding except in case of breach of trust; 
1[(ha) if it would impede or delay the progress or completion of any infrastructure project or 
interfere with the continued provision of relevant facility related thereto or services being the subject 
matter of such project.] 
(i) when the conduct of the plaintiff or his agents has been such as to disentitle him to be the 
assistance of the court; 
(j) when the plaintiff has no personal interest in the matter. 
42. Injunction to perform negative agreement.— Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( e) 
of section 41, where a contract comprises an affirmative agreement to do a certain act, coupled with a 
negative agreement, express or implied, not to do a certain act, the circumstance that the court is unable to 
compel specific performance of the affirmative agreement shall not preclude it from granting an 
injunction to perform the negative agreement: 
Provided that the plaintiff has not failed to perform the contract so far as it is binding on him. 
2* * * * * 
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 
2. Sections 43 and 44 rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974 (56 of 1974), s. 2 and the First Schedule  
     (w.e.f. 20-12-1974). 16 1[THE SCHEDULE 
[See sections 20A and 41 ( ha)] 
Category of projects and Infrastructure Sub-Sectors 
Sl. No. Category Infrastructure Sub-Sectors
1 2 3 
1. Transport (a) Road and bridges 
(b) Ports (including Capital Dredging) 
(c) Shipyards (including a floating or land-based facility with the 
essential features of waterfront, turning basin, berthing and docking 
facility, slipways or ship lifts, and which is self-sufficient for carrying 
on shipbuilding/repair/breaking activities) 
(d) Inland Waterways 
(e) Airports 
(f) Railway Track, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, terminal infrastructure 
including stations and adjoining commercial infrastructure 
(g) Urban Public Transport (except rolling stock in case of urban road 
transport) 
2. Energy (a) Electricity Generation 
(b) Electricity Transmission 
(c) Electricity Distribution 
(d) Oil pipelines 
(e) Oil/Gas/Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) storage facility(including 
strategic storage of crude oil) 
(f) Gas pipelines (including city gas distribution network) 
3. Water and 
Sanitation (a) Solid Waste Management 
(b) Water supply pipelines 
(c) Water treatment plants 
(d) Sewage collection, treatment and disposal system 
(e) Irrigation (dams, channels, embankments, etc.) 
(f) Storm Water Drainage System 
(g) Slurry pipelines 
4. Communication ( a) Telecommunication (Fixed network including optic fibre/wire/cable 
networks which provide broadband/internet) 
(b) Telecommunication towers 
(c) Telecommunications and Telecom Services 
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2018, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1-10-2018). 17 Sl. No. Category Infrastructure Sub-Sectors
1 2 3 
5. Social and 
Commercial 
Infrastructure (a) Education Institutions (capital stock) 
(b) Sports infrastructure (including provision of Sports Stadia and 
Infrastructure for Academies for Training/Research in Sports and 
Sports-relating activities) 
(c) Hospitals (capital stock including Medical Colleges, Para Medical 
Training Institutes and Diagnostic Centres) 
(d) Tourism infrastructure viz.(i) three-star or higher category classified 
hotels located outside cities with population of more than one million; 
(ii) ropeways and cable cars 
(e) Common infrastructure for industrial parks and other parks with 
industrial activity such as food parks, textile parks, Special Economic 
Zones, tourism facilities and agriculture markets 
(f) Post-harvest storage infrastructure for agriculture and horticulture 
produce including cold storage 
(g) Terminal markets 
(h) Soil-testing laboratories 
(i) Cold chain (including cold room facility for farm level pre-cooling, 
for preservation or storage of agriculture and allied produce, marine 
products and meat) 
(j) Affordable Housing (including a housing project using at least 50% 
of the Floor Area Ratio (FAR)/Floor Space Index (FSI) for dwelling 
units with carpet area of not more than 60 square meters 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-clause, the term “carpet 
area” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (k) of 
section 2 of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 
(16 of 2016).] 
--------------------------The Textiles Committee Act, 1963--------------------------
1 
 THE  TEXTILES COMMITTEE ACT, 1963  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1963  
[3rd December, 1963 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Committee for ensuring the quality of textiles and 
textile machinery and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Textiles Committee    
Act, 1963.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1*      *     * . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2, as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(a) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Committee.  
(b) “Committee ” means the Committee established under section 3;  
3[(ba) “fiber ” means man -made fiber including regenerated cellulose rayon, nylon and the like.]  
(c) “Fund ” means the Textile Fund referred to in section 7; 
3[(ca) “handloom industries ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Khad i and Other Handloom 
Industries Development (Additional Excise, Duty on Cloth) Act, 1953  (12 of 1953) ;] 
(d) “member ” means a member of the Committee and includes the Chairman and the               
Vice -Chairman;  
3[(da) “power loom ” means a loom which is worked by power as defined in clause ( g) of section 2 
of the Factories Act, 1948  (63 of 1948) , and which is used or capable of being used only for weaving 
cloth wholly or partly out of cotton yarn or woollen yarn, or fiber, or any kind of mixed yarn;  
(db) “power loom industry ” means an industry in which a manufacturer of textiles has, at any time 
during the period fixed by the Committee under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 5) of section 5 A, not more 
than fifty power looms (without any spinning plants) in the factory or factories owned, controlled or 
managed by him.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, the expression “factory ” has the meaning assigned 
to it in the Factories Act, 1948  (63 of 1948): ] 
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “textile machinery ” means the equipment employed directly or indirectly for the processing of 
textile fiber into yarn and for the manufacture of fabric therefrom by weaving  or knitting and includes 
equipment used either wholly or partly for the finishing, folding, or packing of textiles;  
4[(g) “textiles ” means any fabric or cloth or yarn or garment or any other article made wholly or 
in part of— 
(i) cotton; or  
(ii) wool; or  
(iii) silk; or  
(iv) artificial silk or other fiber,  
and includes fiber;]  
(h) “Vice -Chairman ” means the Vice -Chairman of the Committee.  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1973, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  
2. 22 nd August, 1964,  vide notification No. S.O. 2913(E), dated the 22 nd August, 1964, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,               
Part II , sec. 3( ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 51 of 1973, s. 3  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  
4. Subs. by s. 3,  ibid.,  for clause  (g) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  2 
 1[2A. Construction of references to any law not in force, or any functionary not in existence, in 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir .—Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force, or any 
functionary not in existence in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall in relation to that State, be 
construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to the correspond ing functio nary in 
existence in that State.]  
3. Establishment of Textiles Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, establish with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, a Committee 
to be known as the Textiles Committee, which shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and 
a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract and may, by that 
name, sue or be sued.  
(2) The Head Office of t he Committee s hall be in Bombay.  
(3) The Committee shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) a Vice -Chairman who shall be the Textile Commissioner, ex officio ; 
(c) a Joint Secretary to the Government of India to be appointed by the Central Government,       
ex officio ; 
(d) such other members as the Central Government may think fit to appoint who, in the opinion of 
that Government, have special knowledge or practical experience in matters relating to the textile 
industry and trade and  the manufacture of textile machinery.  
4. Functions of the Committee .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the 
Committee shall generally be to ensure by such measures, as it thinks fit, standard qualities of textiles 
both for internal marketing and export purposes and the manufacture and use of standard type of textile 
machinery.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Committee may — 
(a) undertake, assist and encourage, scientific, tech nological and economic research in -textile 
industry and textile machinery,  
(b) promote export of textiles and textile machinery and carry on propaganda for that purpose;  
2[(c) establish or adopt or recognise standard specifications for — 
(i) textiles, and  
(ii) packing materials used in the packing of textiles or textile machinery,  
for the purposes of export and for internal consumption and affix suitable marks on such standardised 
varieties of textiles and packing materials; ] 
(d) specify the type of quality control or inspection which will be applied to textiles or           
textile   machinery;  
3[(da) provide for training in the techniques of quality control to be applied to textiles or              
textile  machinery;]  
(e) provid e for the inspection and examination of — 
(i) textiles;  
(ii) textile machinery at any stage of manufacture and also while it is in use at mill -heads;  
3[(iii) packing materials used in the packing of textiles or textile machinery;]  
(f) establish laboratories  and test houses for the testing of textiles;  
(g) provide for testing textiles and textile machinery in laboratories and test houses other than 
those established under clause ( f); 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 1973, s. 4   (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  
2. Subs . by s. 5,  ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1-1-1975).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-1975).  3 
 (h) collect statistics for any of the above mentioned purposes from — 
(i) manufacturers of, and dealers in, textiles;  
(ii) manufacturers of textile machinery; and  
(iii) such other persons as may be prescribed;  
(i) advice on all matters relating to the development of textile industry and the production of 
textile machinery;  
(j) provide for such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) In the discharge of its functions, the Committee shall be bound by such directions as the Central 
Government may, for reasons to be stated in writing, give to it from time to time.  
5. Powers of the Co mmittee .—The Committee may exercise all such powers as may be necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act.  
1[5A. Imposition of cess on textiles and textile machinery manufactured in India .—(1) There 
shall be levied and collected as a cess for the purposes of this Act a duty of excise on all textiles and on 
all textile machinery manufactured in India at such r ate, not exceeding one per cent.  ad valorem  as the 
Central Government may, by notificati on in the Official Gaz ette, fix : 
Provided that no such cess shall be levied on textiles manufactured from out of handloom or        
power loom industry.  
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to any cess or duty leviable on 
textiles or textile m achinery under any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) The duty of excise levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be collected by the Committee, in accordance 
with the rules made in this behalf, from every manufacturer of textiles or textile machinery         
(hereinafter in this section and in sections 5C and 5D referred to as the manufacturer).  
(4) The manufacturer shall pay to the Committee the amount of the duty of excise levied under       
sub-section ( 1) within one month from the date on which he r eceives a notice of demand therefore from 
the Committee.  
(5) For the purpose of enabling the Committee to assess the amount of the duty of excise levied under 
sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) the Committee shall, by notification in the Gazette of India, fix the period in respect of which 
assessments shall be made; and  
(b) every manufacturer shall furnish to the Committee a return, not later than fifteen days after the 
expiry of the period to which the return relates, specifying the total quantity of textiles or t extile 
machinery manufactured by him during the said period and such other particulars as may                   
be prescribed.  
(6) If any manufacturer fails to furnish the return referred to in sub -section ( 5) within the time 
specified therein, or furnishe s a return which the Committee has reason to believe is incorrect or 
defective, the Committee may assess the amount of the duty of excise in such manner as may                   
be prescribed.  
(7) Any manufacturer aggrieved by an assessment made under this  section may appeal to the 
Tribunal, constituted under section 5B for cancellation or modification of the assessment.  
5B. Constitution of Tribunal .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Tribunal consisting of one  person, who is or has been, or is qualified for appointment 
as a Judge of a High Court and who is not connected with the Committee to exercise the powers and 
discharge the functions conferred or imposed on the Tribunal by or under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act  51 of 1973,  s. 6 ( w.e.f. 1-1-1975).  4 
 5C. Hearing of  appeals by Tribunal .—(1) An appeal under sub -section ( 7) of section 5A may be 
preferred to the Tribunal within one month from the date on which the notice of demand regarding the 
assessmen t is served on the manufacturer : 
Provided that the Tribunal may admit an appeal after the expiration of the period aforesaid, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring it within that period.  
(2) Every appeal referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in 
the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied with such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Tribunal shall fix a day and place for the hearing of the appeal and shall give notice of the 
same to the appellant and to the Committee.  
(4) The Tribun al may, after giving the appellant and the Committee an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such  order thereon as it thinks fit:  
Provided that no order enhancing the assessment shall he made unless the appellant has had a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cau se against such enhancement.  
(5) The Tribunal shall send a copy of any order passed under this section to the appellant and to the 
Committee and such order shall be final.  
(6) In discharging the functions under this section, the Tribunal may, subject to an y rules that may be 
made in this behalf, follow such procedure as it thinks fit.  
(7) The Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in respect o f the following matters, namel y:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(8) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Central Government.  
5D. Recovery of duty of excise .—If any manufacturer fails to pay the duty o f excise levied under 
section 5 A, within the period specified in sub -section ( 4) of that section, or where an appeal has been 
preferred by him against an order of assessment under sub -section ( 7) of section 5A, within one month 
from the date of disposal of such appeal, the duty payable by him shall be recoverabl e as an arrear of land 
revenue.  
5E. Power to exempt .—If the Central Government is of opinion that in the interests of trade or in the 
public  interest it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt such variety 
of textiles or such textiles machinery as may be specified in the notification from the whole or any part of 
the duty of ex cise leviable under section 5A.  
5F. Payment of proceeds of cess to the Committee .—The proceeds of the duty of excise collected 
under section 5A, reduced by the cost of collection as determined by the Central Government, shall first 
be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Government may, after due appropriate 
made by Parliament by law, pay to the Committee from out of such proceeds, such sums of money as it 
thinks fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. ] 
6. Grants by Central Government to the Committee .—For the purpose of enabling the C ommittee 
to discharge its functions under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Committee in each financial year such sums of money as that 
Government considers necessary by way o f grant, loan or otherwise.  5 
 7. Constitution of Fund .—(1) The Committee shall have a Fund to be called the Textiles Fund and 
there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all moneys transferred to it under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
1[(aa) the proceeds of the duty of excise made over, to the committee by the Centra l Government 
under section 5F;]  
(b) all moneys paid by the Central Government under section 6;  
(c) all fees and other charges levied under this Act;  
(d) all moneys received by the Comm ittee by way of grant, gift, donation, contribution, transfer 
or otherwise.  
(2) The moneys in the Fund shall be applied for — 
(a) meeting the pay and allowances of the officers and other employees of the Committee and 
other administrative expenses of the Co mmittee;  
(b) carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(3) All moneys in the Fund shall be deposited in the State Bank of India or be invested in such 
securities, as may be approved by the Central Government.  
8. Standing or ad hoc  Committee .—(1) The Committee may constitute Standing Committees or    
ad hoc  Committees for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the Committee or for inquiring 
into or reporting and advising on any matter which the Committee may refer to them.  
2[(2) A Standi ng Committee or an ad hoc  Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) may include 
persons who are not members of the Committee, but their number shall not exceed one                             
half of its strength. ] 
9. Officers and other employees of the Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, in 
consultation with the Committee, appoint a person to be the Secretary of the Committee.  
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Committee 
may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of 
its functions.  
(3) The methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of the officers and 
other emp loyees of the Committee shall, — 
(a) as respects th e Secretary, be such as may be prescribed; and  
(b) as respect the other officers and employees, be such as may be determined by regulations 
made by the Committee under this Act.  
10. Transfer of service of existing employees to the Committee .—Subject to the  provisions of this 
Act, every person employed by the Cotton Textiles Fund Committee constituted under section 5 of the 
Cotton Textiles Fund Ordinance, 1944  (34 of 1944) , immediately before the date of establishment of the 
Committee shall on and from such date, become an employee of the Committee with such designation as 
the Committee may determine and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same 
remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions as he would have held on such da te if the 
Committee had not been established and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the 
committee is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by 
the Committee : 
Provided that the tenure,  remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such person shall 
not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government.  
11. Inspection .—(1) The Committee may, on application made to it or otherwise, direct an officer 
specially authorised in that behalf to examine the quality of textiles or the suitability of textile machinery 
for use at the time of manufacture or while in use in a textile mill and submit a report to the Committee,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 1973, s. 7 ( w.e.f. 1-1-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 8,   ibid.,  for sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) (w.e.f . 1-1-1975).  6 
 (2) Subject to any rules made under this Act, such an officer shall have power to — 
(a) inspect any operation carried on in connection with the manufacture of textiles or textile 
machinery in relation to which construction particulars, marks or inspection standards have            
been specified ; 
(b) take  samples of any article or of any material or substance used in any article or process in 
relation to which construction particulars, marks or inspection standards have been specified;  
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of the report referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Committee may tender such advice, as it 
may deem fit , to the manufacturer of textiles, the manufacturer of text ile machinery and the applicant.  
12. Levy of fees for inspection and examination .—(1) The Committee may levy such fees as may 
be prescribed — 
(a) for inspect ion and examination of textiles;  
1*                                    *                                *                                        *                                    *  
2[(b)] for any  3[special] service which the C ommittee may render to the manufacturers                        
4[or exporters] of texti les and textile machinery:  
4[Provided that no fees shall be levied in respect of inspection and examination of textiles on which a 
duty of excise is leviable  under this Act: ] 
5[Provided further that] the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt   from the payment of fees, generally or in any par ticular case.  
(2) Any sum payable to the Committee under sub -section ( 1) may be recovered as an arrear of land 
revenue.  
13. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts , including the balance -sheet, in accordance with such 
general directions as may be issued, and in such form as may be prescribed, by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Committee shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Committee to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Committee shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India ha s in connection with the 
audit of Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the 
Committee.  
(4) The accoun ts of the Committee as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall ca use the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  
14. Delegation of powers and duti es.—The Committee may, by general or special order in writing, 
direct that all or any of the powers or duties which may be exercised or discharged by it shall, in suc h 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in its order, be exercised or 
discharged also by any officer or employee of the Committee specified in this behalf in the order.  
                                                           
1. Clause ( b) omitted by Act 51 of 1973 , s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-1-1975) . 
2. Clause ( c) re-lettered as clause ( b) thereof by s. 9 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1-1-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid. , for “other” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  
4. Ins. by s. 9,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  7 
 15. Acts or proceedings of Committee not to be invalidated .—No act or proceeding of the 
Committee shall be invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy, in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Committee; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Committee; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the  Committee not affecting the merits of  the case.  
16. Officers and employees of the Committee to be public servants .—All officers and employees 
of the Committee shall, while acting or purporting to act in pursuanc e of the provisions of this Act or of 
any rule or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
17. Power to prohibit exports and internal marketing of textiles and textile               
machinery .—(1) Where the Committee has established, adopted or recognised standard specifications for 
textiles either for internal consumption or for the purposes of exp ort or has established, adopted or 
recognised standard type of textile machinery and on the recommendation made to it in this behalf the 
Central Government is of opinion that any textiles or textile machinery which do not conform to the 
standards laid by t he Committee in respect thereof, should not be exported or sold for internal 
consumption the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, prohibit such 
export or sale.  
(2) If any person contravenes any order issued under sub -section (1) prohibiting — 
(a) the export of any textiles or textile machinery, or  
(b) the sale of any textiles or textile machinery for internal consumption,  
he shall, on conviction, be punishable, — 
(i) for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with 
fine or with both;  
(ii) for the second or a subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year and also with fine and in the absence of special and adequate reasons to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the  court, such imprisonment shall not be less than three months.  
(3) Any court trying the contravention of an order prohibiting the marketing of textiles or textile 
machinery under sub -section ( 1) may, without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2), 
direct that the textiles or textile machinery in respect of which the court is satisfied that such 
contravention has been committed , shall be forfeited to the Central Government.  
18. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing any offence under this Act is a company, 
every person who , at the time the offence was committed was in charge of , and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offen ce and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to such 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his  knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence has b een committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of         
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  8 
 19. Procedure for prosecution .—No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be 
instituted except by or with the consent of the Central Government.  
20. Jurisdiction of courts .—No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of 
the first class, shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
21. Protection of action taken under the Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the committee or  any member, officer or employee of the Committee for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or regulation                  
made thereunder.  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules          
provi de for — 
(a) the number of members and the composition of the Committee and the manner in which the 
members shall be chosen;  
(b) the term of offence of and the manner of filling casual vacancies among the members of        
the Committee;  
(c) the allowances,  if any, payable to the members of the Committee;  
(d) the disqualification for membership of the Committee;  
1[(da) the manner in which the duty of excise leviable under section 5A may be assessed, paid or 
collected, and the manner in which any refund of su ch duty paid or collected in excess of the amount 
due may be mad e; 
(db) the conditions of service of the person constituting the Tribunal under section 5B;  
(dc) the form and the manner in which an appeal to the Tribunal constituted under section 5B 
may be preferred and verified the fees payable on such appeals and the procedure to be followed by 
the Tribunal in disposing of such appeals; ] 
(e) the scale of fees that may be levied  2*** under section 12;  
(f) the form in which the Committee shall prepare its annual statement of accounts and       
balance -sheet;  
(g) the method of appointment, the conditions of service and the scale of pay of the Secretary of 
the Committee;  
(h) the collection of any information  or statistics in respect of textile industry and trade and the 
manufacture of textile machinery;  
(i) the mode of inspection by the Committee and the manner in which samples may be taken by it ; 
 1[(j) any other matter which has to b e, or may be, prescribed .] 
3[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two o r more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the  rule shall, 
thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be, so however that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without p rejudice to the validity of any thing previously done 
under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 1973, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  
2. The words “for inspection and examination” omitted by s. 10,  ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 10,   ibid., for sub -section  (3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1975).  
 9 
 23. Power to  make regulations .—(1) The Committee may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and 
the rules made thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for — 
(a) the meeting of the Committee, Standi ng Committees and ad hoc  Committees, the quorum for 
such meetings and the conduct of business thereat;  
(b) the allowances payable to the members of the Standing Committees or the ad hoc  
Committees;  
(c) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of the officers 
(other than the Secretary) and other employees of the Committee;  
(d) the duties and conduct of officers and other employees of the Committee; and  
(e) any other matter in respect of which the Committee is empowered or required to make 
regulations under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , amend, vary or rescind any 
regulation which it has sanctioned; and thereupon the regulation shall have effect accordingly, but without 
prejudice to the exercise of the powers of the Committee under sub -section ( 1). 
24. Repeal and Saving .—(1) With effect from the date  on which the C ommittee is established under 
section  3, the Cotton Textiles Fund Ordinance, 1944  (34 of 1944),  shall stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the  repeal of the said Ordinance, — 
(a) all moneys at the credit of the Cotton Textiles Fund established under the repealed Ordinance 
immediately before the said date shall with effect from the said date stand tra nsferred to and form part 
of the Textiles Fund referred to in section 7;  
(b) any rules made or deemed to have been made or anything done or any action taken in exercise 
of any of the powers conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have b een made, 
done or taken in exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act, as if this Act were in force on 
the day on which such rules were made, such thing was done or such action was taken.  
 
