--------------------------The Cardamom Act, 1965--------------------------
1 
 THE CARDAMOM ACT, 1965  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union . 
3. [Repealed. ] 
4. [Repealed. ] 
5. [Repealed. ] 
6. [Repealed. ] 
7. [Repealed. ] 
8. [Repealed. ] 
9. [Repealed. ] 
10. [Repealed. ] 
11. [Repealed. ] 
12. [Repealed. ] 
13. [Repealed. ] 
14. [Repealed. ] 
15. [Repealed. ] 
16. [Repealed. ] 
17. [Repealed. ] 
18. [Repealed. ] 
19. [Repealed. ] 
20. [Repealed. ] 
21. [Repealed. ] 
22. [Repealed. ] 
23. [Repealed. ] 
24. [Repealed. ] 
25. [Repealed. ] 
26. [Repealed. ] 
27. [Repealed. ] 
28. [Repealed. ] 
29. [Repealed. ] 
30. [Repealed. ] 
31. [Repealed. ] 
32. [Repealed. ] 
33. [Repealed. ] 
 
  2 
 THE CARDAMOM ACT, 1965  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1965  
[9th December,  1965 .] 
An Act to provide for the development under the control of the Union of the cardamom industry.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cardamom Act, 1965.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent to which the 
provisions of this Act relate to the control of export of cardamom from India and import thereof into 
India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
 2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union .—It is hereby declared that it i s expedient 
in the public interest that the Union should take under it s control the cardamom industry.  
2*                                      *                                  *                                         *                                      * 
                                                           
1. 5th April , 1966, vide notification No. G.S.R. 543, dated the 5 th April, 1966,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(i) except Chapter III . 
11th April , 1966,  vide notification No. G.S.R. 380, dated 5th March , 1966,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec . 3(i) 
in respect of ss . 14 and 15.  
12th July, 1966,  vide notification No. S.O. 2166(E), dated 12 th July, 1966, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(ii) in respect of Chapter III . 
2. Section s 3 to 33 rep . by Act 10 of 1986, s. 42 (w.e.f. 26 -2-1987).  
--------------------------The Goa, Daman and Diu (Absorbed Employees) Act, 1965--------------------------
1 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (ABSORBED EMPLOYEES) ACT, 1965  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power to make rules regulating recruitment and conditions of service of absorbed employees and 
employees of certain  corporation.  
4. Repeal . 
5. Power to remove difficulties . 
  2 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (ABSORBED EMPLOYEES) ACT, 1965  
ACT NO. 50 OF 1965  
[22nd December, 1965 .] 
An Act to provide for the regulation of the conditions of service of persons absorbed for service 
in connection with the administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Goa, Dam an and Diu (Absorbed Employees)                
Act, 1965.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “absorbed employee ” means a person who immediately before the 20th day of December, 
1961, was holding an absorbed post and who on and after that date either served or has been serving 
in that or any other post in connection with the administration of the Union territory of G oa, Daman 
and Diu or in any of the Departments of the Central Government;  
(b) “absorbed post ” means a civil service or post which existed under the former Portuguese 
Administration in Goa, Daman and Diu immediately before the 20th day of December, 1961.  
3. Power to make rules regulating recruitment and conditions of service of absorbed employees 
and employees of certain corporation .—(1) The Central  Government may makes rules — 
(a) for the regulation of recruitment to absorbed posts and the conditions of serv ice of absorbed 
employees;  
(b) for the regulation of the conditions of service of persons who where i n the service of a 
Corporation ( whethe r known as a junta or otherwise)  immediately before the 20th day of December, 
1961, and who on or after that date either served or have been serving in connection with the 
administration of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu or in any of the Departments of the 
Central Government.  
(2) Any such rule may be made so as to be retrospective to any date not earlier than the 20th day of 
December, 1961:  
Provided that no person shall, by virtue of such retrospective effect, be liable to refund any amount 
paid to him by way of salary or allow ances or pension before the making of any such rule.  
(3) Every rule made under this section s hall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modificat ion in the rule, or both Houses  
agree that the rule should not be ma de, the rule shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
4. Repeal.—(1) On the making of any rule under section 3, the corresponding law, if any, in respect 
of any matter for which provision is made in that rule, shall stand repealed with effect from the date of the 
coming into force of that rule.  
(2) The provisions of sections 6 and 24 o f the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897),  shall apply to 
such repeal as if the rule and the corresponding law referred to in sub -section ( 1) were Central Acts.  
 5. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving e ffect to the provisions of this 
Act or any rule made thereunder in relation to any absorbed employee or any person referred to in       
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3, the Central Government may, by order, make such provision as 
appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that the power under this section shall not be exercisable after the expiration of a period of 
two years from the commencement of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Goa, Daman and Diu (Extension of the Code of Civil Procedure and the Arbitration Act) Act, 1965--------------------------
1 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (EXTENSION OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 
AND THE ARBITRATION ACT)  ACT, 1965  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S 
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definition s. 
3. Extension of Code of Civil Procedure and Arbitration Act, 1940, to Goa, Daman and Diu.  
4. Repeal and saving . 
5. Rules of construction . 
6. Power to remove Difficulties.  
7. Consequential provisions.  
 
 
  2 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU (EXTENSION OF THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE 
AND  THE ARBITRATION ACT)  ACT, 1965  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1965  
[25th September, 1965.]  
An Act to provide for the extension of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the Arbitration 
Act, 1940, to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and for certain other matters.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: —  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Goa, Daman and Diu 
(Extension of the Code of Civil P rocedure and the Arbitration  Act) Act, 1965.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Goa, Daman and Diu ” means the Union territory of Goa, Daman and D iu;  
(b) “Lieutenant -Governor ” means the administrator of Goa, Daman and Diu appointed by the 
President under article 239 of the Constitution.  
3. Extension of Code of Civil Procedure and Arbitration Act, 1940, to Goa, Daman and 
Diu.—The Code of Civil Proce dure, 1908 ( 5 of 1908), and the Arbitration  Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), as 
in force in the territories to wh ich they generally extend, are hereby extended to, and shall be in force 
in, Goa, Daman and Diu.  
4. Repeal and saving. —(1) So much of any law in force in Goa, Daman and Diu as corresponds 
to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), or any 
part of the said Code or Act, as  the case may be, shall stand re pealed as from the coming into force of 
this Act in Goa , Daman and Diu:  
Provided that the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder, or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any law s o 
repealed, or  
(c) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation or liability as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced as if 
this Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that, subject to the preceding proviso, notifications published, declarations and 
rules made, places appointed, ag reements filed, awards made or filed, scales prescribed, forms 
framed, appointments made an d powers conf erred under any la w so repealed shall, so far as they are 
consistent with the said Code or, as the case may be, the said Act have the same force and effect as if 
they had been respectively published, made, appointed, filed, prescribed, framed and conferred  under 
the said Code or the said Act and by the authority empowered thereby in such behalf.  
 (2) In every law or notification passed or issued before the commencement of this Act in which 
reference is made to or to any Chapter or section or provision of a ny law hereby repealed, such 
reference shall, so far as may be practicable, be taken to be m ade to the said Code or, as the case may 
be, to the said Act or its corresponding Part, Order, section or rule.  
                                                           
1. 15th, June , 1966, vide notification No. S.O. 1597 (E), dated 24th, June , 1966, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary                          
Part II,  sec. 3 (ii).  
 3 
 5. Rules of construction. —(1) In the Code of Civil P rocedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), and in the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), —  
(a) any reference to any provision of law not in force, or to any functionary not in existence, 
in Goa, Daman and Diu shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to 
the corresponding functionary in existence, in that Union ter ritory:  
Provided that —  
(i) if any question arises as to who that corresponding functionary is, or  
(ii) if there is no such corresponding functionary,  
the Lieutenant -Governor shall decide as to who such functionary will be and his decision shall          
be final;  
(b) any reference to the State Government shall be construed as a reference to the Central 
Government and also as including a reference to the Lieutenant -Governor.  
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to Goa, Daman and Diu of the said 
Code or the said Act, any court or other authority may construe it in such manner not affecting the 
substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt  it to the matter before the court or other authority.  
6. Power to remove Difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect in Goa, Daman and Diu 
to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or the Arbitration                       
Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), extended by this Act to that Union territory, the Central Gover nment may, by 
order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions as appear to it to be 
necessary for the removal of the difficulty.  
7. Consequential provisions. —As from the commencement of this Act, in the Goa, Daman and 
Diu (Judicial Commissioner ’s Court) Regulation, 1963 (Reg. 10 of 1963), — 
(i) in section 8, in sub -section ( 1), the words “Subject to the provisions of any law for the time 
being in force ” shall be i nserted at the commencement;  
(ii) in section 16, after the words “subject to the provisions of this Regulation ”, the words 
“and until other provision is made by law ” shall be inserted;  
(iii) in section 17, in sub -section ( 1), after the word “shall”, the words “, until other provision 
is made by law, ”, shall be inserted.  
 
--------------------------The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965--------------------------
1 
 THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________ __ 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and application . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Establishments to include departments, undertakings and branches.  
4. Computation of gross profits.  
5. Computation of available surplus.  
6. Sums deductible from gross profits.  
7. Calculation of direct tax payable by the employer.  
8. Eligibility for bonus.  
9. Disqualification for bonus.  
10. Payment of minimum  bonus.  
11. Payment of maximum bonus.  
12. Calculation of bonus with respect to certain employees.  
13. Proportionate reduction in bonus in certain cases.  
14. Computation of number of working days.  
15. Set on and set off of allocable surplus.  
16. Special provisions with respect to certain establishments.  
17. Adjustment of customary or interim bonus against bonus payable under the Act.  
18. Deduction of certain amounts from bonus payable under the Act.  
19. Time -limit for payment of bonus.  
20. Application of Act to establishments in public sector in certain cases . 
21. Recovery of bonus due from an employer.  
22. Reference of disputes und er the Act.  
23. Presumption about accuracy of balance -sheet and profit and loss account of corporations and 
companies.  
24. Audited accounts of banking companies not to be questioned.  
25. Audit of accounts of employers, not being corporations or companies.  
26. Maintenance of registers, records, etc.  
27. Inspectors.  
28. Penalty.  
29. Offences by companies.  
30. Cognizance of offences.  
31. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
31A. Special provision with respect to payment of bonus linked with production or productivity.  
32. Act not to apply to certain classes of employees.  
33. [Repealed .] 
34. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.  
35. Saving.  
36. Power of exemption.  
37. [Repealed .] 
38. Power to make rules.  
39. Application of certain law not barred . 
  2 
 SECTIONS  
40. Repeal and saving . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965  
 ACT NO. 21 OF 19651 
[25th September , 1965 .] 
2[An Act to provide for the payment of bonus to persons employed in certain establishments 
and for matters connected therewith .] 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India as  follows:— 
1. Short title, extent and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Payment of  Bonus 
Act, 1965.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  3***. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided  in this Act, it shall apply to — 
(a) every factory; and  
(b) every other establishment in which twenty or more persons are employed on any day 
during an accounting year:  
4[Provided  that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less  than two months ’ notice of 
its intention so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act with 
effect from such accounting year as may be specified in the notification, to any establishment or class 
of establishment s [including an estab lishment being a factory within the  meaning of sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( m) of section  2 of the Factories Act,  1948  (63 of 1948)] employing such number of persons 
less than twenty as may be specified in the notification; so, however, th at the number of persons so 
specified shall in no case be less than ten.]  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall, in relation to a factory 
or other establishment to which this Act applies, have effect in respect of the  accounting year 
commencing on any day in the year  1964  and in respect of every subsequent accounting year:  
5[Provided  that in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the reference to the accounting 
year commencing on any day in the year  1964  and every  subsequent accounting year shall be 
construed as reference to the accounting year commencing on any day in the year  1968  and every 
subsequent accounting year:]  
6[Provided  further that when the provisions of this Act have been made applicable to any 
establ ishment or class of establishments by the issue of a notification under the proviso to               
sub-section ( 3), the reference to the accounting year commencing on any day in the year  1964  and 
every subsequent accounting year or, as the case may be, the reference to the accounting year 
commencing on any day in the year  1968  and every subsequent accounting year, shall, in relation to 
such establishment or class of establishments, be construed as a reference to the accounting year 
specified in such noti fication and every subsequent accounting year.]  
(5) An establishment to which this Act applies  7*** shall continue to be governed by this Act 
notwithstanding that the number of person employed therein falls below twenty  8[or, as the case may 
be, the number  specified in the notification issued under the proviso to sub -section ( 3)]. 
  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Act 6 of 1977, s. 2 and the S chedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1977 , s. 3, for the long title (w.e.f. 3-9-1977 ). 
3. The word s “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
4. The proviso ad ded by Act 23 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
5. The proviso added by Act 51 of 19 70, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
6. The p roviso inserted by Act 23 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
7. The words, brackets, letter and figure “under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3)” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
8. Certain words, brackets and figure added  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e. f. 25-9-1975).  4 
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “accounting year ” means— 
(i) in relation to a corporation, the year ending on the day on which the books and 
accounts of the corporation are to be closed and balanced;  
(ii) in relation to a company, the period in respect of which any profit and loss account of 
the company laid before it  in annual general  meeting is made up, whether that period is a year 
or not;  
(iii) in any other case — 
(a) the year commencing on the  1st day of April; or  
(b) if the accounts of an establishment maintained by the employer thereof are closed 
and balanced on any day other than the  31st day of March, then, at the option of the 
employer, the year ending on the day on which its accounts are so closed and balanced:  
Provided that an option once exercised by the employer under paragraph ( b) of this           
sub-clause shall not again be exercised except with the previous permission in writing of the 
prescribed authority and upon such conditions as that authority may think fit;  
(2) “agricultural income ” shall have the same  meaning as in the Income -tax Act;  
(3) “agricultural income -tax law ” means any law for the time being in force relating to the 
levy of tax on agricultural income;  
(4) “allocable surplus ” means— 
(a) in relation to an employer, being a company  1[(other than a banking company)] which 
has not made  the arrangements prescribed under the  Income -tax Act for the declaration and 
payment within India of the dividends payable out of its profits in accordance with the 
provisions of section  194 of that Act, sixty -seven per cent . of the available surplus in a n 
accounting year;  
(b) in any other case, sixty per cent . of such available surplus;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(5) “appropriate Government ” means— 
(i) in relation to an establishment in respect of which the appropriate Government under 
the Industrial Disputes Act,1947  (14 of 1947), is the Central Government, the Central 
Government;  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in  which that other 
establishment is situate;  
(6) “available surplus ” means the available surplus computed under section  5; 
(7) “award ” means an interim or a final determination of any industrial dispute or of any 
question relating thereto by any Labour Cour t, Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal 
constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), or by any other authority 
constituted under any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes in force in a St ate and includes an arbitration award made under section  10A of that Act 
or under that law;  
(8) “banking company ” means a banking company as defined in section  5 of the  Banking 
Companies Act,  1949  (10 of 1949), and includes the State  Bank of India, any subsidiary bank as 
defined in the St ate Bank of India (Sub sidiary  Banks) Act,  1959  (38 of 1959),  3[any 
corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the  Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,  1970  (5 of 1970),   1[any corresponding new bank constituted 
under section  3 of the  Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking s) 
Act, 1980  (40 of 1980),] any co-operative bank as defined in clause ( vii) of section  2 of the 
Reserve bank of India Act,  1934  (2 of 1934 ),] and any other banking institution which may be 
notified in this behalf by the Central Government;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. The words, brackets and figures “and includes any amount treated as such under sub -section ( 2) of section 34” omitted by 
Act 23 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  5 
 (9) “company ” means any company as defined is section  3 of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), and includes a foreign company within the  meaning of secti on 591 of that 
Act; 
(10) “co-operative society ” means a society registered or deemed to be registered under the              
Co-operative Societies Act,  1912  (2 of 1912), or any other law for the time being in force in any 
State relating to co -operating societies;  
(11) “corporation ” means any body corporate established by or under any Central, Provincial 
or State Act but does not include a company or a co -operative society;  
(12) “direct tax ” means— 
(a) any lax chargeable under — 
(i) the Income -tax Act;  
(ii) the Super Profits Tax Act,  1963  (14 of 1963);  
(iii) the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act,  1964  (7 of 1964);  
(iv) the agricultural income -tax law; and  
(b) any other tax which, having regard to its nature or incidence, may be declared by the 
Central Governme nt, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a direct tax for the purposes 
of this Act;  
(13) “employee ” means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on a salary or wage 
not exceeding  1[twenty -one thousand rupees]  per mensem  in any industry to do any skilled or 
unskilled manual, supervisory,  managerial, administrative, technical or clerical work for  hire or 
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied;  
(14) “employer ” includes— 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory, 
including the agent of such owner or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner or 
occupier and where a person has been named as a manager of the factor y under clause (f) of                 
sub-section ( 1) of section  7 of the Factories Act,  1948  (63 of 1948), the person so named; and  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority which, has the 
ultimate control over the affa irs of the establishment and where the said affairs are entrusted 
to a manager, managing director or managing agent, such manager, managing director or 
managing agent;  
(15) “establishment in private sector ” means any establishment other than an establishment in 
public sector;  
(16) “establishment in public sector ” means an establishment owne d, controlled or managed 
by— 
(a) a Government company as defined in section  617 of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956);  
(b) a corporation in which not less tha n forty per cent . of its capital is held (wheth er 
singly or taken together) by — 
(i) the Government; or  
(ii) the Reserve  Bank of India; or  
(iii) a corporation owned by the Government or the Reserve  Bank of India;  
(17) “factory ” shall have the same  meaning as in clause ( m) of section  2 of the Factories 
Act, 1948  (63 of 1948);  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2016, s. 2, for “ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  6 
 (18) “gross profits ” means the gross profits calculated under section  4; 
(19) “Income -tax Act ” means the Income -tax Act,  1961  (43 of 1961);  
(20) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(21) “salary or wage ” means all remuneration (other than remuneration in respect of over -
time work) capable of being expressed in terms of money, which would, if the terms of 
employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to an employee in respect of  his 
employment or of work done in such employment and includes dearness allowance (that is to say, 
all cash payments, by whatever name called, paid to an employee on account of a rise in the cost 
of living), but does not include — 
(i) any other allowance which the employee is for the time being entitled to;  
(ii) the value of any house accommodation or of supply of light, water,  medical 
attendance or other amenity or of any service or of any concessional supply of food grains or 
other articles;  
(iii) any travelling concession;  
(iv) any bonus (including incentive, production and attendance bonus);  
(v) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident 
fund or for t he benefit of the employee under any law for the time being in force;  
(vi) any retrenchment compensation or any gratuity or other retirement benefit payable to 
the employee or any  ex gratia  payment made to  him; 
(vii) any commission payable to the employee.  
Explanation. —Where an employee is given in lieu of the whole or part of the salary or wage 
payable to  him, free food allowance or free food by  his employer, such food allowance or the 
value of such food shall, for the purpose of this clause, be deemed to from part of the salary or 
wage of such employee;  
(22) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Industrial 
Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), shall have the  meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Act. 
3. Establishments to include departments, undertakings and branches .—Where an 
establishment consists of different department or undertakings or has branches, whether situated in 
the same place or in different places, all such departments or undertakings or br anches shall be treated 
as parts of the same establishment for the purpose of computation of bonus under this Act:  
Provided that where for any accounting year a separate balance -sheet and profit and loss account 
are prepared and maintained in respect of an y such department or undertaking or branch, then, such 
department or undertaking or branch shall be treated as a separate establishment for the purpose of 
computation of bonus, under this Act for that year, unless such department or undertaking or branch 
was, immediately before the commencement of that accounting year treated as part of the 
establishment for the purpose of computation of bonus.  
1[4. Computation of gross profits .—The gross profits derived by an employer from an 
establishment in respe ct of any accounting year shall — 
(a) in the case of a banking company, be calculated in the manner specified in the First 
Schedule;  
(b) in any other case, be calculated in the manner specified in the Second Schedule.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 3, for section 4 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  7 
 5. Computation of available surplus .—The available surplus in respect of any accounting year 
shall be the gross profits for that year after deducting therefrom the sums referred to in section 6:  
1[Provided that the available surplus in respect of the accounting year commencing on any day in 
the year 1968 and in respect of every subsequent accounting  year shall be the aggregate of — 
(a) the gross profits for that accounting year after deducting therefrom the sums referred to in 
section 6; and  
(b) an amount equal to the difference between — 
(i) the d irect tax, calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 7, in respect of 
an amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for the immediately preceding 
accounting year; and  
(ii) the direct tax, calculated in accordance with the provisions of  section 7, in respect of 
an amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for such preceding accounting year after 
deducting therefrom the amount of bonus which the employer has paid or is liable to pay to 
his employees in accordance with the provisio ns of this Act for that year.]  
6. Sums deductible from gross profits .—The following sums shall be deducted from the gross 
profits as prior charges, namely: — 
(a) any amount by way of depreciation admissible in accordance with the provisions of                        
sub-section (1) of section 32 of the Income -tax Act, or in accordance with the provisions of the 
agricultural  income -tax law, as the case may be:  
Provided that where an emplo yer has been paying bonus to hi s employees under a settleme nt or 
an award or agreement made before the 29 the May, 1965 , and subsisting on that date after deducting 
from the gross profits notional normal depreciation, then, the amount of depreciation to be deducted 
under this clause shall, at the option of such emp loyer (such option to be exercised once and within 
one year from the date) continue to be such notional normal depreciation;  
(b) any amount by way of  2[development rebate or investment allowance or development 
allowance] which the employe r is entitled to deduct from hi s income under the income -tax Act;  
(c) subject  to the provisions of section 7 , any direct tax which the employer is liable to pay 
for the a ccounting year in respect of hi s income, profits and gains during that year;  
(d) such  further sums as are specified in respect of the employer in the  3[Third Schedule].  
7. Calculation of direct tax payable by the employer .—4[Any direct tax payable by the 
employer] for any accounting year shall, subject to the following provisions, be calculated at the rates 
applicable to the income of the employe r for that year, namely: — 
(a) in calculating such t ax no account shall be taken of — 
(i) any loss incurred by the employer in respect of any previous accounting year and 
carried forward under an y law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes;  
(ii) any arrears of depreciation which the employer is entitled to add to the amount of the 
allowance for depreciation for any following accounting year or years under sub -section ( 2) 
of section  32 of the Income -tax Act;  
(iii) any exemption conferred on the employer under section  84 of the Income -tax Act or 
of any deduction to which he is entitled under sub -section ( 1) of section  101 of that Act, as in 
force immediately before the commenc ement of the Finance Act,  1965  (10 of 1965);  
(b) where the employer is a religious or a charitable institution to which the provisions of 
section  32 do not apply and the whole or any part of its income is exempt from tax under the 
                                                           
1. The proviso a dded by Act 8 of 1969, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26 -3-1965).   
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1 980, s. 4 , for “development rebate or development allowance” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “ Second  Schedule” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
4. Subs. by Act 8 of 1969, s. 3, for “For the purpose of clause ( c) of section 6, any direct tax payable by the employer”  
(w.e.f. 26 -3-1965).  8 
 Income -tax Act, then, with respect to the in come so exempted, such institution shall be treated as 
if it were a company in which the public are substantially interested within the  meaning of that 
Act; 
(c) where the employer is individual or a Hindu undivided family, the tax pa yable by such 
employer under the Income -tax Act shall be calculated on the basis that the income derived 
by him from the establishment is  his only income;  
(d) where the income of any employer includes any profits and gains derived from the export 
of any go ods or  merchandise out of India and any rebate on such income in allowed under any 
law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes, then, no account shall be taken of such 
rebate;  
(e) no account shall be taken of any rebate  1[(other than development rebate or investment 
allowance or development allowance)] or credit or relief or de duction (not herein 
before  mentioned in this section) in the payment of any direct tax allowed under any law for the 
time being in force relating to direct taxe s or under the relevant annual Finance Act, for the 
development of any industry.  
8. Eligibility for bonus .—Every employee shall be entitled to be paid by  his employer in an 
accounting year, bonus, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, provided he has worked in the 
establishment for not less than thirty working days in that year.  
9. Disqualification for bonus .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, an employee 
shall be disqualified from receiving bonus under this Act, if he is dismissed fro m service for — 
(a) fraud; or  
(b) riotous or violent behaviour while on the premises of the establishment; or  
(c) theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any property of the establishment.  
2[10. Payment of minimum bonus .—Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every employer 
shall be bound to pay to every employee in respect of the accounting year commencing on any day in 
the year 1979  and in respect of every subsequent accounting year, a minimum bonus which shall 
be 8.33 per cent . of the salary of wage earned by the employee during the accoun ting year or one 
hundred rupees,  whichever is higher, whether or not the employer has any allocable  surplus in the 
accounting year : 
Provided that where an employee has not complet ed fifteen years of age at the beginning of the 
accounting year, the provisions of this section shall have effect in relation to such employees as if for 
the words “one hundred rupees ”, the words “sixty rupees ” were substituted.  
 11. Payment of maximum bon us.—(1) Where in respect of any accounting year referred to in 
section  10, the allocable surplus exceeds the amount of minimum bonus payable to the employees 
under that section, the employer shall, in lieu of such minimum bonus, be bound to pay to every 
employee in respect of that accounting year bonus which shall be an amoun t in proportion to the 
salary or wage earned by the employee during the accounting year subject to a maximum of twenty 
per cent.  of such salary or wage.  
(2) In computing the allocable surplus under this section, the amount set on or the amount set off 
unde r the provisions of section  15 shall be taken into account in accordance with the provisions of 
that section.]  
3[12. Calculation of bonus with  respect to certain employees. —Where the salary or wage of an 
employee exceeds  4[seven thousand rupees or the minimum wage for the scheduled employment, as 
fixed by the appropriate Government, whichever is higher]   per mensem, the bonus payable to such 
employee under section 10 or, as the case may be, under section 11, shall be calcul ated as if his salary 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 5, for “(other than development  rebate or development allowance )” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for section 10 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3.  Ins. by Act 67 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7-11-1985 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 2016, s. 3, for “three thousand and five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014 ). 9 
 or wage were  1[seven thousand rupees or the minimum wage for the scheduled employment, as fixed 
by the appropriate Government, whichever is higher] per mensem.]  
2[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “scheduled employment ” shall 
have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( g) of section 2 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948                     
(11 of 1948) .] 
3[13. Proportionate reduction in bonus in certain cases .—Where an employee has not worked 
for all the working days in an accounting year, the minimum bonus of one hundred rupees or, as the 
case may be, of sixty rupees, if such bonus is  higher than  8.33 per cent.  of his salary or wage for the 
days he has worked in that accounting year, shall be prop ortionately reduced.]  
14. Computation of number of working days .—For the purposes of section  13, an employee 
shall be deemed to have worked in an establishment in any accounting year also on the days on 
which — 
(a) he has been laid off under an agreement or  as permitted by standing orders under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act,  1946  (20 of 1946), or under the Industrial 
Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), or under any other law applicable to the establishment;  
(b) he has been on leave with salary  or wage;  
(c) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by accident arising out of and in 
the course of  his employment; and  
(d) the employee has been on maternity leave with salary or wage, during the accounting 
year.  
4[15. Set on and set off of allocable surplus .—(1) Where for any accounting year, the allocable 
surplus exceeds the amount of maximum bonus payable to the employees in the establishment under 
section  11, then, the excess shall, subjec t to a limit of twenty per cent.  of the total salary or wage of 
the employees employed in the establishment in that accounting year, be carried forward for being set 
on in the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year to be 
utilised for the pu rpose of payment of bonus in the manner illustrated in the Fourth Schedule.  
(2) Where for any accounting year, there is no available surplus or the allocable surplus in respect 
of that year falls short of the amount of minimum bonus payable to the employee s in the 
establishment under section  10, and there is no amount of sufficient amount carried forward and set 
on under sub -section ( 1) which could be utilised for the purpose of payment of the minimum bonus, 
then, such minimum amount or the deficiency, as t he case may be, shall be carried forward for being 
set off in the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year 
in the manner illustrated in the Fourth Schedule.  
(3) The principle of set on and set off as illustrate d in the Fourth Schedule shall apply to all other 
cases not covered by sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) for the purpose of payment of bonus under this 
Act. 
(4) Where in any accounting year any amount has been carried forward and set on or set off under 
this section, then, in calculating bonus for the succeeding accounting year, the amount of set on or set 
off carried forward from the earliest accounting year shall first be taken into account.]  
16. Special provisions with respect to certain establishments .—5[(1) Where an establishments 
newly set up, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, the employees of such 
establishment shall be entitled to be paid bonus under this Act in accordance with t he provisions of 
sub-sections ( 1A), (1B) and ( 1C). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2016, s. 3, for “three thousand and five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
2. The Explanation  inserted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 8, for section 13 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for  section 15  (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) and the Explanation  thereto  (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  10 
 (1A) In the first five accounting year s following the accounting year in which the employer s sells 
the goods  produced or manufactured by hi m or renders services, as the case may be, from such 
establishment, bonus shall be payable only in respect of the ac counting year in which the employer 
derives profit from such establishment and such bonus shall be calculated in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act in relation to that year, but without applyin g the provisions of section 15 . 
(1B) For the sixth and seventh accounting years following the accounting year in which the 
employer sells the goods  produced or manufactured by hi m or renders services, as the case may be, 
from such establishment, the provisions of section 15 shall apply subject to the f ollowing  
modifications, namely: — 
(i) for the sixth accounting year — 
set on or set off, as the case may be, shall be made in the manner illustrated in the  1[Fourth 
Schedule] taking into account the excess or deficiency, if any, as the case may be, of the 
allocable surplus set on or set off in respect of the fifth and sixth accounting years;  
(ii) for the seventh accounting year — 
set on or set off, as the case may be, shall be made in the manner illustrated in the  1[Fourth 
Schedule] taking into account the excess or d eficiency, if any, as the case may be, of the 
allocable surplus set on or set off in respect of the fifth, sixth and seventh accounting years.  
(1C) From the eighth accounting year following the accounting year in which the employer sells 
the goods produced  or manufactured b y him or renders services, as the case may be, from such 
establishment, the provisions of section 15 shall apply in relation to such establishment as they apply 
in relation to any other establishment.  
Explanation I.—For the purpose of sub-section ( 1), an establishment shall not be  deemed to be  
newly set up merely by reason of a change in its location, management, name or ownership.  
Explanation  II.—For the purpose of sub -section ( 1A), an employer shall not be deemed to be have 
derived pr ofit in any accounting year unless — 
(a) he has made provision for that year ’s depreciation to which he is entitled under the 
Income -tax Act or, as the case may be, under the agricultural income -tax law; and  
(b) the arrears of such depreci ation and losses i ncurred by hi m in respect of the 
establishment for the previous accounting years hav e been fully set off against hi s profits.  
Explanation  III.—For the purpos es of sub -sections ( 1A), (1B) and ( 1C), sale of the goods 
produced or manufactured during the course of the trial running of any factory or of the prospecting 
stage of any mine or an oil field shall not be taken into consideration and where any question arises 
with regard to such production or manufacture, the decision of the appropriate Government , made 
after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of representing the case, shall be final and shall not 
be called in question by any court or other authority.]  
(2) The provisions of  2[sub-sections ( 1), (1A), (1B) and ( 1C)] shall, so far as may be, apply to new 
departments or undertakings or branches set up by existing establishments:  
Provided that if an employer in relation to an existing establishment consisting of different 
(departments or undertakings or branches (whether or not in the same indus try) set up at diffe rent 
periods has, before the 29 th May, 1965 , been paying bonus to the employees of all such departments 
or undertakings or branches irrespective of the date on which such departments or undertakings or 
branches were set up, on the basis  of the consolidated profits computed in respect of all such 
departments or undertakings or branches, then, such employer shall be liable to pay bonus in              
accor dance with the provisions of this Act to the employees of all such departments or u ndertakings 
or branches (whether set up before or after that date) on the basis of the consolidated profits computed 
as aforesaid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980 , s. 10, for “Third Schedule” (w.e.f. 21-8-1980). 
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 12, for “sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  11 
 17. Adjustment of customary or interim bonus against bonus payable under the                  
Act.—Where in any accounting year — 
(a) an employer has paid any puja bonus or other customary bonus to an employee; or  
(b) an employer has paid a part of the bonus payable under this Act to an employee before the 
date on which such bonus beco mes payable,  
then, the employer shall be entitled to deduct the amount of bonus so paid from the amount of bonus 
payable by  him to the employee under this Act in respect of that accounting year and the employee 
shall be entitled to receive only the balance.  
18. Deduction of cert ain amounts from bonus payable under the Act .—Where in any 
accounting year, an employee is found guilty of misconduct causing financial loss to the employer, 
then, it shall be lawful for the employer to deduct the amount of loss from the amount of bonus 
payable by  him to the employee under this Act in respect of that accounting year only and the 
employee shall be entitled to receive the balance, if any.  
19. Time -limit for payment of bonus .—1[All amounts] payable to an employee by way of bonus 
under this Act shall be paid in cash by  his employer — 
(a) where there is a dispute regarding payment of bonus pending before any authority under 
section  22, within a month from the date on which the award becomes enforceable or the 
settlement comes into operation, in respect of such dispute;  
(b) in any other case, within a period of eight months from the close of the accounting year:  
Provided that the appropriate Government or such authority as the ap propriate Government may 
specify in this behalf may, upon an application made to it by the employer and for sufficient reasons, 
by order, extend the said period of eight months to such further period or periods as it thinks fit; so, 
however, that the total  period so extended shall not in any case exceed two years.  
2*   *   *   *   *. 
3*   *   *   *   *. 
20. Application of Act to establishments in public sector in certain cases .—4[(1)] If in any 
accounting year an establishment in public sector sells any goods produced or manufactured by it or 
renders any services, in competition with an establishment in private sector, and the income from 
such sale or services or both is not less than twenty per cent . of the gross income of the establishment 
in public sec tor for that year, then, the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such 
establishment in public sector as they apply in relation to a like establishment in private sector.  
5[(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), nothing in this Act  shall apply to the 
employees employed by any establishment in public sector.]  
21. Recovery of bonus due from an employer .—Where any money is due to an employee by 
way of bonus f rom hi s employer under a settlement or an award or agreement, the employee himself 
or an y other person authorised by hi m in writing in this behalf, or in the case o f the death of the 
employee, hi s assignee or heirs may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an 
application to the appropriate Government for the recovery of the money due to hi m, and if the 
appropriate Government or such authority as the appropriate Government may specify in this behalf 
is satisfied that any money is so due, it shall issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector who 
shall procee d to recover the same in the same manner as an arrear  of land revenue:  
Provided that every such application shall be made within one year from the date on which the 
money became due to the employee from the employer:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 13, for “( 1) Subject to this provisions of this section , all amou nts” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
2. Sub -section s (2) to (7) omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Sub -section ( 8) omitted by Act 55 of 1973, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
4. Section 20 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 66 of 1980, s. 11 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).   
5. Ins. by s. 11,  ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  12 
 Provided further that any such applicat ion may be entertained after the expiry of the said period 
of one year, if the appropriate Government is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not 
making the application within the said period.  
Explanation —In this section and in  1[sections 22, 23, 24 and 25 ], “employee ” includes a person 
who is entitled to the payment of bonus under this Act but who is no longer in employment.  
22. Reference of disputes under the Act .—Where any dispute arises between an employer 
and his employees with respect  to the bonus payable under this Act or with respect to the application 
of this Act to an establishment in public sector, then, such dispute shall be deemed to be an industrial 
dispute within the  meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), o r of any corresponding 
law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in a State and the provisions 
of that Act or, as the case may be, such law, shall, save as otherwise expressly provided, apply 
accordingly.  
23. Presumption about accuracy of balance -sheet and profit and loss account of 
corporations and companies .—(1) Where, during the course of proceedings before any arbitrator or 
Tribunal under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ), or under any corresponding law 
relating to investigation and settlement of industrial dispu tes in force in a State (herein after in this 
section  2[and in  3[sections 24 and 25 ] referred to as the “said authority ”) to which any dispute of the 
nature specified in section 22 has been referre d, the balance -sheet and the profit and loss account of 
an employer, being a corporation or a company (other than a banking company), du ly audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of 
companies  under sub -section ( 1) of section 226 of the Companies Act , 1956 (1 of 1956 ), are produced 
before it, then, the said authority may presume the statements and particulars contained in such 
balance -sheet and profit and loss account to be accurate and it shall not be necessary for the 
corporation or the company to prove the accuracy of such statements and particulars by the filing of 
an affidavit or by any other mode:  
Provided that where the said authority is satisfied that the statement and particulars contained in 
the balance -sheet or the profit and loss account of the corporation or the company  are not accurate, it 
may take such steps as it thinks necessary to find o ut the accuracy of such statement s and particulars.  
(2) When an application is made to the said authority by any trade union being a party to the 
dispute or where there is no trade union, by the employees being a party to the dispute, requiring any 
clarifi cation relating to any item in the balance -sheet or the profit and loss account, it may, after 
satisfying itself that such clarification is necessary, by order, direct the corporation or, as the case may 
be, the company, to furnish to the trade union or th e employees such clarification within such time as 
may be specified in the direction and the corporation or, as the case may be, the company, shall 
comply with such direction.  
4[24. Audited accounts of banking companies not to be questioned .—(1) Where any dispute of 
the nature specified in section 22 between an employer, being a banking company, and its employees 
has been referred to the said authority under that section and during the course of proceedings the 
accounts of the banking company duly audited a re produced before it, the said authority shall not 
permit any trade union or employees to question the correctness of such accounts, but the trade union 
or the employees may be permitted to obtain from the banking company such information as is 
necessary for verifying the amount of bonus due under this Act.  
(2) Not hing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall enable the trade union on the employees to obtain 
any information which the banking company is not compelled to furnish under the provisions of 
section 34A  of the  Banking Regulation Act, 1949 ( 10 of 1949).]  
25. Audit of accounts of employers, not being corporations or companies .—(1) Where any 
dispute of the nature specified in section  22 between an employer, not being a corporation or a 
company, and  his empl oyees has been referred to the said authority under that section and the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 12, for “sections 22, 23 and 25” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 16, for “ and in sections 24 and 25” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 13, for “section 25” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  13 
 accounts of such employer audited by any auditor duly qualified to act as auditor of companies under 
sub-section ( 1) of section  226 of the Companies Act,  1956  (1 of 1956), are produced before the said 
authority, the provisions of section  23, shall, so far as may be, apply to the accounts so audited.  
(2) When the said authority finds that the accounts of such employer have not been audited by 
any such auditor and it is of opinion  that an audit of the accounts of such employer is necessary for 
deciding the question referred to it, then, it may, by order , direct the employer to get  his accounts 
audited within such time as may be specified in the direction or within such further time  as it may 
allow by such auditor or auditors as it thinks fit and thereupon the employer shall comply with such 
direction.  
(3) Where an employer fails to get the accounts audited under sub -section ( 2) the said authority 
may, without prejudice to the provis ions of section  28, get the accounts audited by such auditor or 
auditors as it thinks fit.  
(4) When the accounts are audited under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) the provisions of 
section  23 shall, so far as may be, apply to the accounts so audited.  
(5) The expenses of, and incidental to, any audit under sub -section ( 3) (including the 
remuneration of the auditor or auditors) shall be determined by the said authority (which 
determination shall be final) and paid by the employer and in default of such payment shall be 
recoverable from the employer in the manner provided in section  21. 
 26. Maintenance of registers, records, etc .—Every employer shall prepare and maintain such 
registers, records and other documents in such form and in such manner as may b e prescribed.  
27. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such person as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define the 
limits within which they shall exercise jurisdi ction.  
(2) An Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
any of the provisions of t his Act has been complied with — 
(a) require an employer to furnish such information as he may consider necessary;  
(b) at any reasonable time and with such assistance, if any, as he thinks fit, enter any 
establishment or any premises connected therewith and require any one found in charge thereof to 
produce before  him for examination any accounts, books, registers and other docum ents relating 
to the employment of persons or the payment of salary o f wage or bonus in the establishment;  
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes aforesaid, the 
employer,  his agent or servant or any other person found in cha rge of the establishment or any 
premises connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe 
to be or to have been an employee in the establishment;  
(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any book, register or other doc ument maintained in 
relation to the establishment;  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the  meaning of the Indian penal 
Code (45  of 1860).  
(4) Any person required to produce  any accounts, book, register or other documents or to give 
information by an Inspector under sub -section ( 1) shall be legally bound to do so.  
1[(5) Nothing contained in this section shall enable an Inspector to require a banking company to 
furnish or disc lose any statement or information or to produce, or give inspection of , any of its books 
of account or other documents, which a banking company cannot be compelled to furnish, disclose, 
produce or give inspection of, under the provisions of section  34A of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949  (10 of 1949).]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 15 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  14 
  28. Penalty .—If any pe rson— 
(a) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder; or  
(b) to whom a direction is given or a requisition is made under this Act fails to comply with 
the direction or requisition,   
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
29. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without  his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to b e proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or other associa tion of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm,  means a partner in the  firm.  
30. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act, save on complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government  1[or an 
officer of that Government (not below the rank of a Regional Labour Commissioner in the case of an 
officer of the Central Government, and not below the rank of a Labour Commissioner in the case of 
an officer of the State Government) specially author ised in this behalf by that Government].  
(2) No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try 
any offence punishable under this Act.  
31. Protection of action taken under the Act .—No suit, prosecution or othe r legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Government or any officer of the Government for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder.  
2[31A. Special provision with respect to payment of bonus linked with production or 
productivity .—Notwithstanding a nything contained in this Act, — 
(i) where an agreement or a settlement has been entered into by the employees with their 
employer before the commencement of the Payment of  Bonus (Amendment) 
Act, 1976  (23 of 1976), or  
(ii) where the employees enter into any agreement or settlement with their em ployer after 
such commencement,  
for payment of an annual bonus linked with production or productivity in lieu of bonus based on 
profits payable under th is Act, then, such employees shall be entitled to receive bonus due to them 
under such agreement or settlement, as the case may be:  
3[Provided  that any such agreement or settlement whereby the employees relinquish their right to 
receive the minimum bonus u nder section  10 shall be null and void in so far as it purports to deprive 
them of such right:] ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 16 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).   
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 17 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  15 
 1[Provided  further that] such employees shall not be entitled to be paid such bon us in excess of 
twenty per cent.  of the salary or wage earned by them during the relevant accounting year.  
32. Act not to apply to certain classes of employees .—Nothing  in this Act shall apply to — 
(i) 2[employees employed by any insurer carrying on general insurance business and the ] 
employees employed by the Life Insurance Corporation of India;  
(ii) seamen as defined in clause ( 42) of section 3 of th e Merchant Shipping Act, 1958                 
(44 of 1958);  
(iii) employees  registered or listed under any scheme made under the Dock Workers 
(Regulation of Employment ) Act, 1948 ( 9 of 1948), and employed by registered or listed 
employers;  
(iv) employees employed by an establishment engaged in any industry carried on by or under 
the authority of any department of the Central Government or a State Government or a local 
authority;  
(v) employees employed by — 
(a) the Indian Red Cross Society or any other institution of a like nature (including its 
branches);  
(b) universities  and other educational institutions;  
(c) institutions (including hospitals, chambers of commerce and social welfare 
institutions) established not for purposes of profit;  
3*   *   *   *  *; 
4*   *   *   *  *; 
(viii) employees  employed by the Reserve Bank of India;  
(ix) employees employed by — 
(a) the Industrial Finance Corporation of India;  
(b) any Financial Corporation established under section 3, or any Joint Financial 
Corporation established under section 3A, of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951            
(63 of 1951);  
(c) the Deposit Insurance Corporation;  
5[(d) the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development;]  
(e) the Unit Trust of India;  
(f) the Industrial Development Bank of India;  
6[(fa) the Small In dustries Development Bank of India established under sec tion 3 of the 
Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989  (39 of 1989) ;] 
7[(ff) the National Housing Bank;]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 66 of 1980,  s. 17,  for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 21 -7-1980).  
2. The words in brackets shall stand omitted  (date to be notified) by Act  62 of 1968, s . 41. 
3. Clause ( vi) omitted by Act 45 of 2007, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2006).  
4. Clause ( vii) omitted by Act 66 of 1980, s. 18 (w.e.f. 21 -7-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 61 of 1981, s. 61 and the Second Schedule , for sub -clause ( d) (w.e.f. 2 -7-1982).  
6. Ins. by Act 39 of 1989 , s. 53 and the Second Schedule  (w.e.f. 7 -3-1990).  
7. Ins. by Act 53 of 1987, s. 56 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -7-1988).  16 
 (g) any other financial institution  1[(other than a banking company)], being an 
establishment in public sector, which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gaze tte, specify, having regard to — 
(i) its capital structure;  
(ii) its objectives and the nature of its activities;  
(iii) the  nature and extent of financial assistance or any concession given to it by 
the Government; and  
(iv) any other relevant factor;  
2*   *   *   *  *; 
(xi) employees employed by inland water transport establishments operating on routes 
passing through any othe r country.  
33. [ Act to apply to certain pending disputes regarding payment of bonus .]—Rep. by the Payment 
of Bonus (Amendment) Act , 1976  (23 of 1976), s. 23 (w.e.f . 25-9-1975).  
3[34. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act .—Subject to the provisions of 
section 31 A, the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in the terms of any award, 
agreement, settlement or contract of service.]  
35. Saving .—Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions of the Coal 
Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948  (46 of 1948) , or of any scheme made 
thereunder.  
36. Power of exemption .—If the appropriate Government, having regard to the financial position 
and other relevant circumstances of any establishment or class of esta blishment, is of opinion that it  
will not be in public interest to apply all or any of the provisions of this Act the reto, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt for such period as may be specified therein and subject to 
such conditions as it may think fit to impose, such establishment or class of establishment s from all or 
any of the provisions of this Act. 
37. [Power to remove difficulties ].—Rep. by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment)  
Act, 1976  (23 of 1976), s. 23 (w.e.f. 25-9-1975).  
38. Power to make rules .—4[(1) The Central Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, by notification  in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act.]  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provi de for— 
(a) the authority for granting permission under the proviso to sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( 1) of 
section 2 ; 
(b) the preparation of registers, records and other documents and the form and manner in 
which such registers, records and documents may b e maintained under section 26 ; 
(c) the powers which may be exercised by an Inspector under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 27 ; 
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be a fter it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in 
one session  5[or in two or more successive sessions], and if before the expiry of the 
session  6[immediately following the s ession or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 18 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Clause ( x) omitted by Act 23 of 1976, s.  20 (w.e.f . 25-9-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for section 34 ( w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 2016, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 24, for “or in two successive sessions” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
6. Subs. by s. 2 4, ibid., for “in which it is so laid or the session immediately following” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  17 
 in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case m ay be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
39. Application of certain law not barred .—Save as otherwise expressly provided, the 
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes in force in a State.  
40. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Payment of  Bonus O rdinance,  1965  (3 of 1965), is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the  29th 
May,  1965.  
  18 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 4 ( a)] 
COMPUTATION OF GROSS PROFITS  
Accounting Year ending  ...... 
 
Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of  
main items  Remarks  
2[1. Net Profit , as show in the Profit and 
Loss Account after making usual and 
necessary provisions.  Rs. Rs.  
2. Add back  provision for:     
(a) Bonus to employees.     
(b) Depreciation.     
(c) Development Rebate Reserve .   See foot-note (1)  
(d) Any other reserves.    See foot-note (1)  
Total of Item No. 2      .         .             .  Rs.   
3. Add back  also:    See foot-note (1)  
(a) Bonus paid to employees in respect 
of previous accounting years.    See foot-note (1)  
(b) The amount debited in respect of 
gratuity paid or payable to 
employees in excess of the 
aggregate of —    
(i) the amount, if any, paid to, or 
provided for payment to, an 
approved gratuity fund; and    
(ii) the amount actually paid to 
employees on their retirement 
or on termination of their 
employment for any reason .    
(c) Donation s in excess of the amount 
admissible for income -tax.    
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 19 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Where the profit subject to taxation is shown in the Profit and Loss Account and the provision  made for taxes on income 
is shown, the actual provision for taxes on income shall be deducted from the profit.  19 
 Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of main 
items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
 (d) Capital expenditure (other 
than capital expenditure on 
scientific research which is 
allowed as a deduction under 
any law for the time being in 
force relating to direct taxes) 
and capital losses (other than 
losses on sale of capital 
assets on which depreciation 
has been allowed for 
income -tax).   See foot-note (1) 
(e) Any amount certified by the 
Reserve Bank of India in 
terms of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 34A of the Banking 
Regulation  Act, 1949           
(10 of 1949).     
(f) Losses of, or expenditure 
relating to, any business 
situated outside India.     
Total of Item No. 3 .     .    .       .  Rs.   
4. Add also  income, profits or gains 
(if any) credited directly to 
published or disclosed reserves, 
other than —    
(i) capital receipts and capital 
profits (including profits on 
the sale of capital asse ts on 
which depreciation has not 
been allowed for income -
tax);    
(ii) profits of, and receipts 
relating to, any business 
situated outside India;     
(iii) income of foreign banking 
companies from investment 
outside India.     
Net total of Item No. 4 .  .  .  .   .     Rs.   
5. Total of Item Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4   Rs. 
   
  20 
 Item 
No.  Particulars   Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of  
main items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
6. Deduct :    
(a) Capital receipts and capital 
profits (other than profits on 
the sale of assets on which 
depreciation has been 
allowed for income -tax).   See foot-note (2)  
(b) Profits of, and receipts 
relating to, any business 
situated outside India.    See foot -note (2) 
(c) Income of foreign banking 
companies from investments 
outside India.    See foot-note (2) 
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any ) 
debited directly to published 
or disclosed reserves, other 
than—    
(i) capital expenditure and 
capital losses (other 
than losses on sale of 
capital assets on which 
depreciation has not 
been  allowed for 
income -tax);    
(ii) losses of any business 
situated outside India.     
(e) In the ca se of foreign banking 
companies proportionate 
administrative  (overhead) 
expenses of Head Office 
allocable to Indian business .   See foot-note (3)  
(f) Refund of any excess direct 
tax paid for previous 
accounting years and excess 
provision, if any, of previous 
accounting years, relating to 
bonus, depreciation, or 
development rebate, if 
written back.    See foot-note (2)  
(g) Cash subsidy, if any, given by 
the Government or by any body 
corporate established by any 
law for the time being in force 
or by any other agency through 
budgetary  grants, whether given 
directly o r through any agency 
for specified purposes and the 
proceed s of which are reserved 
for such purposes.    See foot-note (2)  
Total of Item No. 6 .     .    .     .     
7. Gross Profits for purposes of 
bonus (Item No. 5 minus Item 
No. 6)   Rs. Rs. 21 
 [Explanation .—In sub -item ( b) of Item 3, “approved gratuity fund ” has the same meaning 
assigned to it in clause ( 5) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act.  
Foot -notes— 
(1) It, and to the extent, charged to Profit and Loss Account.  
(2) If, and to the extent, credited to Profit and Loss Account.  
(3) In the proportion of Indian Gross Profit (Item No. 7) to Total World Gross Profit (as per 
Consolidated Profit and Loss Account adjusted as in Item No.  2 above only).]  22 
 1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE]  
2[See section  4(b)] 
COMPUTATION OF  GROSS PROFITS  
Accounting Year  ending......  
 
Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of  
main items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
1. Net Profit as per Profit and Loss 
Account.     
2. Add back  provision for:     
(a) Bonus to employees.     
(b) Depreciation.     
(c) Direct taxes, including the 
provision (if Any) for previous 
accounting years.     
3[(d) development 
rebate /Investment 
allowance /development 
allowance  reserve .]   See foot-note (1)  
(e) Any other reserves.    See foot-note (1) 
 Total of Item No. 2 .  .    .      .   .  Rs.   
3. Add back  also :    
(a) Bonus paid to employees in 
respect of previous accounting 
years.    See foot-note (1)  
4[(aa) The amount debited in 
respect of gratuity paid or 
payable to employees  in 
excess of the aggregate of —    
(i) the amount, if any, paid to, 
or provided for payment to, 
an approved gratuity fund; 
and    
(ii) the amount actually paid to 
employees on their 
retirement or on termination 
of their employment for any 
reason.]     
  
                                                           
1.  The First Schedule renumbered as the Second Schedule by Ac t 66 of 1980, s. 19 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “( See section 4)” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for entry ( d) (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
4. Ins. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  23 
 Ite
m 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of            
main items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
 (b) Donations in excess of the among 
admissible for income -tax.    
(c) Any annuity due, or commuted 
value of any annuity paid, under 
the provisions of section 280D of 
the Income -tax Act during the 
accounting year.     
(d) Capital expenditure (other than 
capital expenditure on scientific 
research which is allowed as a 
deduction under any law for the 
time being in force relating to 
direct taxes) and capital losses 
(other than losses on sale of 
capital assets on which 
deprec iation has been allowed for 
income -tax or agricultural              
income -tax).   See foot-note ( 1) 
(e) Losses of, or expenditure relating 
to, any business situated outside 
India.     
 Total of Item No. 3     .           .         .  Rs.   
4. Add also  Income, profits or gains (if 
any) credited di rectly to reserves, 
other than —    
 (i) capital receipts and capital profits 
(including profits on the sale of 
capital assets on which 
depreciation has not been allowed 
for income -tax or agricultural 
income -tax);    
(ii) profits of, and receipts relating to, 
any business situated outside 
India;     
(iii) income of foreign concerns from 
investments outside India.     
 Net total of Item No. 4 .      .    .      . Rs.   
5. Total of Item Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 .    .  . Rs.   
 
  24 
 Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of  
main items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
6. Deduct  :    
(a) Capital receipts and capital 
profits (other than profits on 
the sale of assets on which 
depreciation has been allowed 
for income -tax or agricultural            
income -tax).   See foot-note ( 2) 
(b) Profits of, and receipts relating 
to, any business situated 
outside India.    See foot-note ( 2) 
(c) Income of foreign concerns 
from investment outside India.    See foot-note ( 2) 
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any ) 
debited di rectly to reserves, 
other than —    
(i) capital expenditure and 
capital losses (other than 
losses on sale of capital 
assets on which 
depreciation has not been 
allowed for income -tax or 
agricultural income -tax);    
(ii) losses of any business 
situated outside India.     
(e) In the case of foreign concerns 
proportionate administrative 
(overhead) expenses of Head 
Office allocable to Indian 
business .   See foot-note ( 3) 
(f) Refund of any direct tax paid 
for previous accounting years 
and excess provision, if any, of 
previous accounting years 
relating to bonus, depreciation, 
taxation or development rebate 
or development allowance, if 
written back.    See foot-note ( 2) 
  25 
 Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of main 
items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
 1[(g) Cash subsidy, if any, given by 
the Government or by any 
body corporate established 
by any law for the time being 
in force or by any other 
agency through budgetary 
grants, whether given 
directly or through any 
agency for specified 
purposes and the proceed s of 
which are reserved for such 
purposes.]     
 Total of Item No. 6 .          .           . Rs.   
7. Gross Profit for purposes of bonus 
(Item No. 5 minus Item No. 6)  Rs.   
2[Explanation .—In sub -item ( aa) of Item 3, “approved gratuity fund ” has the same meaning 
assigned to it in clause ( 5) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act.]  
Foot -notes— 
(1) If, and to the extent, cha rged to Profit and Loss Account.  
(2) If, and to the extent, credited to Profit and Loss Account.  
(3) In the proportion of Indian Gross Profit (Item No.  7) to Total World Gross Profit (as per 
Consolidated  Profit and Loss Account, adjusted as in Item No. 2 above only).   
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 26, for sub -item ( g) (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
2. Explanation  inserted by s. 26, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  26 
 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE ] 
[See section  6(d)] 
 
Item 
No. Category of employer  Further sums to be deducted    
(1) (2) (3)   
1. 2[Compan y, other than a banking 
company ]   (i) The dividends payable on its preference 
share capital for the accounting year 
calculated at the actual rate at which such 
dividends are payable;    
  (ii) 8.5 per cent . of its paid up equity share 
capital as at the commencement of the 
accounting year;   
  (iii) 6 per cent . of its reserves shown in its 
balance -sheet as at the commencement of 
the accounting year, including any profits 
carried forward from the previous 
accounting year:    
 Provided  that where the employer is a foreign 
company within the meaning of          
section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956                 
(1 of 1956), the total amount to be deduced 
under this Item shall be 8.5 per cent . on the 
aggregate of the value of the net fixed assets 
and the current assets of the company in 
India after deducting t he amount of its 
current liabilities (other than any amount 
shown as payable by the company  to its 
Head Office whether to wards any advance 
made by the Head Office or otherwise or 
any interest paid by the company to its 
Head Office) in India.   
3[2. Banking  company  (i) The dividends payable on its preference 
share capital for the accounting year 
calculated at the rate at which such 
dividends are payable;   
  (ii) 7.5 per cent. of its paid up equity share 
capital as at the commencement  of the 
accounting year;   
  (iii) 5 per cent. of its reserves shown in its 
balance sheet as at the commencement of 
the accounting year, in cluding any profits 
carried for ward from the previous 
accounting year;   
  
                                                           
1. The Second Schedule renumbered as the Third Schedule by Act 66 of 1980, s. 20 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).   
2.  Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for “Company” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  27 
 Item No.  Category of employer  Further sums to be deducted   
(1) (2) (3)  
  (iv) any sum which , in respect of the account ing 
year, is transferred by it —  
  (a) to a reserve fund under  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 17 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949 (10 of 1949); or   
  (b) to any reserves in India in pursuance of 
any direction or advice given by the  
Reserve Bank of India.   
 
 
  whichever is higher:  
 
  Provided  that where the banking company is a 
foreign company within the meaning of 
section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956              
(1 of 1956), the amount to be deducted 
under this Item shall be the aggregate of —  
  (i) the dividends payable to its preference 
shareholders for the accounting year at the 
rate a t which such dividends are pay able 
on such amount as bears the same 
proportion to its total preference share 
capital as its total working funds in India 
bear to its total world working funds;   
  (ii) 7.5 per cent. of such amount as bears the 
same proportion to its total paid up equity 
share capital as its total working funds in 
India bear to its total world working funds;   
  (iii) 5 per cent. of such amount as bears the 
same proportion to its total  disclosed 
reserves as its working funds in India bear 
to its total world working funds;   
  (iv) any sum which, in respect of the accounting 
year, is deposited by it with the Reserve 
Bank of India under sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( b) of   sub-section ( 2) of section 11 
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 
of 1949), not exceeding the amount 
required under the aforesaid provision to 
be so deposited.]   
3. Corporation  (i)  8.5 per cent. of its paid up  capital as at the 
commencement of the accounting year;   
  (ii)  6 per cent. of its reserve s, if any, shown in 
its balance -sheet as at the commencement 
of the accounting year, including any 
profits carried forward from the previous 
accounting year.   28 
 Item No.  Category of employer  Further sums to be deducted   
(1) (2) (3)  
4. Co-operative society  (i) 8.5 per cent. of the capital invested by such 
society in its establishment as evidenced 
from its books of accounts at the 
commencement of the accounting year;   
  (ii) such sum as has been carried forward in 
respect of the accounting year to a reserve 
fund under any law relating to co -
operative societies for the time being in 
force.   
5. Any other employer not falling 
under any of the aforesaid 
categories.   (iii) 8.5 per cent. of the capital invested by him 
in his establishment as evidence d from his 
books of accounts at the commencement 
of the  accounting year:   
  Provided  that where such employer  is a person 
to whom Chapter XXIIA of the              
Income -tax Act applies, the annuity deposit 
payable by him under the provisions of that 
Chapter during the accounting year shall 
also be deducted:   
  Provided  further that where such employer is a 
firm, an amount equal to  25 per cent. of the 
gross profits  derived by it from the 
establishment in respect of the accounting 
year after deducting depreciation in 
accordance with the provisions of clause 
(a) of section 6 by way of remuneration to 
all the partners taking part in the conduct of 
business of the estab lishment shall also be 
deducted, but where the partnership 
agreement, whether oral or written, 
provides for the payment  of remune ration 
to any such partner,  and—  
  (i) the total remuneration pay able to all such 
partners is  less than the said 25 per 
cent. , the amount payable, subject  to a 
maximum of  forty -eight  thousand rupees 
to each such  partner; or   
  (ii) the total remuneration pay able to all such 
partners is  higher than the said 25  per cent. , 
such percentage, or  a sum calculated at the 
rate of forty -eight thousand rupe es to each 
such partner, which ever is less, shall be 
deducted  under this proviso:   
  29 
 Item No.  Category of employer  Further sums to be deducted   
(1) (2) (3)  
  Provided  also that where such employer  is an 
individu al or a Hindu undivided  family ,—  
  (i) an amount equal to 25 per  cent. of the 
gross profits  derived by such employer  
from the establishment in  respect of the 
accounting  year after deducting 
depreciation in accordance  with the 
provisions of  clause ( a) of section 6; or   
  (ii) forty -eight thousand  rupees,  
 
  whichever is less, by way of remuneration to 
such employer, shall also  be deducted.   
6. Any employer falling under Item  No. 
1 of Item No. 3 or Item No.  4 or 
Item No. 5 and being a  licensee 
within the meaning of 
the Electricity (Supply) Act, 
1948                (54 of 1948) . In addition to the sums deductible  under any 
of the aforesaid Items, such  sums as are 
required to be appropriated  by the 
licensee in respect of the  accounting 
year to a reserve under the  Sixth 
Schedule to that Act shall also  be 
deducted.   
Explanation. —The expression “reserves ” occurring in column ( 3) against Item Nos.  1[1(iii), 2(iii) 
and 3(ii)] shall not include any amou nt set apart for the purpose of — 
(i) payment  of any direct tax which, according to the balance -sheet, would be payable;  
(ii) meeting any depreciation admissible in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of 
section  6; 
(iii) payment of dividends which have been declared,  
but shall include — 
(a) any amount, over and above the amount referred to in clause ( i) of this  Explanation , set 
apart as specific reserve for purpose of payment of any direct tax; and  
(b) any amount set apart for  meeting any depreciation in excess of the amount admissible in 
accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of section  6. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 20, for “1( iii) and 3 (ii)” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  30 
 1[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See sections 15 and 16 ) 
In this Schedule, the t otal amount of bonus equal to 8 . 33 per  cent.  of the annual salary or wage 
payable to all the e mployees is assumed to be Rs. 1,  04, 167 . Accordingly, the maximum bonus to 
which all the employees are entitled to be paid (twenty per cent . of the annual salary or wage of al l 
the employees) would be Rs. 2, 50, 000 . 
 
Year  Amount equal To sixty per  
cent. or sixty -seven               
per cent., as the case may 
be, o f available surplus 
allocable as bonus Amount 
payable as 
bonus  Set on or set off of 
the year carried 
forward  Total set on or set off  
carried forward  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)   
  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs.   of (year)  
1 1,04,167  1,04,167**  Nil Nil   
2 6,35,000  2,50,000*  Set on  
2,50,000*  Set on  
2,50,000*  (2) 
3 2,20,000  2,50,000* 
(inclusive of 
30,000 from 
year-2) Nil Set on  
2, 20,000  (2) 
4 3,75,000  2,50,000*  Set on  
1,25,000  Set on  
2,20,000  
1,25,000   (2)  
 (4) 
5 1,40,000  2,50,000* 
(inclusive of 
1,10,000 from 
year-2) Nil Set on  
1,10,000  
1,25,000   (2)  
 (4) 
6 3,10,000  2,50,000*  Set on  
60,000  Set on  
Nil+ (2) 
        1,25,000  (4) 
        60,000  (6) 
7 1,00,000  2,50,000* 
(inclusive of 
1,25,000 from 
year-4 and 
25,000 from 
year-6) Nil Set on  
35,000  (6) 
8 Nil 
(due to loss)  1,04,167** 
(inclusive of 
35,000 from 
year-6) Set off  
69,167  Set off  
69,167  (8) 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 21, for the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  31 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)   
9 10,000  1,04,167**  Set off  
94,167  Set off  
69,167  
94,167  (8) 
(9) 
10 2,15,000  1,04,167** 
(after setting  
off 69,167 
from year -8 
and 41,666 
from year -9) Nil Set off  
52,501  (9) 
Notes— 
* Maximum  
+ The balance of Rs. 1,10,000 set on from year -2 lapses.  
**Minimum. ] 
 
--------------------------The Railways (Employment of Members of the Armed Forces) Act, 1965--------------------------
1 THE RAILWAYS (EMPLOYMENT OF MEMBERS OF  THE ARMED FORCES) ACT, 1965  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Interpretation.  
3. Employment of members of Armed Forces of the Union to assist a railway administration in 
connection with the service of a railway . 
4. Employment of members of Armed Forces of the Union to replace railway administration in 
working a railway . 
5. Repeal and saving.  
 
  2 THE RAILWAYS (EMPLOYMENT OF MEMBERS OF  THE ARMED FORCES) ACT, 1965  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1965  
[3rd December , 1965 .] 
An Act to make certain provisions relating to the employment of members of the Armed Forces 
of the Union in the working and management of railways.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of th e Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Railways (Employment of Members of the 
Armed Forces) Act, 1965.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India . 
 2. Interpretation. —Words and expressions used in this Act and defined in the Indian Railways Act, 
1890(9 of 1890), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Employment of members of Armed Forces of the Union to assist a railway administration in 
connection with the service of a railway. —(1) When any member of t he Armed Forces of the Union is 
employed to assist a railway administration in connection with the service of a railway, then, whether 
such employment was before or is after the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any provision of the Indian Railways Act, 1890(9 of 1890), or of the rules made thereunder, 
which confers a power, status or immunity, or imposes a duty or liability, upon a railway servant, in 
connection with the working , use, management and maintenance of railways, shall be construed as 
conferri ng the same power, status or immunity or imposing the same duty or liability, as the case may 
be, upon such member of the Armed Forces of the Union when so employed;  
(b) the employment of a member of the Armed Forces of the Union, in addition to or in the place 
of any railway servant, shall not affect any liability that would have attached to the railway 
administration had such member been a railway servant.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed as making applicable to the members of the Armed 
Forces of the Union employed to assist a railway administration the provisions of Chapter VIA of the 
Indian Railways Act, 1890(9 of 1890), or as derogating from any provision of a law regulating the 
governance, control and discipline of the members of the A rmed Forces of the Union.  
4. Employment of members of Armed Forces of the Union to replace railway administration in 
working a railway. —If at any time the whole of the working , management and maintenance of a 
railway, or of a specific portion or section of a railway, is assumed by the Armed Forces of the Union, the 
Central Government may notify the fact of such assumption in the Official Gazette, and thereupon, so 
long as such a ssumption continues, the Indian Railways Act, 1890(9 of 1890), shall cease to be applicable 
to the Railway or the portion or section of the Railway concerned.  
5. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Railways (Employment of Members of the Armed Forces) 
Ordinance, 196 5 (Ord. 4 of 1965) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 29th day of 
September, 1965.  
 
--------------------------The Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1965--------------------------
1 
 THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT AND MISC ELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)  
ACT,  1965  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. [Repealed .] 
8. Exemption from tax in certain cases of undisclosed income invested in National Defence Gold 
Bonds, 1980.  
9. Repeal and saving.  
 
  2 
 THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT AND MISC ELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)  
ACT,  1965  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1965  
[4th December,  1965.]  
An Act further to amend the Income -tax Act, 1961, the Estate Duty Act, 1953, the Wealth -tax 
Act, 1957, the Gift -tax Act, 1958 and to provide for exemption from tax in certain cases of 
undisclosed income invested in National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscell aneous 
Provisions) Act, 1965.  
 1*                                 *                                   *                                    *                                         *  
8. Exemption from tax in certain cases of undisclosed income invested in National Defence Gold 
Bonds, 198 0.—(1) Where a person who has  acquired any gold out of his income whic h has not been 
disclosed by him for the purposes of the Indian Income -tax Ac t, 1922  (11 of 1922) , or the Income -tax 
Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) , or the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940 (15 of 1940) , or the  Business Profits Tax Act, 
1947 (21 of 1947) , or the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963  (14 of 1963) , or the Companies (Profits) Surtax  
Act, 1 964  (7 of 1964),  tenders such gold as subscription for the National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980, 
prior to the  detection of such income by the Income -tax Officer or the seizure of such gold under any law 
for the time being in force, such income shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the said Acts, not be 
included in his income, profits or gains chargeable to  tax under the said Acts in an assessment or re-
assessment for any assessment year made under the said Acts on or after the 20th day of October, 1965.  
(2) In computing the net wealth of a person under the Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957) , the value of 
the assets represented by the income, which  under sub -section ( 1) is not includible in his income, profits 
or gains, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the said Act, not be taken into account in an 
assessment or re -assessment for any assessment yea r made under the said Act on or after the 20th day of 
October, 1965.  
(3) (a) The name of the pers on subscribing to the National D efence Gold Bonds, 1980, and any 
particulars relating to the Bonds subscribed to by him, shall be treated  as confidential, and , 
notwith standing anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no court shall be entitled to 
require any public servant to disclose the name of such person or any such particulars or to give any 
evidence in respect thereof.  
(b) No public ser vant shall disclose the name of the person subscribing to the National Defence Gold 
Bonds, 1980 or any particulars relating to the Bonds subscribed to by him, except to an officer employed 
in the execution of an y of the Acts mentioned in sub -section ( 1) or the Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957) 
or to any officer appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or the Central Board of 
Direct Taxes (constituted under the Cent ral Boards of Revenue Act, 1963  (54 of 1963) to audit                 
income -tax receipts or refunds.  
(4) In this section ,—  
(a) “gold” means gold, including its alloy, whether virgin, melted, re -melted, wrought or 
unwrought, in any shape or form, and includes any gold coin (whether legal tender or not), any 
ornament and any other article of gold;  
(b) “public servant ” includes an officer or othe r employee of the Reserve Bank of India, the State 
Bank of India or any subsidiary bank of the State Bank of India.  
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 7 rep.  by Act, 56 of 1974 , s. 2 and the First Schedule   (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
 3 
 9. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Taxation Laws (Amendment and Miscellaneou s Provisions) 
Ordinance, 1965 (5 of 1965) is  hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 19th day of 
October, 1965.  
--------------------------The Union Territories (Direct Election of the House of the People) Act, 1965--------------------------
1 
 THE UNION TERRITORIES (DIRECT ELECTION TO  THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
ACT, 1965  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Direct election to fill the seats in the House of the People allotted to certain Union territories . 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. Provision as to sitting member . 
 
 
  2 
 THE UNION TERRITORIES (DIRECT ELECTION TO  THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE) 
ACT, 1965  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1965  
[22nd December,  1965 .] 
An Act to provide for direct election in certain Union territories for filling the seats allotted to 
them in the House of the People and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be calle d the Union Territories (Direct Election to the House          
of the People) Act, 1965.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act — 
(a) “parliamentary constituency ” has the same meaning as in the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950  (43 of 1950);  
(b) “sitting member ” means a person who immediately before the commencement of this Act 
is a member of the House of the People;  
(c) “Union territory ” means any of the Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
1[Lakshadweep] and Dadra and Nagar Haveli . 
3. Direct election to fill the seats in the House of the People allotted to certain Union 
territories .—At the next general election to the House of the People and thereafter, the seats allotted 
under section 3 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) to the Union territories in 
the House of the People shall be seats to be filled by persons chosen by direct election and for that 
purpose each Union territory shall form one parliamentary constituency . 
2*                                      *                                *                                         *                                  *  
6. Provision as to sitting member .—The sitting member representing each Union territory shall 
continue to represent that Union territory until the dissolution of the present House of the People and 
if before such dissolution the seat allotted to a Union territory in the House of the People becomes 
vacant it shall be filled by a person nominated by the President and that person shall represent the 
Union territory in the present House of the People until its dissolution.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Aminidivi  Islands (Alteration of Name) Adaptation of Laws Order, 1974          
(w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
2.  Section s 4 and 5 rep. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 2 and  The First  Schedule (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
--------------------------The Warehousing Corporations (Supplementary) Act, 1965--------------------------
1 
 THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS (SUPPLEMENTARY) ACT, 1965  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, application and commencement . 
2. Application of the Act with respect to notified commodities . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE WAREHOUSING CORPORATIONS (SUPPLEMENTARY) ACT, 1965  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1965  
[22nd September,  1965.]  
An Act to supplement the provisions of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 196 2. 
WHEREAS , in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, resolutions have been 
passed by the Legislatures of certain State to the effect that storage of commodities other than those 
covered by the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (58 of 1962), in warehouse s run by the 
corpo ration s established under that Act, shall be regulated in those States by Parliament by law.  
AND WHEREAS , in consequence thereof it is necessary to supplement the provisions of the said 
Warehousing Corporations Act for the purposes hereinafter appearing ; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India as follow s:— 
1. Short title, application and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Warehousing 
Corporations (Supplementary) Act, 1965.  
(2) It shall apply to the State specified in the Schedule:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add the name 
of any other State to the Schedule in respect whereof resolutions have been passed by the Legislatures 
of those States adopting this Act under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution in respect of the 
storage of commodities other than those covered by the Warehousing Corporations                          
Act, 1962 (58 of 1962), and on the issue of any such notification the States so added shall be deem to 
be States specified in the Schedule within the meaning of this sub -section.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1, as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Application of the Act wit h respect to notified commodities. —The Warehousing Corporations 
Act, 1962 (58 of 1962), shall, in its application to the States for the time being specified in the 
Schedule, have effect as if in clause ( e) of section 2 of that Act the words and figures “be ing a 
commodity wi th respect to which Parliament has power to make laws by virtue of entry 33 in List III 
in the Seventh Schedule to Constitution” had been omitted.  
  
                                                           
1. 27 th November, 1965, vide notific ation No. G.S.R. 1713, dated 17 th, Nevember, 1965, see Gazette of India, Part II,        
sec. 3( i). 3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 1( 2)] 
1. Andhra Pradesh.  
1[2. 2[Assam, as it existed immediately before the 21 st January, 1972.] ] 
3[3.] Gujarat.  
4[3A. Haryana.]  
3[4.] Kerala.  
3[5.] 5[Tamil Nadu. ] 
6[5A. Maharashtra. ] 
7[5B. Meghalaya. ] 
3[6.] 8[Karnataka. ] 
9[7. Orissa. ] 
10[8.] 11[Punjab, as it existed immediately before the 1 st day of November, 1966. ] 
10[9.] Rajasthan.  
10[10.] Uttar Pradesh.  
10[11.] West Bengal.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 1283, dated 17 -8-1967.  
2. Subs. by the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1974 .                   
3. “2” to “5” r e-numbered as “3” to “6”  by G.S.R. 1283, dated 17 -8-1967.  
4. Ins. by G.S.R. 1003, dated 31 -7-1978.  
5. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1970 .                           
6. Ins. by G.S.R. 1019, dated 31-5-1971.  
7. Ins. by G.S.R. 1200, dated 20 -9-1978.  
8. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1974 . 
9. Ins. by G.S.R. 1008, dated 21 -5-1968.  
10. “6” to “9” re -numbered as “8” to “11”, ibid. 
11. Subs. by  the Punjab Reorganisation and Delhi High Court (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1968.  
