--------------------------The Asian Development Bank Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
  THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  ACT,  1966   
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Payments to Bank . 
4. Reserve Bank to be depository for Bank . 
5. Conferment of status and certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on Bank and conferment 
of certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on its officers and employees . 
6. Power to make rules . 
7. Notifications issued under section 5 and rules made under section 6 to be laid before Parliament . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE  ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  ACT,  1966  
ACT NO.18 OF 1966  
[29th May , 1966 .] 
An Act to implement the international agreement for the establishment and operation of the 
Asian Development Bank and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called  the Asian Development 
Bank Act,  1966.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into f orce on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “Agreement ” means the Agreement for the establishment and operation of the international 
body known as the Asian Development Bank;  
(b) “Bank ” means the Asian Development Bank established under the Agreement.  
3. Payments to Bank .—(1) There shall be paid out of the Con solidated Fund of India, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, all such sums as may, from time to time, be 
required for the purpose of paying, — 
(a) the subscriptions payable by the Central Government to the Bank under paragraphs  1, 2 and 3 
of Article 5 of the Agreement;  
(b) any commission, fees or other charges payable by the Central Government to the Bank under 
Article 16 of the Agreement;  
(c) any sums payable by the Central Government to the Bank under paragraph 1 of Article 25  of 
the Agreement . 
(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks fit so to do, create and issue to the Bank, in such form as 
it thinks fit, any such non -interest bearing and non -negotiable notes or other obligations as are provided 
for by paragraph 3 of Art icle 6 of the Agreement . 
4. Reserve Bank  to be depository for Bank .—The Reserve Bank of India shall be the depository of 
the Indian currency holdings of the Bank . 
5. Conferment of status and certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on Bank and 
conferm ent of certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on its officers and                          
employees .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, the provisions of 
the Agreement set out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India:  
 
Provided that nothing in Article 56 of the Agreement shall be construed as — 
                                                           
1. 19 th, December , 1966 , vide notification No. S.O. 3803 (E), dated 8 th, December,  1966, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary ,  
Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
 3 
 (a) entitling the Bank to import into India goods free of any duty of customs without any 
restriction on their subsequent sale therein; or  
(b) conferring  on the Bank any exemption from duties or taxes which from part of the price of 
goods sold; or  
(c) conferring on the Bank any exemption from duties or taxes which are in fact no more than 
charges for services rendered . 
(2) The Central Government may, by no tification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in 
conformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out 
therein . 
6. Power to make rules .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act . 
 7. Notifications issued under section 5 and rules made under section 6 to be laid before 
Parliament .—Every notification issued under sub - section ( 2) of section 5 and every rule made under 
section 6 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is issued or made before each House of Parliament while 
it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised  in one session or  1[in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of  the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or, as the 
case may be, in the rule, or both Houses agree that the notification or rule should not be iss ued or made, 
the notification or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so , however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously don e under that notification or rule . 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule,  for “in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid”  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1983).  
 4 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
PROVISIONS OF THE AGREEMENT WHICH SHALL HAVE FORCE OF LAW  
CHAPTER VIII  
STATUS , IMMUNITIES , EXEMPTIONS  AND PRIVILEGES  
ARTICLE 48  
PURPOSE  OF CHAPTER  
To enable the Bank effectively to fulfil  its purpose and carry out the functions entrusted to it, the 
status, immunities, exemptions and privileges set forth in this Chapter shall be accorded to the Bank in the 
territory of each member . 
ARTICLE 49  
LEGAL  STATUS  
The Bank shall posses full juridic al personality and, in particular, full capacity:  
(i) to contract;  
(ii) to acquire, and dispose of, immovable and movable property; and  
(iii) to institute legal proceedings . 
ARTICLE 50  
IMMUNITY FROM JUDICIAL  PROCEEDINGS  
1. The Bank shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal process, except in c ases arising out of or 
in connex ion with the exercise of its powers to borrow money, to guarantee obligations, or to buy and sell 
or underwrite the sale of securities, in which cases actions may be brought again st the Bank in a court of 
competent jurisdiction in the territory of a country in which the Bank has its principal or a branch office, 
or has appointed an agent for the purpose of accepting service or notice of process, or has issued or 
guaranteed securiti es. 
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article, no action shall be brought against the 
Bank by any member, or by any agency or instrumentality of a member, or by any entity or person 
directly or indirectly acting for or deriving claim s from a member or from any agency or instrumentality 
of a member . Members shall have recourse to such special procedures for the settlement of controversies 
between the Bank and its members as may be prescribed in the Agreement, in the by -laws and regulat ions 
of the Bank, or in contracts entered into with the Bank . 
3. Property and assets of the Bank shall, whosesoever located and by whom soever held, be immune 
from all forms of seizure, attachment or execution before the delivery of final judgment against the Bank . 
ARTICLE 51  
IMMUNITY  OF ASSETS  
Property and assets of the Bank, whosesoever located and by whomsoever held, shall be immune 
from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation or any other form of taking or foreclosure by 
executive or legislati ve action . 
 5 
 ARTICLE 52  
 IMMUNITY OF  ARCHIVES  
The archives of the Bank and, in general, all documents belonging to it, or held by it, shall be 
inviolable, wherever located . 
ARTICLE 53  
FREEDOM OF  ASSETS FROM  RESTRICTIONS  
To the extent necessary to carry o ut the purpose and functions of the Bank effectively, and subject to 
the provisions of this Agreement, all property and assets of the Bank shall be free from restrictions 
regulations, controls and moratoria of any nature . 
ARTICLE 54   
PRIVILEGE FOR  COMMUNI CATIONS  
Official communications of the Bank shall be accorded by each member treatment not less favo urable 
than that it accords to the official communications of any other member . 
ARTICLE 55   
IMMUNITIES  AND PRIVILEGES  OF BANK PERSONNEL  
All Governors, Directors, alternates, officers and employees of the Bank, including experts 
performing missions for the Bank:  
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts performed by them in their official 
capacity, except when the Bank waives the immunit y; 
(ii) where they are not local citizens or nationals, shall be accorded the same immunities from 
immigration restrictions, alien registration requirements and national service obligations, and the 
same facilities as regards exchange regulations, as are a ccorded by members to the representatives, 
officials and employees of comparable rank of other members; and  
(iii) shall be granted the same treatment in respect of travelling facilities as is accorded by 
members to representatives, officials and employees of comparable rank of other members . 
ARTICLE 56  
EXEMPTION  FROM  TAXATION  
1.The Bank, its assets, property, income and its operations and transactions, shall be exempt from all 
taxation and from all customs duties . The Bank shall also be exempt from any obl igation for the payment, 
withholding or collection of any tax or duty . 
2. No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emoluments paid by the Bank to Directors, 
alternates, officers or employees of the Bank, including experts performing missions  for the Bank, except 
where a member deposits with its instrument of ratification or acceptance a declaration that such member 
retains for itself and its political sub -divisions the right to tax salaries and emoluments paid by the Bank 
to citizens or natio nals of such member . 
3. No tax of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or security issued by the Bank, including any 
dividend or interest thereon, by whomsoever held:  6 
 (i) which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is is sued by the     
Bank; or  
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the place or currency in which it is issued, 
made payable or paid, or the location of any office or place of business maintained by the Bank . 
4. No tax of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or security guaranteed by the Bank, including 
any dividend or interest thereon, by whomsoever held:  
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is guaranteed by the 
Bank ; or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the location of any office or place of 
business maintained by the Bank . 
ARTICLE 58  
WAIVER  OF IMMUNIT IES, EXEMPTIONS  AND PRIVILEGES  
The Bank as its discretion may waive any of the privileges, immunities and exemptions conferred 
under this Chapter in any case or instance, in such manner and upon such conditions as it may determine 
to be appropriate in the best interests of the Bank . 
 
 
--------------------------The Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF  
EMPLOYMENT)  ACT, 196 6                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Industrial premises to be licensed.  
4. Licences . 
5. Appeals.  
6. Inspectors.  
7. Powers of Inspectors.  
7A. Inspector not to disclose the source of any complaint, etc.  
8. Cleanliness.  
9. Ventilation.  
10. Overcrowding.  
11. Drinking water.  
12. Latrines and urinals.  
13. Washing facilities.  
14. Creches.  
15. F irst aid.  
16. Canteens.  
17. Working hours.  
18. Wages for overtime work.  
19. Interval for rest.  
20. Spread over.  
21. Weekly holidays.  
22. Notice of periods of work.  
23. Hours of work to correspond with notice under section 22.  
24. Prohibition of employment of children.  
25. Prohibition of employment of women or young persons during certain hours.  
26. Annual leave with wages.  
27. Wages during leave period.  
28. Application of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 to industrial premises.  
29. Special provisions.  
30. Onu s as to age.  
31. Notice of dismissal.  2 
 SECTIONS  
32. Penalty for obstructing Inspector.  
33. General penalty for offence.  
34. Offences by companies.  
35. Indemnity.  
36. Cognizance of offences.  
37. Application of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act,  1946 and the Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1961 . 
38. Certain provisions not to apply to industrial premises.  
39. Application of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.  
40. Effect of law s and agreements inconsistent with this Act.  
41. Power to exempt.  
42. Powers of Central Government to give directions.  
43. Act not to apply to self -employed persons in private dwelling houses.  
44. Power to make rules.  
  3 
 THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF  
EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1966  
[30th November, 1966 .] 
An Act to provide for the welfare of the workers in beedi and cigar establishments and to 
regulate the conditions of their work and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Beedi and Cigar 
Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such  date1 as the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed by the State Government for different 
areas and for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “adult ” means a person who has completed eighteen years of age;  
(b) “child ” means a person who has not completed fourteen years of age;  
(c) “competent authority ” means any authority authorised  by the State Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette to perform all or any of the functions of the competent authority 
under this Act and for such areas as may be specified therein;  
(d) “contractor ” means a person who, in relation to a manufact uring process, undertakes to 
produce a given result by executing the work through contract labour or who engages labour for any 
manufacturing process in a private dwelling house and includes a  sub-contractor, agent, munshi,  
thekedar ; 
(e) “contract labour ” means any person engaged or employed in any premises by or through 
contractor, with or without the knowledge of the employer, in any manufacturing process;  
(f) “employee ” means a person employed directly or through any agency, whether for wages or 
not, in any establishments  2[or godown] to do any work s skilled, unskilled, manual or clerical, and 
includes — 
(i) any labour who is given raw materials by an employer or a contractor for being made into 
beedi or cigar or both at h ome (herein after referred to in this Act as “home worker ”), and  
(ii) any person not employed by an employer or a contractor but working with the permission 
of, or under agreement with, the employer or contractor  2[or both];  
(g) “employer ” means, — 
(a) in relation to c ontract labour, the principal employer; and  
(b) in relation to other labour, the person who has the ultimate control over the affairs of any 
establishment or who has, by reason of his advancing money, supplying goods or otherwise, a 
substantial interest in  the control of the affairs of any establishment, and includes any other 
person to whom the affairs of the establishment are entrusted, whether such other person is called 
the managing agent, manager, superintendent or by any other name;  
                                                           
1. 10th February , 1970, vide notification No. IIE/2 -1/70, dated the 9th February , 1970, in respect of section  3, in the State of 
Orissa.  
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 2 ( w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 4 
 (h) “establishment ” means any place or premises including the precincts thereof in which or in 
any part of which any manufacturing process connected with the making of beedi or cigar or both is 
being, or is ordinarily, carried on and includes an industrial premises;  
1[(hh) “godown ” means any warehouse or other place, by whatever name called, used for the 
storage of — 
(i) any article or substance required for any manufacturing process; or  
(ii) beedi or cigar or both;]  
(i) “industrial premises ” means any place or premises (not being a private dwelling house), 
including the precincts thereof, in which or in any part of which any industry or manufacturing 
process connected with the making of beedi or cigar or both is being , or is ordinarily , carried on with 
or without the aid of p ower , 2[and includes a godown attached thereto];  
(j) “Inspector ” means an Inspect or appointed under sub -section  (1) of section 6;  
(k) “manufacturing process ” means any process for, or incidental to, making, finishing or packing 
or otherwise treating any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or 
disposal as beedi or cigar or both;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the State Government under this Act;  
(m) “principal employer ” means a person for whom or on whose behalf any contract labour is 
engaged or employed in an establishment;  
(n) “private dwelling house ” means a house in which persons engaged in the manufacture of 
beedi or cigar or both reside;  
(o) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof;  
(p) “week ” means a period of seven days, beginning at midnight on Saturday;  
(q) “young person ” means a person who has completed fourteen years of age but has not 
completed eighteen years of age.  
3. Industrial premises to be licensed .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no employer shall 
use or allow to be used any place or premises as an industrial premises unless he holds a valid licence 
issued under this Act and no such premises shall be used except in accordance with the terms a nd 
conditions of such licenced . 
4. Licences .—(1) Any person who intends to use or allows to be used any place or premises as 
industrial premises shall make an application in writing to the competent authority, in such form on 
payment of such fees as may be  prescribed, for a licence to use, or allow to be used, such premises as an 
industrial premises.  
(2) The application shall specify the maximum number of employees proposed to be employed at any 
time of the day in the place or premises and shall be accompan ied by a plan of the place or premises 
prepared in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The competent authority shall, in deciding whether to grant or refuse a licence, have regard to the 
following matters: — 
(a) the suitability of the place or premises wh ich is proposed to be used for the manufacture of 
beedi or cigar or both;  
(b) the previous experience of the applicant;   
(c) the financial resources of the applicant including his financial capacity to meet the demands 
arising out of the provisions of the laws for the time being in force relating to welfare of labour;  
(d) whether the application is made  bona  fide on behalf of  the applicant himself or in be nami of 
any other person;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 
2. Added by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 5 
 (e) welfare of the labour  in the locality, the interest of the public generally and such other matters 
as may be prescribed.  
(4) (a) A licence  granted under this section shall not be valid beyond the financial year in which it is 
granted but may be renewed from financial year to financial year.  
(b) An application for the renewal of a licence granted under this Act shall be made at least thirty 
days before the expiry of the period thereof, on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, and where 
such an application has been made, the licence shall be deemed to continue, notwithstanding the expiry of 
the period thereof, until the renewal of the lice nce, or, as the case may be, the rejection of the application 
for the renewal thereof.  
(c) The competent authority shall, in deciding whether to renew a licence or to refuse a renewal 
thereof, have regard to the matters specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The competent authority shall not grant a renew a licence unless it is satisfied that the provisions 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder have been substantially complied with.  
(6) The competent authority may, after giving the holder of a licence an opp ortunity of being heard, 
cancel or suspend any licence granted or renewed under this Act if it appears to it that such licence has 
been obtained by misrepresentation or fraud or that the licensee has contravened or failed to comply with 
any of the provisio ns of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any of the terms or conditions of the 
licence.  
(7) The State Government may issue in writing to a competent authority such directions of a general 
character as that Government may consider necessary in respect  of any matter relating to the grant or 
renewal of licences under this section.  
(8) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, the competent authority may grant or renew 
licences under this Act on such terms and conditions as it may determine and  where the competent 
authority refuses to grant or renew any licence, it shall do so by an order communicated to the applicant, 
giving the reasons in writing for such refusal.  
5. Appeals .—Any person aggrieved by the decision of the competent authority refusing to grant or 
renew a licence or cancelling or suspending a licence may, within such time and on payment of such fees, 
not exceeding twenty rupees, as may be prescribed, appeal to such authority as the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, and such authority may by order 
confirm, modify or reverse any order refusing to grant or renew a licence or cancelling or suspending a 
licence.  
6. Insp ectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such 
of its officers or such officers of any local authority as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this 
Act and may assign to them such local limits as i t may think fit.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint any person to be a 
Chief Inspector who shall exercise the powers of an Inspector throughout the State.  
(3) Every Chief Inspector and Inspector shall be deemed t o be a public servant within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 (45 of 1860).  
7. Powers of Inspectors .—(1) Subject to any rules  made  by the State Government in this behalf, an 
Inspector may, within the local limits for which he is appo inted, — 
(a) make such examination and hold such inquiry as may be necessary for ascertaining whether 
the provisions of this Act have been or are being complied with  in any place or premises:  
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this section to answer any question or to give 
any evidence which may tend to incriminate himself;  
(b) require the production of any prescribed register and any other document relating to the 
manufacture of beedi or cigar or both;  6 
 (c) enter, with such assistants as he thinks fit, at all times any place or premises including the 
residences of employees if he has reasonable grounds for suspecting that any manufacturing process 
is being carried on or is ordinari ly carried on in any such place or premises;  
(d) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(2) If an Inspector has reasonable grounds for suspecting that any manufacturing process is being 
carried on in any establishment in contravention of the prov isions of this Act, he may, after giving due 
notice to the employer or, in the absence of the employer, to the occupier, enter such establishment with 
such assistants, if any, as he may think fit.  
(3) Every employer or occupier shall accord to the Chief In spector or the Inspector, as the case may 
be, all reasonable facilities in the discharge of his duties under this Act.  
1[7A. Inspector not to disclose the source of any complaint, etc. —(1) No Inspector shall disclose 
the source of any complaint made to him  regarding the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No Inspector shall, while making an inspection under this Act in pursuance of a complaint 
received by him, disclose to the employer or contractor concerned or any of his representatives  that the 
inspection is being made in pursuance of a complaint:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any case in which the person who has made the 
complaint has consented to disclose his name.]  
8. Cleanliness .—Every industrial premises shall be kept clean and free from effluvia arising from any 
drain, privy or other nuisance and shall also maintain such standard of cleanliness including                
white washing, colour washing, varnishing or painting, as may  be prescribed.  
9. Ventilation .—(1) For the purpose of preventing injury to the health of the persons working therein, 
every industrial premises shall maintain such standards of lighting, ventilation and temperature, as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) Wherever dust  or fume or other impurity of such a nature and to such an extent as is likely to be 
injurious or offensive to the persons employed in any industrial premises is given off by reason of the 
manufacturing process carried on in such premises, the competent au thority may require the employer to 
take such effective measures as may prevent the inhalation of such dust, fume or other impurity and 
accumulation thereof in any work room.  
10. Overcrowding .—(1) No room in any industrial premises shall be overcrowded to an extent 
injurious to the health of the persons employed therein.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section ( 1), there shall be in any work room of such 
premises at least four and a quarter cubic metr es of space for every person employed therein, and for the 
purposes of this sub -section, no account shall be taken of any spa ce which is more than three met res 
above the level of the floor of the work room.  
11. Drinking water .—(1) The employer shall make in every industrial premises effective 
arrangements to provide and maintain at suitable points conveniently situated for all persons employed 
therein, a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water.  
(2) All such points shall be legibly marked “drinking water ” in a language understood by the majority 
of the persons employed in the industrial premises and no such point s hall be situated within six met res of 
any washing place, urinal or latrine except with the prior approval in wri ting of the competent authority.  
12. Latrines and urinals .—(1) In every industrial premises, sufficient latrine and urinal 
accommodation of such types as may be prescribed shall be provided and shall be so conveniently 
situated as may be accessible to the employees at all times  while they are in the industrial premises:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary to provide separate urinals in industrial premises where less 
than fifty persons are employed or where the latrines are connected to a water -borne sewage system.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 7 
 (2) The St ate Government may specify the number of latrines and urinals which shall be provided in 
any industrial premises in proportion to any number of male and female employees ordinarily employed 
therein, and may provide for such further matters  in respect of sa nitation in the industrial premises 
including obligation of the employees in this regard as it may consider necessary in the interest of the 
health of the persons employed therein.  
13. Washing facilities .—In every industrial premises, where blending or sieving or both of tobacco 
or warming of beedi in hot ovens is carried on, the employer shall provide such washing facilities for the 
use of the employees, as may be prescribed.  
14. Creches .—(1) In every indust rial premises wherein more than  1[thirty] female employees are 
ordinarily employed, there shall be provided and maintained a suitable room or rooms for the use of 
children under the age of six years of such female employees.  
(2) Such rooms shall — 
(a) provide adequate accommodation;  
(b) be adequately lighted and ventilated;  
(c) be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;  
(d) be under the charge of women trained in the care of children and infants.  
(3) The State Government may make rules ,— 
(a) presc ribing the location and the standards in respect of construction, accommodation, 
furniture and other equipment of rooms to be provided under this section ; 
(b) requiring the provision in any industrial premises to which this section applies, of additional 
facilities for the care of children belonging to female employees, including suitable provision of 
facilities for washing and changing their clothing;  
(c) requiring  the provision in any industrial premises of free milk or refreshment or both for such 
children;  
(d) requiring that facilities shall be given in any industrial premises for the mothers of such 
children to feed them at necessary intervals.  
15. First aid .—Every industrial premises shall provide such first aid facilities as may be prescribed.  
16. Canteens .—The State Government may, by rules, require the employer to provide and maintain 
in every industrial premises wherein not less than two hundred and fifty employees are ordinarily 
employed, a canteen for the use of the employees.  
17. Working hours .—No employee shall be required or allowed to work in any industrial premises 
for more than nine hours in any day or for more than forty -eight hours in any week:  
Provided that any adult employee may be allowed to work in such industrial premises for any period 
in excess of the limit fixed under this section subject to the payment of overtime wages if the period of 
work , including overtime work, does not exceed ten ho urs in any day and in the aggregate fifty -four hours 
in any week.  
18. Wages for overtime work .—(1) Where any employee employed in any industrial premises is 
required to work overtime, he shall be entitled in respect of such overtime work, to wages at the rate of 
twice his ordinary rate of wages.  
(2) Where the employees in an industrial premises are paid  on a piece -rate basis, the overtime rate 
shall be calculated, for the purposes of this section, at the time rates which shall be as nearly as possible 
equivalent to the daily average of their full time earnings for the days on which they had actually worked 
during the week immediately preceding the week in which the overtime work has been done.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 4, for “fifty” (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 8 
 1[Explanation. —Where an employee had not worked on any day of th e week immediately preceding 
the week in which the overtime work has been done, any week preceding such week in which he had 
actually worked shall be taken into account in calculating the overtime rate for the purposes of this        
sub-section.]  
(3) For the purposes of this section, “ordinary rates of wages ” means the basic wages plus such 
allowance, including the cash equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessiona l sale to the 
employees of food grains and other articles as the employee is fo r the time being entitled to but does not 
include bonus.  
(4) The cash equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessio nal sale to an employee of 
foodgrains and other articles shall be computed as often as may be prescribed on the basis of the 
maximum quantity of food grains and other articles admissible to a standard family.  
Explanation  I.—“Standard family ” means a family consisting of the employee, his or her spouse and 
two children requiring in all three adult consumption units.  
Explanation  II.—“Adult consumption units ” means the consumption unit of a male above the age of 
fourteen years; and the consumption unit of a female above the age of fourteen years and that of a child 
shall be calculated at the rate of eight -tenths and six -tenths, respecti vely, of one adult consumption unit.  
19. Interval for rest .—The periods of work for employees in an industrial premises each day shall be 
so fixed that no period shall exceed five hours and that no employee shall work for more than five hours 
before he has  had an interval for rest of at least half an hour.  
20. Spread over .—The periods of work of an employee in an industrial premises shall be so arranged 
that inclusive of his intervals for rest under section 19, they shall not spread over more than ten and a half 
hours in any day:  
Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reaso ns to be specified in writing, increase the spread over 
to twelve hours.  
21. Weekly holidays .—(1) Every industrial premises shall remain entirely closed, except for wetting 
of beedi or tobacco leaves, on one day in the week which day shall be specified by the employer in a 
notice exhibited in a conspicuous place in the industrial premises and the day so specified shall not be 
altered by the employer more often than once in three months and except with the previous written 
permission of the Chief Inspector.  
2[Provided that a copy of every such notice shall be sent to the Inspector having jurisdiction over the 
industrial premises within two weeks from the date on which such notice is exhibited in the industrial 
premises.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained  in sub -section ( 1), an employee employed in the said 
premises for wetting of beedi or tobacco leaves on the day on which it remains closed in pursuance of 
sub-section ( 1), shall be allowed a substituted holiday on one of the three days immediately before or after 
the said day.  
(3) For a holiday under this section, an employee shall be paid, notwithstanding any contract to the 
contrary, at the rate equal to the daily average of his total full time earnings for the days on which he had 
worked during the week  immediately preceding the holiday exclusive of any overtime earnings and bonus 
but inclusive of dearness and other allowances.  
Explanation. —The expression “total full time earnings ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
section 27.  
22. Notice of periods of work .—(1) There shall be displayed and correctly maintained in every 
industrial premises a notice of periods of work in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, 
showing clearly for every day the periods during which the empl oyees may be required to work.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 
2. The p roviso added by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 9 
 (2) (a) A copy of the notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be sent in triplicate to the Inspector 
having jurisdiction over the industrial premises within two weeks from the date of the grant of a licence 
for the first time under this Act, in the case of any industrial premises carrying on work at the 
commencement of this Act, and in the case of any industrial premises beginning work after such 
commencement, before the day on which the work is begun in the industrial pre mises.  
(b) Any proposed change in the system of work which will necessitate a change in the notice referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) shall be notified to the Inspector in triplicate before the change is made and except 
with the previous sanction of the Inspec tor, no such change shall be made until one week has elapsed 
since the last change.  
23. Hours of work to correspond with notice under section 22 .—No employee shall be employed 
in any industrial premises otherwise than in accordance with the notice of work displayed in the premises 
under section 22.  
24. Prohibition of employment of children .—No child shall be required or allowed to work in any 
industrial premises.  
25. Prohibition of employment of women or young persons during certain hours .—No woman or 
young  person shall be required or allowed to work in any industrial premises except between 6 a.m.      
and 7 p.m.  
26. Annual leave with wages .—(1) Every employee in an establishment shall be allowed in a 
calendar year leave with wages — 
(i) in the case of an adult, at the rate of one day for every twenty days of work performed by him 
during the previous calendar year;  
(ii) in the case of a young person at the rate of one day for every fifteen days of work performed 
by him during the previous calendar year.  
Explanation.—The leave admissible under this sub -section shall be exclusive of all holidays whether 
occurring during, or at the beginning or at the end of, the period of leave.  
(2) If an employee is discharged or dismissed from service or quits employment during the course of 
the year, he shall be entitled to leave with wages at the rate laid down in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) In calculating leave under this section, any fraction of leave of half a day or more shall be treated 
as one full day ’s leave and any frac tion of less than half a day shall be omitted.  
(4) If any employee does not, in any calendar year take the whole of the leave allowed to him under 
sub-section ( 1), the leave not taken by him shall be added to the leave to be allowed to him in the 
succeedin g calendar year:  
Provided that the total number of days of leave that may be carried forward to a succeeding year shall 
not exceed thirty in the case of an adult or forty in the case of a young person.  
(5) An application of an employee for the whole or any  portion of the leave allowed under              
sub-section ( 1) shall be in writing and ordinarily shall have to be made sufficiently in advance of the day 
on which he wishes the leave to begin.  
(6) If the employment of an employee who is entitled to leav e under sub -section ( 1) is terminated by 
the employer before he has taken the entire leave to which he is entitled, or if having applied for leave, he 
has not been granted such leave, or if the employee quits his employment before he has taken the leave, 
the employer shall pay him the amount payable under section 27 in respect of leave not taken and such 
payment shall be made, where the employment of the employee is terminated by the employer, before the 
expiry of the second working day after such terminati on and where the employee quits his employment, 
on or before the next pay day.  
(7) The leave not availed of by an employee shall not be taken into consideration in computing the 
period of any notice required to be given before discharge or dismissal.  10 
 27. Wages during leave period .—(1) For the leave allowed to him under section 26, an employee 
shall be paid at the rate equal to the daily average of his total full time earnings for the days on which he 
had worked during the month immediately preceding his lea ve exclusive of any overtime earnings and 
bonus but inclusive of dearness and other allowances.  
Explanation I.—In this sub -section, the expression “total full time earnings ” includes the cash 
equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessional sale to employees of foodgrains and other 
articles, as the employee is for the time being entitled to, but does not include bonus.  
Explanation  II.—For the purposes of determining the wages payable to a home worker during leave 
period or for the purpose of payment of maternity benefit to a woman home worker, “day” shall mean any 
period during which such home worker was employed , during a period of twe nty-four hours commencing 
at midnight, for making beedi or cigar or both.  
(2) An employee who has been allowed leave for not less than four days in the case of an adult and 
five days in the case of a young person, shall, before his leave begins, be paid wa ges due for the period of 
the leave allowed.  
28. Application of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 to industrial premises .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936) (hereinafter referred to in this section 
as the said  Act), the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of 
the provisions of the said Act or the rules made thereunder shall apply to all or any class of employees in 
establishment or class of establishments to whic h this Act applies and on such application of the 
provisions of the said Act, an Inspector appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be the Inspector for 
the purposes of the enforcement of such provisions of the said Act within the local limits of his 
jurisdiction.  
(2) The State Government may, by a like notification, cancel or vary any notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1). 
29. Special provisions .—(1) The State Government may permit the wetting or cutting of beedi or 
tobacco leaves by employees outsi de the industrial permises on an application made to it by the employer 
on behalf of such employees.  
(2) The employer shall maintain in the prescribed form a record of the work permitted under         
sub-section ( 1) to be carried on outside the industrial  premises.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no employer shall require or allow any manufacturing 
process connected with the making of beedi or cigar or both to be carried on outside the industrial 
premises:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any labour who is given raw material by an 
employer or a contractor for being made into beedi or cigar or both at home.  
30. Onus as to age .—(1) When any act or omission would, if a person were under a certain age, be 
an offence punis hable under this Act and such person is, in the opinion of the court,  prima facie  under 
such age, the burden shall be on the accused to prove that such person is not under such age.  
(2) A declaration in writing by a medical officer not below the rank of a Civil Assistant Surgeon 
relating to an employee that he has personally examined him and believes him to be under the age stated 
in such declaration, shall, for the purposes of this Act and the rules made thereunder, be admissible as 
evidence of the age of that employee.  
31. Notice of dismissal .—(1) No employer shall dispense with the services of an employee who has 
been employed for a period of six months or more, except for a reasonable cause, and without giving such 
employee at least one month ’s notice or  wages in lieu of such notice:  
Provided that such notice shall not be necessary if the services of such employee are dispensed with 
on a charge of misconduct supported by satisfactory evidence recorded at an inquiry held by the employer 
for the purpose.  11 
 (2) (a) The employee discharged, dismissed or retrenched may appeal to such authority and within 
such time as may be prescribed either on the ground that there was no reasonable cause for dispensing 
with his services or on the ground that he had not been gui lty of misconduct as held by the employer or on 
the ground that such punishment of discharge or dismissal was severe.  
(b) The appellate authority may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to the employer and the 
employee, dismiss the appeal or dire ct the reinstatement of the employee with or without wages for the 
period during which he was kept out of employment or direct payment of compensation without 
reinstatement or grant such other relief as it deems fit in the circumstances of the case.  
1[(2A) The appellate authority shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , when trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examini ng him on oath; and  
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects.]  
(3) The decision of the appellate authority shall be final and binding on both the parties and be given 
effect to within such time as may be specified in the order of the  appellate authority.  
32. Penalty for obstructing Inspector .—Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector or an Inspector in 
the exercise of any powers conferred on him by or under this Act, or fails to produce on demand by the 
Chief Inspector or an Inspector any  register or other document kept in his custody in pursuance of this Act 
or of any rules made thereunder, or conceals or prevents any employee in an industrial premises from 
appearing before or being examined by the Chief Inspector or an Inspector, shall b e punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to  2[six months] which may extend to  3[five thousand rupees], 
or with both.  
33. General penalty for offence .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any person who 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder, or fails to wages or 
compensation in accordance with any order of the appellate authority passed under clause ( b) of          
sub-section ( 2) of section 31, shall, be punishable, for the first offence,  with fine which may extend to two 
hundred and fifty rupees and for a second or any subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than one month or more than six months or with fine which shall not be less than one 
hundred rupees or more than five hundred rupees or with both.  
(2) (a) Any employer who fails to reinstate any employee in accordance with the order of the 
appellate authority passed under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 31, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.  
(b) Any employer, who, after having been convicted under clause ( a), continues, after the date of such 
conviction, to fail to reinstate an employee in accordance with the order mentioned in that clause, shall be 
punishable, for each day of such default, with fine which may extend to twenty rupees.  
(c) Any Court trying an offence punishable under this sub -section may direct that the whole or any 
part of the fine, if realised, shall be paid, by way of compensation, to the person, who, in i ts opinion, has 
been injured by  such failure.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936) , with regard 
to the definition of wages, any compensation required to be paid by an employer under cl ause ( b) of         
sub-section ( 2) of section 31 but not paid by him shall be recoverable as delayed wages under the 
provisions of that Act.  
(4) It shall be no defence in a prosecution of any person for the contravention of the provisions of 
section 3 tha t any manufacturing process connected with the making of beedi or cigar or both was carried 
on by such person himself of by any member of his family or by any other person living with or 
depend ent on such person.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 7 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid.,  for “three months” (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid.,  for “five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 22 -5-1993).  
 12 
 34. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed , was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was com mitted without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager , secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to  be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm, and other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
35. Indemnity .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or ord er made 
thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rule or order made there under.  
36. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act except upon a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of the Chief Inspector 
or an Inspector within three months of the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to 
the knowledge of the Inspector:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by the competent 
authority, the Chief Inspector or an Inspector, complaint thereof may be mad e within six months of the 
date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.  
(2) No Court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
37. Application of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 and the Maternity 
Benefit Act, 1961 .—(1) The provisions of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders)                       
Act, 1946 (20 of 1946) shall apply to every industrial premis es wherein fifty or more persons are 
employed or were employed on any one day of the preceding twelve months as if such industrial premises 
were an industrial establishment to which that Act has been applied by a notification under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 1 thereof, and as if the employee in the said premises were a workman within the meaning of 
that Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State Government may, after giving 
not less than two months ’ notice of its intention so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply all 
or any of the provisions of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) , Act, 1946 (20 of 1946), to any 
industrial premises wherein less than fifty employees are employed or were employed on any one day of 
the preceding twelve months as if such industrial premises were an industrial establishment to which Act 
has been applied by a notification under sub -section ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and as if the employee in the 
said premises were a workman within the meaning of that Act.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961), the 
provisions of that Act shall apply to every establishment as if such establishment were an establishment to 
which that Act has been applied by a notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 2 thereof:  13 
 Provided that the said Act shall, in its application to a home wo rker, apply subject to the following 
modifications, namely: — 
(a) in section 5, in the  Explanation  to sub -section ( 1), the words “or one rupee a day, whichever is 
higher ” shall be omitted; and  
(b) sections 8 and 10 shall be omitted.  
38. Certain provisions n ot to apply to industrial premises .—(1) Chapter IV and section 85 of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (62 of 1948) shall apply to an industrial premises and the rest of the provisions in that 
Act shall not apply to any industrial premises.  
(2) Nothing contained in any law relating to the regulation of the conditions of work of workers in 
shops or commercial establishments shall apply to any establishment to which this Act applies.  
39. Application of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 .—(1) The provisions of the Indust rial Disputes 
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) , shall apply to matters arising in respect of every industrial premises.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a dispute between an employer and 
employee relating to — 
(a) the issue by the employer o f raw materials to the employees,  
(b) the rejection by the employer of beedi or cigar or both made by an employee,  
(c) the payment of wages for the beedi or cigar or both rejected by the employer,  
1[shall  be referred for settlement within such time and by such authority as the State Government may, by 
rules, specify in this behalf and such rules may also provide for the summary manner in which such 
dispute shall be settled ]. 
(3) Any person aggrieved by a s ettlement made by the authority specified under sub -section ( 2) may 
prefer an appeal to such authority and within such time as the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.  
(4) The decision of the authority spec ified under sub -section ( 3) shall be final.  
40. Effect of law s and agreements inconsistent with this Act .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
in forc e or in the terms of any award, agreement , or contract of service whether made before or after the 
commencement of this Act : 
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwise an employee 
is entitled to benefits in respec t of any matters which are more favourable to him than those to which he 
will be entitled to under this Act, the employee shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable 
benefits in respect of that matter notwithstanding that he receives benefits in r espect of other matters 
under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any employee from entering into an 
agreement with an employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more 
favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act.  
41. Power to exempt .—The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as it may impose, any class of industrial  premises or class of 
employers or employees from all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be constructed as empowering the State Government to 
grant any exemption in respect of a ny woman employee from any of the provisions of this Act or any 
rules made thereunder relating to annual leave with wages, maternity benefits, creches, wages, rejection 
of beedi or cigar and night work.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 14 
 42. Powers of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
directions to a State Government as to the carrying into execution of the provisions of this Act.  
43. Act not to apply to self -employed persons in private dwelling houses .—Nothing contained in 
this Act shall apply to the own er or occupier of a private dwelling house who carries on any 
manufacturing process in such private dwelling house with the assistance of the members of his family 
living with him in such dwelling house and depend ent on him:  
Provided that the owner or occu pier thereof is not an employee of an employer to whom this Act 
applies.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “family ” means the spouse and children of the owner 
or occupier.  
44. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the terms and conditions subject to which a  licence may be granted or renewed under this Act 
and the fees to be paid in respect of such licence;  
(b) the form of application for a licence under this Act and the documents and plans to be 
submitted together with such appli cation;  
(c) other matters which are to be taken into consideration by the competent authority for granting 
or refusing a licence;  
(d) the time within which, the fees on payment of which and the authority to which, appeals may 
be preferred against any order  granting or refusing to grant a licence;  
(e) the submission of a monthly return by an employer to the competent authority specifying the 
quantity of tobacco released by the Central Excise Department and the number of beedi or cigar or 
both manufactured by  him; 
(f) the powers which may be conferred on the Inspectors under this Act;  
(g) the standards of cleanliness required to be maintained under this Act;  
(h) the standards of lighting, ventilation and temperature required to be maintained under this 
Act; 
(i) the types of urinals and latrines required to be provided under this Act;  
(j) the washing facilities which are to be provided under this Act;  
(k) canteens;  
(1) the form and manner of notice regarding the periods of work;  
(m) the form in which records of work done outside an establishment shall be maintained;  
(n) the authority to which and the time within which an appeal may be filed by a dismissed, 
discharged or retrenched employee;  
(o) the manner in which the cash equivalent of the advantage accruing thr ough the concessional 
sale to an employee of foodgrains  and other articles shall be computed;  
(p) the  records and registers that shall be maintained in an establishment for the purpose of 
securing compliance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder;  
(q) the maintainence of first aid boxes or cupboards and the contents thereof and the persons in 
whose charge such boxes shall be placed;  
(r) the manner in which sorting or rejection of beedi or cigar or both and disposal of rejected 
beedi or cigar or both shall be carried out;  15 
 (s) the  fixation of maximum limit of the percentage of rejection of beedi or cigar or both 
manufactured by an employee;  
(t) specifying the place at which wages shall be paid to persons who receive directly or through 
an agent raw materials for the manufacture of beedi or cigar or both at home;  
(u) supervision by the Inspectors over distribution of raw materials including beedi and tobacco 
leaves to the employees;  
(v) precautions to be taken against fire for the safety of workers;  
(w) 1[the time within which a disp ute specified section -section ( 2) of section 39 shall be referred 
for settlement, the authority by which and the summary manner in which such dispute shall be settled] 
and the authority to which an appeal shall lie from the settlement made by the first -mentioned 
authority;  
(x) any matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be subject to the 
condition of previous publication; and the dates to be specified under  clause ( 3) of section  23 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall not be less than three months from the date on which draft 
of the proposed rules was published.  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it i s made, before each 
House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in tw o successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately following the Legislatures agree in making any modification in the rule or the 
Legislatures agree that the rule should not be made, the rule s hall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or 
annulment, shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 22-5-1993 ). 
--------------------------The Criminal Law Amendment (Amending) Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT (AMENDING) ACT, 1966  
____________  
 ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. Validation and indemnity . 
5. Pending cases . 
6. Repeal and Saving.  
 
   2 
 THE CRIMINAL LAW AMENDMENT (AMENDING) ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 22 OF 1966  
[3rd September,  1966 .] 
An Act further to amend the Crimina l Law Amendment Act, 1952.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as follow: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Criminal Law Amendment (Amending) Act, 1966.  
1*                                 *                               *                                 *                                     * 
4. Validation and indemnity. —No trial or other proceeding held or taken before, and  no sentence 
passed by a court -martial or any other authority under any military, naval and air force la w before the 
30th day of June, 19 66, shall be called in question in any court merely on the ground that the                      
court -martial or other autho rity had no jurisdiction by virtue of the provisions of the principal Act , and all 
such trials, proceedings and sentences shall, notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, be as 
valid and operative as if they had been held, taken or passed in  accordance with law; and accordingly no 
suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued against any  person  whatever on  the ground 
that any such trial, proceeding or sentence was not held, taken or passed in accordance with law.  
5. Pending  cases.—(I) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the  principal Act  as 
amended by this Act, —   
(a) cases pending immediately before the 30th day of June, 1966, before a special Judge in which 
one or more persons sub ject to military,  naval or air force law is or a re charged with and tried for an 
offence under the principal Act together with any other  person or persons not so subject, and  
(b) cases pending immediately before the said date before a special Judge in which one or more 
persons su bject to military, naval or air  force law is or are alone charged with and trie d for an offence 
under the prin cipal Act and charges have already been framed against such person or persons,  
shall be tried and di sposed of by the special Judge.   
(2) Where in any case pending im mediately before the 30th day of June, 1966, before a special Judge , 
one or more persons subject to military, naval or air force law is or are alone charged with and tried for an 
offence under the princ ipal Act and charges have not been framed against such person or per sons before 
the said date, or where, on appeal or on revision against any  sentence passed by a special Judge in any 
case in which one or more persons subject was or were alone tried, the appellate court has directe d that 
such person or persons be retried and on such retrial charges have not been framed against such person or 
person s before the said date, t hen, in either case, the special Judge shall follow the procedure laid down in 
section 549 of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , as if the special Judge were a 
Magistrate.  
6. Repeal and Saving. —(1) The Criminal Law Amendment (Amendment) Ordinance,                   
1966 (7 of 1966), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or  any action taken under the said Ordinance or under 
the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 
this Act or under the principal Act as amended by this Act as if this Act had commenced on the            
30th day of June, 1966.  
                                                           
1. Section s 2 and 3 rep. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 2 and the First Schedule   (w.e.f. 20 -12-1972) . 
--------------------------The Delhi High Court Act, 1966--------------------------
1 THE DELHI HIGH COURT ACT, 1966  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. High Court.  
3A. Salaries and allowances or Judges to be expenditure charged on Consolidated Fund of India.  
4. Exceptions and modifications subject to which the provisions of Chapter V of Part VI of the 
Constitution apply to the High Court of Delhi.  
5. Jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi.  
6. Power to enrol legal practitioners, etc.  
7. Practice and procedure in the High Court of Delhi.  
8. Custody of the Seal of the High Court of Delhi.  
9. Form of writs and other processes.  
10. Powers of Judges.  
11. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.  
12. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Punjab to the High Court of  Delhi.  
13. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to the High Court of Delhi.  
14. Interpretation.  
15. Savings . 
16. Pending proceedings before subordinate courts in Delhi.  
17. Extension of the jurisdiction of the High Court of Delhi.  
18. Rule  of construction.  
19. [Repealed .] 
20. Power to remove difficulties.  
21. Power to adapt laws.  
THE SCHEDULE. [Repealed .] 2 THE DELHI HIGH COURT  ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 26 OF 1966  
  [5th September , 1966 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of a High Court for the Union territory of Delhi, for the 
extension of the jurisdiction of that High Court to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh  
and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the R epublic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi High Court Act, 1966.  
(2) Section 17 shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint; and the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force at once.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under section 3;  
(b) “notified order ” means order notified in the Official Gazette.  
3. High Court .—(1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be a High Court for the Union territory of Delhi (hereinafter referre d 
to as the High Court of Delhi ). 
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Delhi shall be a t Delhi or at such other place as the 
President may, by notified order, appoint.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Judges and Division Courts of the 
High Court of  Delhi may sit at such other place or places other than its princ ipal seat as the Chief Justice 
may, with the approval of the President,  appoint.  
2[3A. Salaries and allowances or Judges to be expenditure charged on Consolidated Fund of 
India .—Expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of Judges of the High Court of Delhi shall 
be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.]  
4. Exceptions and modifications subject to which the provisions of Chapter V of Part VI of the 
Constitution apply to the High Court of Delhi .—(1) The provisions of Chapter V of  Part VI of the 
Constitution shall , in their application to the High Court of Delhi, have effect subject to the following 
exceptio ns and modifications, namely: — 
(a) in article 217, the words “the Governor of the State ” shall be omitted and in relation to 
appointments to be made under sub -section ( 2), that article shall be construed as if the words “and, in 
the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court,” 
had also been omitted;  
(b) in article 219, the ref erence to the Governor of the State, and in the proviso to clause ( 3) of 
article 227, the reference to the Governor, shall be construed as a reference to the administrator of the 
Union territory of Delhi;  
(c) the provisions of article 225 shall not apply;  
(d) in article 229, — 
(i) the reference s to the Governor of the State shall be construed as references to the 
administrator of the Union territory of Delhi;  
                                                           
1. 1st May, 1967, vide notification No. G.S.R. 508 (E), dated 11th April, 1967 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
    Part II, sec. 3 (i). 
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1969, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1969).   3 (ii) the references to the State Public Service Commission, the Legislature of the State and the 
Consolidated Fund of the State shall be construed, respectively as refer ences to the Union Public 
Service Commission, Parliament and the Consolidated Fund of India;  
(e) the provisions of article 230 shall apply subj ect to the modifications that — 
(i) in claus e (1) thereof , for the words “High Court ” in both the places where they occur , the 
words “High Court for a Union territory ”, and for the words “any Union territory ”, the words 
“any other Union territory ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) for clause ( 2) thereof, the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(2) Where the High Court for a Union territory exercises jurisdiction in relation to 
another Union territory, the reference in article 227 to the administrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that 
other Union territory, be construed as a reference to the administrator of that other Union 
territory. ”. 
(2) Between the coming into force of this section and  the appointed day, the President may, after 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, appoint the Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi and as 
many other Judges of the said High Court as he thinks fit, and any appointments so made shall take effect  
as from the appointed day.  
5. Jurisdiction of High Court of Delhi .—(1) The High Court of Delhi shall have, in respect of the 
territories for the time being included in the Union territory of Delhi, all such original, appellate and other 
jurisdiction as, under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, is exercisable in respect of 
the said territories by the High Court of Punjab.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the High Court of 
Delhi shall also ha ve in respect of the said territories ordinary original civil jurisdiction in every suit the 
value of which exceeds  1[rupees two crore ]. 
6. Power to enrol legal practitioners, etc. —(1) The High Court of Delhi shall have like  powers to 
approve, admit, enro l, remove and suspend legal practitioners, and to make rules with respect to them, as 
are, under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, exercisable by the High Court of 
Punjab.  
(2) The right of audience in the High Court of Delhi shall be regulated in accordance with the like 
principles, as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audience in 
the High Court of Punjab:  
Provide d that subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court of Delhi  in the exercise 
of the powers conferred by this section, any person who immediately before the appointed day is an 
advocate entitled to practi se or an attorney entitled to act in the High Court of Punjab shall be recognised 
as an advocate or an attorney e ntitled to practi se or act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Delhi.  
7. Practice and procedure in the High Court of Delhi .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and proc edure in the High 
Court of Punjab shall , with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Delhi and 
accordingly the High Court of Delhi shall have all such powers to make rules and orders with respect to 
practice and procedure as ar e immediately before the appointed day exercisable by the High Court of 
Punjab and shall also have powers to make rules and orders with respect to practice and procedure for the 
exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction:  
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to practice and procedure in the Hi gh Court of Punjab shall, until  varied or revoked by rules or 
orders made by the High Court of Delhi, apply with the necessary modifications i n relation to practice 
and procedure in the High Court of Delhi as if made by that High Court.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 20 15, s. 2, for “rupees twenty  lakhs ” (w.e.f. 26-10-2015 ). 4 8. Custody of the Seal of the High Court of Delhi .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day with respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court of Punjab shall , with the 
necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court of Delhi.  
9. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to the form of writs  and other processes used, issued or awarded , by the High Court of Punjab 
shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes , used, 
issued or awarded by the High Court of Delhi.  
10. Powers of Judges .—(1) Wh ere a single Judge of the High Court of Delhi exercises ordinary 
original civil jurisdiction conferred by sub -section ( 2) of section 5 on that Court, an appeal shall lie from 
the judgment of the single Judge to a Division Court of that High Court.  
(2) Subj ect to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the law in force immediately before the appointed day 
relating to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and Division Courts of the High Court of Punjab 
and with respect to all matters ancillary to the exer cise of those powers shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Delhi.  
11. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law  in force immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from th e High Court of Punjab and the Judges and 
Division Courts thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of 
Delhi.  
12. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Punjab to the High Court of                   
Delhi .—(1) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Punjab shall, as from the appointed day , 
have no jurisdiction in respect of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Punjab immediately before the appointed day a s 
are certified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court having regard to the 
place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances to be proceedings which ought to be heard 
and decided by the High Court of  Delhi , shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to 
the High Court of Delhi.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section and in section 5, 
but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Punjab shall have, and the High Court of Delhi shall 
not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of, appeals, applications for leave to appeal including 
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such 
proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court of Punjab before the 
appointed day:  
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Punjab, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court  that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Delhi, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred 
accordingly.  
(4) Any order mad e by the High Court of Punjab — 
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Delhi by virtue 
of sub -section ( 2); 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of Punjab retains jurisdiction by 
virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall for all purposes have effect , not only as an order of the High Court of Punjab, but also as an order 
made by the High Court of Delhi.  
13. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to the High Court of Delhi .—Any 
person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practi se or an attorney 
entitled to act, in the High Court of Punjab , and was authorised to appear or to act in any proceedings 
transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Delhi under section 12, shall have the right to 
appea r or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Delhi in relation to those proceedings.  5 14. Interpretation .—For the  purposes of sections 12 and 17, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues 
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings 
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs ; 
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or Division 
Court thereof, and references to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or m ade by that court or Judge.  
15. Savings .—Save as provided in section 4, nothing in this A ct shall affect the application  to the 
High Court of Delhi of any provisions of the Constitution, and this Act shall have effect subject to any 
provision that may  be made on or after the appointed day with respect to the High Court by any 
Legislature or other authority having power to make such provision.  
16. Pending proceedings before subordinate courts in Delhi .—All proceedings pending 
immediately before the appointe d day in any subordinate court in the Union territory of Delhi in or in 
relation to any such civil suit as is referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 5 shall on that day stand 
transferred to the High Court of Delhi which shall proceed to try , hear and de termine the matter  as if it 
had been pending therein.  
17. Extension of the jurisdiction of the High Court of Delhi .—(1) As f rom such date  as the Central 
Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, appoint h ereinafter referred to as the prescribed 
date), the jurisdiction of the High Court of Delhi shall extend to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh.  
(2) As from the prescribed date the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh shall 
cease to function and is hereby abolished:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prejudice or affect the continued operation of any 
notice served , injunction issued, direction given, or proceedings taken before the prescribed da te by the 
Court of the Judi cial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh abolished by this sub -section.  
(3) The High Court of Delhi shall have, in respect of the territories for the time being included in the 
Union territory of Himachal Prades h,— 
(a) all such original, appellate  and other jurisdiction as under the law in force immediately before 
the prescribed date, is exercisable in respect of the said territories by the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh; and also  
(b) ordinary original civil jurisdiction in every suit  the value of which exceeds  1[fifty thousand 
rupees ], notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force.  
(4) All proceedings pending in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh before 
the prescribed date shall stand transferred to the High Court of Delhi.  
(5) Any order made before the prescribed date by the Court referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall for all 
purposes have effect not only as an order of that Court but also as an order of the High Court of Delhi.  
(6) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of sections 6 to 11 and 13 
shall, with the necessary modifications, apply to the High Court of Delhi in the exercise of jurisdiction 
conferred upon it by this section.  
(7) All proceedings pending immediately before the prescribed date in any subordinate court in the 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh in or in relation to any such civil suit as is referred to in clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 3) shall on that da te stand transf erred to the High Court of Delhi which shall proceed to try, 
hear and determine the matter  as if it had been pending therein.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1969, s. 4, for “twenty -five thousand  rupees ” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1969) . 6 18. Rule of construction .—(1) References in any law in force in the Union territory of Delhi to the 
High Court of Punjab shall, as  from the appointed day,  be construed in relation to that Union territory as 
references to the High Court of Delhi.  
(2) References in any law in force in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh to the High Court of 
Punjab or to the Court of the Judicial Co mmissioner for that territory shall, as from the prescribed date, be 
construed in relation to that Union territory as references to the High Court of Delhi.  
19. [Amendment of certain laws .]—Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1974 (56 of 1974) s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
20. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by notified order, make such provision as appears to it to be 
necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both 
Houses agree that the order should not be made, th e order shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the cases may be; so, however , that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
21. Power  to adapt laws .— For the purpose of facilitating the applicati on of any law in relation to 
the Union territory of Delhi or Himachal Pradesh, the Central Government may, before the expiration of 
two years from the appointed day in relation to the Union territory of Delhi and before the expiration of 
two years from the prescribed date in relation to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, by order, make 
such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be 
necessa ry or expedient to give effect to the provisions of this Act and thereupon every such law shall have 
effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a 
competent Legislature or other competent authority.  
[The Schedule .]—Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1974 (56 of 1974) s. 2 and the  First Schedule  
(w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
--------------------------The Jawaharlal Nehru University Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE JAWAHARLAL NEHRU UNIVERSITY ACT, 1966  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University.  
4. Objects.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction of the University.  
7. Pow ers and jurisdiction in respect of institution or body outside the Union territory of Delhi.  
8. Visitor.  
9. Officers of the University.  
10. Authorities of the University.  
11. The Court.  
12. The Executive Council.  
13. The Academic Council.  
14. The Ac ademic Advisory Committee.  
15. Statutes.  
16. Statutes how made.  
17. Ordinances.  
18. Regulations.  
19. Annual Report.  
20. Audit of accounts.  
21. Disputes as to constitution of the University authorities and bodies.  
22. Constitution of committees.  
23. Filling of casual vacancies.  
24. Proceedings of the University authorities and bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
25. Removal of difficulties.  
26. Transitional provisions.  
27. Amendment of Act 8 of 1922.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  2 
 THE  JAWAHARLAL NEHRU UNlVERSITY ACT, 1966  
 ACT NO. 53 OF 1966  
[22nd December , 1966.]   
An Act to establish and incorporate a university in Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title and com mencement .― (1) This Act may be called the Jawaharlal Nehru University 
Act, 1966.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. ―In this Act, unless the context ot herwise  requires,― 
(a) “College” means a college maintained by the University;  
(b) “Hall” means a unit of residence, by whatever name called, for students of the University 
provided, maintained or recognised by it;  
(c) “recognised institution ” means an ins titution of higher learning maintained or recognised by, 
or associated with, the University;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations;  
(e) “Statutes”, “Ordinances” and “Regulations ” mean, respectively, the Statutes, Ordinanc es and 
Regulations of the University made under this Act;  
(f) “University ” means the Jawaharlal Nehru University.  
3. The University .―(1) There shall be consti tuted in the Union territory of Delhi a University by the 
name of “Jawaharlal Nehru University ”. 
(2) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor of the University and the first members of the 
Court, the Executive Council an d the Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such 
officers o r members so long as they continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted a 
body corporate by the name of “Jawaharlal Nehru University ”. 
(3) The University sha ll have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects .―The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance knowledge, wisdom 
and understanding by teaching and research and by the example and influence of its corporate life and in 
particular the objects set out in the First Schedule.  
5. Powers of  the University .―The University shall have the following powers, namely: ― 
(1) to provide for instruction including the method of correspondence courses in such branches of 
learning as the University may from time to time determine, and to make provision fo r research and 
for the  advancement  and dissemination of knowledge;  
                                                           
1. 22nd April 1969,  vide Notific ation No. S.O.1525, dated 21st April, 1969, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 3( ii). 3 
 (2) to establish within the Union territory of Delhi or outs ide that territory such Special Centres 
and Specialised Laboratories and such other units for research and instruction as are nec essary for the 
furtherance of its objects;  
(3) to organise and to undertake extra -mural teaching and extension services;  
(4) to hold examinations and grant diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees and other 
academic distinctions on, persons and to w ithdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(5) to confer honorary degrees or other academic distinctions in the manner laid down in the 
Statutes;  
(6) to create such teaching, administrativ e and other posts as the University may deem necessary, 
from time to time, and to make appointments thereto;  
(7) to appoint or recognise persons as Professors, Readers or Lecturers or otherwise as teachers of 
the University;  
(8) to institute and award Fell owships, Scholarships, Exhibitions and prizes;  
(9) to establish and maintain Colleges and Halls, to recognise, guide, supervise and control Halls 
not maintained by the University and other accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such 
recognition;  
(10) to regulate and enforce discipline among students and employees of the University and to 
take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed necessary;  
(11) to make arrangements for promoting health and general welfare of students and emplo yees 
of the University;  
(12) to determine and provide for examinations for admission into the University;  
 (13) to recognise for any purpose, either in whole or in part, any institution or members or 
students thereof on such terms and conditions as may, fr om time to time, be prescribed and to 
withdraw such recognition;  
(14) to co -operate with any other University, authority or association or any other public or 
private body having in view the promotion of purposes and objects similar to those of the Univers ity 
for such purposes as may be agreed upon, on such terms and conditions as may, from time to time, be 
prescribed;  
(15) to enter into any agreement for the incorporation in the University of any other institution 
and for taking over its rights, properties  and liabilities and for any other purpose not repugnant to this 
Act; 
(16) to demand and receive payment of such fees and other charges as may be prescribed, from 
time to time;  
(17) to receive donations and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any prope rty movable or 
immovable, including trust or endowed property within or outside the Union territory of Delhi, for the 
purposes or objects of the University, and to invest funds in such manner as the University thinks fit;  
(18) to make provision for researc h and advisory services; and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions or bodies as the University may deem necessary;  4 
 (19) to provide for the printing, reproduction and publication of research and other work which 
may be is sued by the University;  
(20) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the University 
property, money for the purposes of the University;  
(21) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainm ent of all or 
any of the objects of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction of the University .―(1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to all Colleges 
and recognised institutions.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 13) of section 5, the Jawaharlal Nehru University 
shall not grant recognition, either in whole or in part, to any institution which has already been recognised 
by the University of Delhi unless the Central Government, after consultation with the University of Delhi, 
authorises the Jawaharlal Nehru University to do so.  
(3) On and from the date of the recognition  either in whole or in part of an institution by the 
Jawaharlal Nehru University under sub - section ( 2), the University of Delhi shall to the extent of such 
recognition cease to have jurisdiction over that institution.  
7. Powers and Jurisdiction in respect  of institution or body outside the Union territory of 
Delhi.―Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5, ― 
 (a) where any institution or body established outside the Union territory of Delhi seeks 
recognition from the University, or  
 (b) where the Uni versity establishes and maintains any institution or body outside the Union 
territory of Delhi,  
then the powers and jurisdiction of the University shall extend to such institution or body subject to — 
(i) the laws in force in the State within which, and  
(ii) the rules and regulations of the University within whose jurisdiction,  
the said institution or body is situated.  
8. Visitor .―(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University and to submit a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the V isitor may, after 
obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon, take such action and issue such directions as he 
considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be 
bound to comply with such dir ections.  
(3) The Visitor shall also have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons 
as he may direct of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment and of any institution 
maintained by the University, and also of th e examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done 
by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in respect of any matter connected with the 
University.  
(4) The Visitor shall in every case give notice to the University of his intention to cau se an inspection 
or inquiry to be made, and the University shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the 
right to be present and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.  5 
 (5) The Visitor may address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to th e result of such inspection and 
inquiry, and the Vice -Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive Council the views of the Visitor 
with such advice as the Visitor may offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(6) The Executive Council shall communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, 
if any, as it is proposed to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) Where the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction o f 
the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the 
Executive Council, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Executive Council shall be bound to 
comply with such directions.  
(8) The Visitor may b y order in writing annul any proceeding of the University which is not in 
conformity with this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(9) The Visitor shall also have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
9. Officers of the University .―(1) There shall be a Chancellor appointed in the manner prescribed 
by the Statutes who shall be the Head of the University.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at convocation of the University for conferring degrees 
and all meetings of the Court . 
 (3) There shall be a Vice -Chancellor appointed in the manner prescribed by the Statutes who shall be 
the principal executive and Academic Officer of the University and ex officio  Chairman of the Executive 
Council, Academic Council and Finance Committee and he shall, in the absence of the Chancellor preside 
at any convocation for conferring degrees and also at any meeting of the Court.  
(4) There shall be one or more Rectors who shall be appointed in such manner and with such powers 
and duties as may be pr escribed by the Statutes.  
 (5) There shall be a Dean for each School of Study who shall be appointed in such manner and with 
such powers and duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
 (6) There shall be a Registrar who shall act as Secretary of the Cour t, the Executive Council and the 
Academic Council and he shall be appointed in such manner and with such powers and duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
 (7) There shall be a Finance Officer who shall be the Secretary of the Finance Committee and 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(8) There shall be such other officers as provided for in the Statutes.  
10. Authorities of the University .―The authorities of the University shall be the Court, the 
Executive  Council, the Academic Council, the Schools of Studies, the Finance Committee and such other 
authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University.  
11. The Court. ―(1) The Court shall be the supreme authority of the University, and its constitution 
and the terms of office of its members shall be prescribe d by the Statutes.  
(2) The Court shall have the power to review the acts of the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council (save when these authorities have acted in accordance w ith the powers conferred upon them 
under this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances) and shall exercise all the powers of the University not 
otherwise provided for by this Act or the Statutes:  6 
 Provided that the power of review under this sub -section shall no t be exercised except by a majority 
of the total membership of the Court and by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members of the 
Court present and voting.  
12. The Executive Council. ―(1) The Executive Council shall be the executive body of the 
University, and its constitution and the terms of office of its members, other than ex officio  members, 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) It shall be in charge of the general management and administration (including the revenue and 
property) of the U niversity.  
13. The Academic Council. ―(1) The Academic Council shall be the academic body of the 
University, and its constitution and the terms of office of its members, other than ex officio  members, 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Academic Council shall, subject to the provisio ns of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, 
have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the maintenance, of standards of 
instruction, education and examination within the University, and shall exercise such other powers and 
perform  such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
14. The Academic Advisory Committee .―(1) There shall be constituted an Academic Advisory 
Committee of the University which shall advise generally on the planning and development of the 
University and keep under review the standard of education and research in the University.  
(2) The Committe e shall consist of ― 
 (a) not more than seven persons of high academic standing who shall be appointed in such  
manner as may be prescribed by the statutes, and  
(b) the Vice -Chancellor.  
(3) The Visitor may determine a date with effect from which the Academi c Advisory Committee shall 
stand dissolved.  
15. Statutes .―Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of  the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities and other bodies of the U niversity, the 
qualifications and disqualifications for membership of such authorities and other bodies, appointment 
and removal of members thereof and other matters connected therewith;  
(b) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the Univers ity; 
(c) the appointment, terms and conditions of service and the powers and duties of the employees 
of the University;  
(d) the terms and conditions under which institution s may be associated with the University;  
(e) the administration of the University, t he establishment and abolition of Colleges, institutions 
and Halls, the grant and withdrawal of recognition to institutions, the institution of Fellowships, 
Awards and the like, the conferment of degrees and other academic distinctions and the grant of 
diplomas and certificates;  
(f) any other matter which is necessary for the proper and effective management and conduct of 
the affairs of the University and which by this Act is to be or may be provided by the Statutes.  7 
 16. Statutes, how made .―(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Second Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes in the manner hereafter in this section provided:  
Provided that the Exec utive Council shall not make any Statute or any amendment of a Statute 
affecting the status, powers or constitution of any existing authority of the University until such authority 
has been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion on the proposal, and  any opinion so expressed 
shall be in writing and shall be considered by the Executive Council:  
Provided further that no Statute shall be made by the Executive Council affecting the discipline of 
students, and standards of instruction, education and examin ation except after consultation with the 
Academic Council.  
 (3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall 
require the approval of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent on remit to the Execut ive 
Council for consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
17. Ordinances .―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the admission of students, the courses of study and the fees therefor, the qualifications 
pertaining to degrees, d iplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the conditions for the 
grant of Fellowships, Awards and the like;  
(b) the conduct of examinations, including the terms of office and appointment of examiners, and 
the conditions of residence of student s and their general discipline;  
(c) the management of colleges and institutions maintained by the University;  
(d) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by th e Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Regulations .―1 [(1)] The authorities o f the University may make Regulations consistent with this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances in the manne r 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
2[(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regul ation made under this Act shall be published in the Offical 
Gazette.  
(3) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, befo re each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
                                                           
1. Section  18 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 4 of  2005, s.  2 and Sch edule  (w.e.f.11 -1-2005).  
2. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f .11-1-2005).  8 
 making any modification in the St atute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect o nly in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.]  
19. Annual report .―(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council and shall be submitted to the Court on or before such date as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes and shall be considered by the Court at its annual meetin g.  
(2) The Court may communicate its comments thereon to the Executive Council.  
1[(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be l aid before both Houses of 
Parliament.]  
20. Audit of accounts .―(1) The accounts of the University shall, once at least in every year and at 
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, or 
any person authorised by him in this behalf.  
 (2) The accounts, when audited shall be published in the Gazette of India, and a copy of the accounts 
together with the audit report shall be submitted by the Registrar to the Visitor and to the Court.  
 2[(3) A copy of th e accounts, together with the audit report, shall also be submitted to the Central 
Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.]  
21. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies .―If any question arises 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
22. Const itution of committees .― Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint committees, such committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of 
members of the authority concerned and of such other persons (if a ny) as the authority in each case may 
think fit.  
23. Filling of casual vacancies .― All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as conveniently may be, 
by the person or body who appointed, elected or co -opted the member whose place has become vacant, 
and the person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or 
body for the residue of the term for which the person wh ose place he fills would have been a member.  
24. Proceedings of the University authorities and bodies not invalidated by vacancies .―No act 
or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalidated merely by reason of 
the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
25. Removal of difficulties .― If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provi sions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2008, s. 6  (w.e.f. 5 -12-2008).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -12-2008).  9 
 26. Transitional prov isions .―Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes ―  
(a) the first Chancellor, members of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic Council 
shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(b) the fi rst Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and he shall hold office for a term 
of five years.  
27. Amendment of Act 8 of 1922 .―In the Delhi University Act, 1922, in sub -section ( 2) of section 
5, after the words “for the time being in force ”, the words and figures “but subject to the provisions 
contained in the Jawaharlal Nehru University Act, 1966 ” shall be inserted.  10 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 4)  
The University shall endeavour to promote the study of the principles for which Jawaha rlal Nehru 
worked during his life -time, namely, national integration, social jus tice, secularism, democratic way of 
life, international understanding and scientific ap proach to the problems of society.  
Towards this end, the university shall — 
(i) foster t he composite culture of India and establish such departments or institu tions as may be 
required for the study and development of the languages, arts and culture of India;  
(ii) take special measures to facilitate students and teachers from all over India t o join the 
University and participate in its academic programmes;  
(iii) promote in the students and teachers an awareness and understanding of the social needs of 
the country and prepare them for fulfilling such needs;  
(iv) make special provision for integ rated courses in humanities, science and tech nology in the 
educational programmes of the University;  
(v) take appropriate measures for promoting inter -disciplinary studies in the Uni versity;  
(vi) establish such departments or institutions as may be neces sary for the study of languages, 
literature and life of foreign countries with a view to inculcating in the students a world perspective 
and international understanding;  
(vii) provide facilities for students and teachers from other countries to participate  in the academic 
programmes and life of the University.  
 
 11 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 16( 1)] 
THE STATU TES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. Definitions. —In these Statutes — 
(a) “Act” means the Jawaharlal Nehru University Act, 1966;  
(b) all words and expressions us ed herein and defined in the Act shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in the Act.  
2. Chancellor.  —(1) The Chancellor shall be elected by the Court and shall hold office for a term of 
three years:  
Provided that the Chancellor shall, notwith standing the expiration of his term, continue to hold office 
until the election of his successor.  
(2) If the office of the Chancellor becomes vacant, the functions of his office shall, until some person 
is elected under clause ( 1) to the vacant office, be performed by the Vice -Chancellor.  
3. Vice -Chancellor.  —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not 
less than three persons who shall be recommended by a committee consisting of three members:  
Provided that, if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations.  
(2) Two members of the committee shall be persons not connected with the Univer sity or an 
institution recogni sed by, or associated with, the University nominated  by the Executive Council and one 
member shall be a person nominated by the Visitor who shall also be the Chairman of the committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office  for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office and shall, on the expiration of his term of office be ineligible for re -appointment to that 
office:  
Provided that the Vice -Chancellor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his te rm, continue to hold 
his office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office.  
(5) The emoluments and terms and conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows — 
(i) There shall be paid to the Vice -Chancellor a salary of two t housand five hun dred rupees per 
mensem and he shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his 
term of office and no charge shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor personally in respect of the 
maintenance of such residence . 
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall not be entitled to the benefits of the University Provident  Fund or 
to any other allowance:  
Provided that where any employee of the University is appointed as Vice -Chancellor, he shall be 
allowed to continue to contribute t o the Provident Fund and the contribution of the University shall be 
limited to what he had been contributing immediately before his appointment as Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowances at such rates as may b e fixed 
by the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay for one -eleventh of the period spent 
by him on active service.  
(v) The Vice -Chancellor shall also he entitled, on medical grounds or otherwise than on medical  
grounds, to leave without pay for a period not exceeding three months during the term of his office:  12 
 Provided that such leave may be converted into leave on full pay to the extent to which he will be 
entitled to leave under sub -clause ( iv). 
(6) Notwithsta nding anything contained in clause ( 5), the Executive Council may, with the previous 
approval of the Visitor, vary the emoluments and all or any of the conditions of service of                          
Vice -Chancellor at the time of his appointment.  
(7) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant, the functions of his office shall until some 
person is appointed under clause ( 1) to the vacant office, be performed by the Rector, and if there are two 
or more Rectors, by the senior -most of the Rectors:  
Provided that if there is no Rector, the Registrar shall carry on the current duties of the                          
Vice -Chancellor and call a meeting of the Executive Council forthwith and take its directions for carrying 
on of the work of the University . 
4. Powers and duties of Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall have a general 
responsibility for maintaining and promoting the efficiency and good order of the University.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that the provisions  of the Act, these Statutes, the 
Ordinances and the Regulations are duly observed and the decisions taken by the authorities of the 
University are implemented.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall have power to convene meetings of the Court, the Executive Council  
and the Academic Council and shall perform all such acts as may be necessary to carry out the provisions 
of the Act, these Statutes and the Ordinances.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at and to address any meeting of any authority 
or body or committee of the University but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of 
such authority or body or committee.  
(5) If, in the opinion of the Vice -Chancellor, any emergency has arisen which requires immediate 
action to be tak en, the Vice -Chancellor shall take such action as he deems necessary and shall report the 
same for approval at the next meeting to the authority which, in the ordinary course, would have dealt 
with the matter:  
Provided that, if the action taken by the Vice -Chancellor is not approved by the authority concerned, 
he may refer the matter to the Visitor, whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that, where any such action taken by the Vice -Chancellor affects any person in the 
service of the Univer sity, such person shall be entitled to prefer, within thirty days from the date on which 
he receives notice of such action, an appeal to the Executive Council.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by the Ordinances or 
the Regulations.  
5. Rector. —(1) Every Rector shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recomme ndation of 
the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, he may recomm end any other person to the Executive Council and if it does not accept that 
recommendation also, the Vice -Chancellor shall forward the names of both the persons aforesaid to the 
Visitor and the Visitor may appoint either of them or direct the Vice -Chancel lor to recommend any other 
person to the Executive Council.  
(2) A Rector shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(3) The term of office of a Rector shall be such as may be decided by the Executive Council, but it 
shall not in any case exc eed five years. On the expiration of his term of office he shall be eligible for               
re-appointment.  
(4) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Rector shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  13 
 6. Powers and duties of Rector. —(1) A Rector shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such 
matters as may be specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf. He shall also exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) Where the V ice-Chancellor is the Chairman of any body or committee of the University and he is 
absent for any reason whatsoever from any meeting of such body or committee, the Rector, and if there 
are two or more Rectors, the senior -most Rector shall preside over suc h meeting.  
(3) A Rector shall, on being authori sed by the Vice -Chancellor in that behalf, be entitled to be present 
at and to address any meeting of any authority, body or committee of the University but shall not be 
entitled to vote thereat:  
Provided that  if the Rector is a member of such authority, body or committee, such Rector shall have 
all the rights and privileges of a member thereof.  
7. Dean of School of Studies. —(1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the     
Vice -Chancellor for  a period of three years and he shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that when the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness or 
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the  office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(2) The Dean shall be the head of the School of Studies and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
standard of teaching and research in the School. He shall hav e such other functions as may be prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of a board or committee of 
the School, as the case may be, but not the right to vote th ereat unless he is a member th ereof.  
8. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council and shall be a  whole -
time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness or absence 
for an y other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Registrar shall not by reason only of his being Secretary of the Court, the Ex ecutive Council 
and the Academic Council, be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities.  
(4) The Registrar shall — 
(a) be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other properties of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council;  
(c) supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of meetings of the authorities of the University as 
soon as they are issued and the minutes of the meetings of the authorities ordinarily within a month of 
the holding of the meetings;  
(d) in an emergency, when the Vice -Chancellor or any of the Rectors is not able to act, call a 
meeting of the Executive Council forthwith and take its directions f or carrying on the work of the 
University;  
(e) represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the pur pose; and  
(f) perform such other duties as m ay be specified in these Statutes, or prescribed by the 
Ordinances or the Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Executive Council or 
the Vice -Chancellor.  14 
 (5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against the employees belonging to 
the ministerial staff and to suspend them pending inquiry , to administer warnings to them or to impose on 
them the penalty of censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person c oncerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing the penalty 
of the withholding of increme nt. 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the powers of the Registrar is 
called for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations, for such action as t he Vice -Chancellor deems fit:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against the order to the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing the penalty of dismissal.  
9. Finance Officer.  —(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council an d shall 
be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness or absence for any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office 
shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regard its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Execu tive Council or 
as may be prescribed by these Statutes or the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall not incur any expenditure to make any investment 
exceeding Rs. 10, 000 without the previous approval of the Executive Council.  
(4) Subject to the control of the Finance Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments including trust and endowed property for 
furthering any of the objects of the University;  
(b) see that the limits fixed by the Finance Committee for recurring and non -recurring expediture 
for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purposes for which they are 
granted or allotted;  
(c) be res ponsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University for the 
next financial year and for their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
inves tments;  
(e) watch the progress of collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection employed;  
(f) have the accounts of the University regularly audited by an internal audit party;  
(g) see that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equ ipment are maintained up -to-date and 
that the  stock -checking is conducted of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Special Centres, Speciali sed Laboratories, colleges and institutions maintained by the University;  
(h) call for explanatio n for unauthori sed expenditure and for other financial irregulari ties and 
suggest disciplinary action against the persons at fault; and  
(i) call for from any office or college or institution under the University any information or 
returns that he may cons ider necessary to discharge his financial responsibilities.  15 
 (5) The receipt of the Financial Officer or of the person or persons duly authori sed in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge f or the same.  
10. Officers of the University. —(1) The following shall also be the officers of the University, 
namely:― 
(a) Dean of Students,  
(b) Chief Proctor,  
(c) Librarian.  
(2) (a) The Dean of Students shall be appointed from amongst employees of the University, who are 
or who have been teachers of the University not below the rank of Reader , by the Executive Council o n 
the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor; the Dean shall be a whole -time employee of the University, 
shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(b) The person who is appointed as the Dean of Students shall cont inue to hold his lien on his 
substantive post.  
(c) When the office of the Dean of Students is vacant or when the Dean of Students is, by reason of 
illness or absence for any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office 
shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(d) The duties and powers of the Dean of Students shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) (a) The Chief Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the reco mmendation of the 
Vice -Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties in respect of the maintenance of 
discipline among the students as may be assigned to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(b) The Chief Proctor shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for                                
re-appointment.  
(4) (a) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council and shall be a whole -time salaried 
officer of the University.  
(b) The duties and powers of the Librarian sh all be regulated by the Ordinances.  
11. The Court .—(1) The Court shall consist of the following members, namely — 
Ex Officio  Members : 
(i) The Chancellor;  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) The Rector or the Rectors;  
(iv) The remaining members of the Executive Council who are not otherwise members of the 
Court;  
(v) The Dean of Students;  
(vi) The Chief Proctor;  
(vii) The Librarian;  
(viii) Vice -Chancellor, Delhi University;  
(ix) Director, All -India Institute of Medical Science, New Delhi;  
(x) Director, Indian Inst itute of Technology, New Delhi;  
(xi) Director, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi;  
(xii) Director, Indian School of International Studies, New Delhi;  16 
 (xiii) Director, Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi;  
(xiv) Director, Ins titute of Advanced Studies, Simla;  
(xv) Sheikh -ul-Jamia, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi;  
(xvi) The President, Alumni Association;  
Representatives of Municipal Bodies : 
(xvii) Mayor, Municipal Corporation of Delhi;  
(xviii) One member to be elected by the Ne w Delhi Municipal Committee, New Delhi, from 
among its members;  
Representatives of Education Board : 
(xix) Chairman, Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi;  
(xx) Director of Education, Delhi;  
Representatives of Schools, Departments and Colleges : 
(xxi) All Deans of Schools of Studies;  
(xxii) Not more than ten Heads of Departments, who are not Deans, by rotation according to 
seniority;  
(xxiii) Not more than five Principals of Colleges, by rotation according to senority of whom at 
least one shall be Pr incipal of Women's Colleges;  
(xxiv) One Professor from each School of Studies, not being the Head of Department, by rotation 
according to seniority;  
(xxv) Two Readers, by rotation according to seniority;   
(xxvi) Five Lecturers, by rotation according to sen iority;  
members of the Court referred to in items ( xxii) to ( xxvi) shall hold office for a term of two years;  
Representatives of Alumni Association : 
(xxvii ) Not more than five representatives, other than the President, to be elected by Alumni 
Association;  
Representatives of Parliament : 
(xxviii ) Six representatives of Parliament, four to be elected by the Lok Sabha in such manner as 
the Speaker may direct and two to be elected by the Rajya Sabha in such manner as the Chairman 
may direct;  
Persons representing  Learned Professions, Industry, Commerce and Agriculture : 
(xix) Not more than ten persons representing learned professions to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(xxx) Not more than six persons representing Industry, Commerce and Agriculture  to be 
nominated by th e Visitor;  
Other Nominated Members : 
(xxxi) Not more than five persons to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(xxxii ) Not more than two persons to be nominated by the Chancellor:  
Provided that in making nominations under items ( xxix), (xxx), (xxxi) and ( xxxii ) due  regard shall 
be had to the representation of the different interests, professions, cultures and learnings and also of 
the different regions of the country:  17 
 Provided further that no employee of the University or of a recogni sed institution shall be eligibl e 
to be a member under any of the items ( xxvii ) to ( xxxii ). 
(2) When an elected member of the Court becomes an ex officio member before the expiry of his 
term, he shall cease to be an elected member.  
(3) If any body of persons entitled to elect members fai ls to do so within the time prescribed by the 
Court, the Court may appoint as a member any person whom that body of persons could have elected as a 
member:  
Provided that in the case of first elections to the Court, the powers conferred upon the Court by th is 
clause shall be exercisable by the Executive Council.  
(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided, a member of the Court shall hold office for a period of 
three years.  
(5) Thirty members of the Court shall form the quorum.  
12. Meetings of the Court. —(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date fixed by the 
Executive Council and at such annual meetings a report of the proceedings of the Executive Council and a 
report of the working of the University during the previous year together with a stat ement of the receipts 
and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited and the budget for the next financial year shall be presented 
by the Executive Council and any vacancies among the officers of the University or among the members 
of the Court or the Execu tive Council which ought to be filled up by the Court shall also be filled up.  
(2) A copy each of the reports together with a copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure and 
of the balance -sheet and the budget referred to in clause ( 1) shall be sent to every member of the Court at 
least seven days before the date of the annual meeting.  
13. Executive Council. —(1) The Executive Council shall consist of the following members, 
namely— 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor, ex officio ; 
(ii) The Dean of Students, ex officio; 
(iii) Not more than three Deans of Schools of Studies, by rotation according to seniority;  
(iv) Not more than three Principals of Colleges including at least one Principal from a Women's 
College, by rotation according to seniority;  
(v) Three persons, none of whom shall be an employee of the University or an institution 
recogni sed by, or associated with, the University, elected by the Court from among its members;  
(vi) Four persons nominated by the Visitor;  
(vii) Such number of other persons representin g institutions recogni sed by, or associated with, the 
University, as may be determined by the Visitor, from time to time.  
(2) The members of the Executive Council referred to in items ( iii) and ( iv) shall hold office for a 
term of two years.  
(3) The member s referred to in items ( v), (vi) and ( vii) shall hold office for a term of three years.  
(4) The term of office of the members of the Executive Council shall commence from the date of 
election, nomination or appointment, as the case may be.  
(5) Five members  of the Executive Council shall form the quorum.  18 
 14. Powers of the Executive Council. —Subject to the provisions of the Act, these Statutes and the 
Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, in addition to any other powers vested in it, have the following 
powers, namely — 
(i) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers, and other members of the teaching staff as may 
be necessary, on the recommendations of the Selection Committees constituted for the purpose, and 
to provide for filling temporary vacancies th erein;  
(ii) to fix the emoluments and define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, 
Lecturers and other members of the teaching staff:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number, the 
quali fications and the emoluments of teachers otherwise than after consideration of the 
recommendations of the Academic Council;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto;  
(iv) to regulate and enforce  discipline among the members of the teaching, administra tive and 
ministerial staff of the University in accordance with these Statutes and the Ordinances;  
(v) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University and, for that purpose, to appoint such agents as it may think 
fit; 
(vi) to invest any money belonging to the University, including and unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or securities, as it shall, from t ime to time, think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investments, from time to time;  
(vii) (a) to accept on behalf of the University any trust, bequest, donation or transfer of any 
immovable propert y to the University; and  
(b) to transfer any movable or immovable property on behalf of the University;   
(viii) to provide the buildings, premises, furniture, apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(ix) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(x) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if it thinks fit, to redress, any grievances of the salaried 
officers, the teaching staff and other employees of the University who may for any reasons  feel 
aggrieved:  
Provided that, in matters of discipline and punishment where the final power has been vested in 
the Vice -Chancellor or any other officer of the University, no appeal shall lie to the Executive 
Council;  
(xi) to appoint examiners and moderat ors and if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xii) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of the seal;  
(xiii) to i nstitute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;   
(xiv) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Registrar or such other officer of 
the University or to a Committee appointed by it as it may deem fit.  
15. Academic Counc il.—(1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, 
namely :— 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) The Rector or the Rectors;  
(iii) The Deans of Schools of Studies;  19 
 (iv) The De an of Students;  
(v) The Chief Proctor;  
(vi) The Librarian;  
(vii) Such n umber of Heads of Departments, other than the Dean of Schools of Studies and the 
Principals of Colleges (by rotation according to seniority) as may be laid down in the Ordinances;  
(viii) Not more than five Professors, other than the Heads of Departments, D eans of Schools of 
Studies and Principals of Colleges, by rotation according to seniority;  
(ix) Not more than eight Principals of Colleges, other than Deans of Schools of Studies, by 
rotation according to seniority;  
(x) Not more than eight teachers of the University elected from amongst themselves by the 
teachers, other than those referred to in items ( iii) to ( v) and ( vii) to ( ix); 
(xi) Not more than five persons, not being employees of the University or an institution 
recogni sed by, or associated with, th e University, co -opted by the Academic Council for their special 
knowledge;  
(xii) Such number of other persons representing institutions recogni sed by, or associated with, the 
University, as may be determined by the Executive Council, from time to time.  
(2) All members of the Academic Council, other than ex officio  members shall hold office for a term 
of two years.  
(3) Fifteen members of the Academic Council shall form the quor um. 
16. Powers and duties of the Academic Council. —Subject to the provisions of t he Act and these 
Statutes, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following 
powers, duties and functions, namely :— 
(i) to report on any matter referred to it by the Court or the Executive Council;  
(ii) to make pr oposals to the Executive Council for the establishment of Departments, Colleges, 
institutions of higher learning, Special Centres, Speciali sed Laboratories, Librar ies and Museums;  
(iii) to formulate, modify or revise schemes for the organi sation of, and a ssignment of subjects to 
Schools of Studies;  
(iv) to consider proposals submitted by the Schools of Studies;  
(v) to promote research within the University and to require, from time to time, reports on such 
research;  
(vi) to make recommendations to the Exe cutive Council with regard to the creation and abolition 
of teaching posts in the University and the classification of the said posts and the emoluments and 
duties attaching thereto;  
(vii) to recogni se diplomas and degrees of other Universities and institu tions and to determine 
their equivalent diplomas and degree of the Jawaharlal Nehru University;  
(viii) to appoint Committees for admission to the University;  
(ix) to publish lists of  prescribed or recommended text books and to publish the syllabuses of 
prescribed courses of study;  
(x) to make such arrangements for the institution and examination of persons, not being members 
of the University, as may be necessary;  
(xi) to recommend to the Executive Council draft Ordinances regarding examinations of the 
Unive rsity and the conditions on which students should be admitted to such examinations;  20 
 (xii) to make recommendations to the Executive Council in regard to the appointment of 
examiners a nd, if necessary, their removal and the fixation of their fees, emoluments  and travelling 
and other expenses;  
(xiii) to make arrangements for the conduct of examinations and to fix dates for holding them;  
(xiv) to declare the results of various University examinations, or to appoint committees or 
officers to do so;  
(xv) to make recommendations for the conferment of honorary degrees and to confer or grant 
degrees, academic distinctions, honours, diplomas, licences, titles and marks of honour;  
(xvi) to make proposals to the Executive Council for the institution of fellowships, scho larships, 
studentships, medals and prizes and to award the same;   
(xvii) to perform, in relation to academic matters, all such duties and to do all such acts as may be 
necessary for the proper carrying out of the provisions of the Act, these Statutes and t he Ordinances;  
(xviii) to promote the health and welfare of students and to constitute a Council of Students' 
Affairs consisting of such number of teachers and students as may be prescribed by the Ordinances to 
advise the Academic Council on matters relati ng to the welfare of the students of the University.  
17. The Academic Advisory Committee. —(1) The members and the Chairman of the Academic 
Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Visitor and shall hold office for such period as he may 
determine.  
(2) The Academic Advisory Committee shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it by the Act 
have the right to advise the Executive Council and the Academic Council on any academic matter.  
(3) On the date determined by the Visitor under sub -section ( 3) of Section 14, this Statute shall cease 
to have effect.  
18. Schools of Studies .—(1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as may be specified 
in the Ordinances.  
(2) (a) Every School of Studies (hereinafter referred to as the School) shall consist  of such 
Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances.  
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely :— 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons appointed to conduct research in the Department;  
(iii) Honorary Professors, i f any, attached to the Department;  
(iv) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions 
of the Ordinances.  
(c) Each Department shall have a Head who may be a Professor or, if there is no Professor, a Reader 
and whos e duties and functions shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that if there are more Professors or, as the case may be, Readers than one in any 
Department, the Executive Council shall appoint one of them as the Head of the Department.  
(3) Every Sc hool shall have a Board consisting of the following members, namely :— 
(i) The Dean of the School;  
(ii) The Heads of Departments in the School;  
(iii) The Professors in the Departments in the School;  
(iv) One Reader and one Lecturer, by rotation according to  seniority, from each Department in the 
School;  21 
 (v) Five members elected by the Academic Council for their special knowledge in any subject 
assigned to the School or in any allied branch of knowledge;  
(vi) Such other members, but not exceeding five, as may  be specified in the Ordinances.  
(4) All m embers of a Board other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a term of three years 
and shall be eligible for re -election or re -appointment, as the case may be. The first term of members shall 
commence fro m such date as may be notified by the University.  
(5) Every Board shall have such powers and shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(6) The conduct of the meetings of a Board and the quorum required shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
19. Finance Committee. —(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, 
namely :— 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) Three persons nominated by the Visitor;  
(iii) Three persons, who are not employees of the University or of any recogni sed institution 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be the Secretary of the Finance Committee.  
(3) Three members of the Finance Committee shall form the quorum.  
(4) All members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a term 
of three years.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall preside at the meetings of the Finance Committee.  
(6) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice every year to examine accounts and scrutini se 
proposals for expenditure.  
(7) The annual accounts and financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval with or without amen dments.  
20. Committees .—The Court, the Executive Council or the Academic Council may appoint Board or 
Committees consisting of members of the authority making such appointment and of such other persons 
(if any) as that authority in each case may think fit;  and any such Board or Committee may deal with any 
subject assigned to it subject to subsequent confirmation by the authority which appointed it.  
21. Elected Chairman to preside where no provision made in Statutes .—Where, by the Statutes 
or the Ordinances,  no provision is made for a Chairman to preside over a meeting of the University 
Authority, Board or Committee, or when the Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present 
shall elect one among themselves to preside at the meeting.  
22. Resignation. —(1) Any member other than an ex officio  member, of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any other authority of the University or committee may resign by letter 
addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon a s such letter is received by the 
Registrar.  
(2) Any officer of the University (whether salaried or otherwise) may resign his office by letter 
addressed to the Registrar:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date from which the same is accepted by 
the authority competent to fill the vacancy.  22 
 23. Disqualifications. —(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being a 
member of any of the authorities of the University — 
(a) if he is of unsound mind or is a deaf -mute o r suffers from contagious leprosy;  
(b) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(c) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and  
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any ques tion arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in sub -section  (1), the question shall be referred for the decision of the Visitor 
and his decision shall be final, and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any court of law against such 
decision.  
24. Honorary degrees. —Any pr oposal for the conferment of hono rary degrees shall be made by the 
Academic Council to the Executive Council, and the proposal if accepted by the Executive Council shall 
require the  assent of the Court before submission to the Chancellor for confirmation.  
25. Withdrawal of degrees, etc. —The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any de gree or academic 
distinction conferred on or any certificate of diploma granted to, any person by the University for good 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling  upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, i f any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Academic Council.  
26. Univ ersity teachers. —(1) Teachers of the University shall be of two classes, namely: — 
(i) Appointed teachers of the University;  
(ii) Recogni sed teacher of the University;  
(2) Appointed teachers of the University shall be either — 
(a) employees of the University  paid by University and appointed by the Executive Council as 
Professors, Readers or Lecturers or otherwise as teachers of the University, or  
(b) persons appointed by the Executive Council as Honorary Professors, Emer itus Professors, 
Readers or Lecturers o r otherwise as teachers of the University.  
(3) Recogni sed teachers of the University shall be members of the staff of a recogni sed institution 
other than an institution maintained by the University:  
Provided that no such member of the staff shall be deemed  to be a recogni sed teacher unless he is 
recogni sed by the Executive Council as a Professor, Reader or in any other capacity as a teacher of the 
University.  
(4) The qualifications of recogni sed teachers of the University shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the Ordinances.  
(5) All applications for the recogni sed teachers of the University shall be made in such manner as 
may be laid down by the Regulations made by the Executive Council in that behalf.  
(6) The period of recognition of a teacher of the Univer sity as Professor or Reader shall be 
determined by Ordinances made in that behalf. A person in the service of a recogni sed institution other 
than an institution maintained by the University, recognis ed as a teacher of the University otherwise than 
as a Pro fessor or Reader shall continue to be recogni sed so long as he is in the service of the institution.23 
        (7) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members present and voting, withd raw r ecognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such resolution 
should not be passed a nd until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Academic Council.  
(8) A person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause ( 7) may, within three months from the 
communication to him of s uch order, appeal to the Executive Council who may pass such orders thereon 
as it thinks fit.  
(9) No person shall be appointed or recogni sed as a teacher of the University except on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose.  
27. Selection Committees. —(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations 
to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance 
Officer and Librarian.  
(2) Every Selection Committee shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, who shall be the Chairman 
thereof, and a person nominated by the Visitor; and, in addition, the Selection Committee for making 
recommendations for appointment to a post specified in column 1 of the Table below shall have as its 
members the persons specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
 Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned if he is a Professor;  
 (ii) Three persons not connected with the Univer sity, 
nominated by the Execu tive Council, out of a panel of 
name s recommended by the Aca demic Council for their 
special knowledge of or interest in, the subject with which 
the Professor will be concerned.  
Reader, Lecturer  (i)    The Head of the Department concerned ; 
  (ii)  Two pe rsons not connected with the Univer sity, nominated 
by the Executive Council, out of a panel of name s 
recommended by the Aca demic Council for their special 
knowledge of or interest in, the subject with which the 
Reader or Lecturer will be con cerned . 
Regi strar, Finance Officer          Three members of the Executive Council nomi nated by it. 
Librarian  Three persons not connected with the Univer sity, who 
have special knowledge of the sub ject of Library Science 
to be nominated by the Executive Council.  
(3) The Procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommenda tions shall  be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(4) If the Executive Council is unable to accept any recommendation made by the Selection 
Committee, it may remit the same to the Selec tion Committee for reconsideration and if the difference is 
not resolved, the Executive Council shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for orders.  24 
 (5) The constitution of the Selection Committees for the purpose of recogni sing teachers  shall be 
provided for by the Ordinances.  
28. Special mode of appointment. —Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 27, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainment to accept 
a post of Professor or  Reader in the University, as the case may be, on such terms and conditions as it 
deems fit, and on the person agreeing to do so, appoint him to the post.  
29. Condition s of service of officers, etc. —(1) Every teacher and salaried officer and such other 
employees as are mentioned in the Statutes shall be appointed under a written contract, which shall be 
lodged with the University and a copy thereof shall be furnished to the officer or teacher or employee 
concerned:  
Provided that in the case of any teacher a ppointed for the first time, the period of the contract shall 
not exceed five years.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the University and those mentioned in clause ( 1) 
shall, at the request of the teacher or officer or employee concerned, o r at the instance of the University, 
be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Executive Council, 
one member nominated by the officer or teacher concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor, and 
the decision of the Tribunal shall be final.  
30. Removal of teachers. —(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, the 
Vice -Chancellor may, if he thinks fit, by order in writing, place the teacher under suspension and shall 
forthwith report to the Exe cutive Council the circumstances in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher, revoke that order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the terms of his contract of service or of his appointment, 
the Executive Council shall be entitled to remove a teacher on the ground of misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council shall not be entitled to remove a teacher except  for good 
cause and after giving three months ’ notice in writing or payment of three months ’ salary in lieu of notice.  
(4) No teacher shall be removed under clause ( 2) or under clause ( 3) until he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause ag ainst the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal o f a teacher shall require a two -thirds majority of the members of the Executive 
Council present and voting.  
(6) The removal of a teacher shall take effect from the date on which the o rder of removal is made:  
Provided that where a teacher is under suspension at the time of his removal, the removal shall take 
effect on the date on which he was placed under suspension.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in these Statutes, the teacher shall be entitled to resign by 
giving three months' notice in writing to the Executive Council.  
31. Removal of  employees other than teachers. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
terms of his contract of service or of his appointment, an employee of the University, other than a teacher, 
may be removed by the authority which is competent to appoint the employee — 
(a) if he is of unsound mind or is deaf -mute or suffers from contagious leprosy;  
(b) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(c) if he has been  convicted by a court of law of any offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months;  
(d) if he is  otherwise guilty of misconduct:  25 
 Provided that no officer of the University shall be removed fr om his office unless a resolution to that 
effect is passed by the Executive Council by a majority of two -thirds of its members present and voting.  
(2) No such employee shall be removed under clause ( 1) until he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of sh owing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(3) Where the removal of such employee is for a reason other than that specified in sub -clause ( c) or 
sub-clause ( d) of clause ( 1), he shall be given three months ’ notice in writing or paid three months ’ salary 
in lieu of notice.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in these Statutes, an employee of the Univer sity, not being a 
teacher, shall be entitled to resign ,— 
(i) in the case of a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the 
appointing authority or paying to the University three months' salary in lieu thereof;  
(ii) in any other case, only after giving one month's notice in writing t o the appointing authority 
or paying to the University one month's salary in lieu thereof.  
32. Maintenance of discipline amo ng students of the University. —(1) All powers relating to 
discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students shall vest in t he Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or such of his powers as he deems proper to the Chief 
Proctor and to such other persons as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to  the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action in the interest of maintaining discipline as may seem to him appropriate, the Vice -
Chancellor may, in the exercise of his powers aforesaid, order or direct that any student or students be 
expelled from any coll ege or institution maintained by the University, Department, Special Centre or 
Speciali sed Laboratory, or be, for a stated period rusticated or be not, for a stated period, admitted to a  
course or courses of study in any college or institution, Department,  Special Centre , or Speciali sed 
Laboratory, or be fined in a sum of rupees that may be specified, or be debarred from taking an 
examination or examinations for one or more years or that the results of student or students concerned in 
the examination or exa minations in which he has or they have appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Principals or, as the case may be, the Heads of the Colleges, Institutions, Departments, 
Special Centres or Speciali sed Laboratories shall have the authority to exercise all such discipl inary 
powers over the students in their respective colleges, institutions, Departments, Special Centres or 
Specialized Laboratories as may be necessary for the proper conduct of such colleges, institutions, 
Departments, Special Centres or Speciali sed Labor atories.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor and the Chief Proctor as aforesaid, 
detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be framed. The Principals or, as the case may be, the 
Heads of the colleges, institutions, Departm ents, Special Centres or Speciali sed Laboratories may frame 
such supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the aforesaid purposes. Every students shall provide 
himself with a copy of these rules.  
33. Membership of students ’ organi sation.—The membershi p of any students' organi sation shall be 
voluntary.  
34. Alumni Association. —(1) There shall be an Alumni Association established for the Jawaharlal 
Nehru University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has been a 
member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a graduate  of the 
University of at least five years standing:  26 
 Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election after the commencement of the Act.  
35. Ordinances. —Subject to the provisions of the Act and these Statutes, the Ordina nces may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the university and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(b) the conditions of the award of fellowshi ps, scholarships, studentships, exhibitions, medals and 
prizes;  
(c) the conduct of examinations, including the terms of office and manner of appoint ment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(d) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the University;  
(e) the conditions of residence of students at the University;  
(f) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing for them of special cour ses of study;  
(g) the giving of moral instruction;  
(h) the numbers, qualifications, emoluments and the terms and conditions of service, of teachers 
of the University;  
(i) the management of colleges, institutions maintained by the University, Special Centre s or 
Speciali sed Laboratories;  
(j) supervision and inspection of colleges, recogni sed institutions, Special Centres and Speciali sed 
Laboratories;  
(k) all other matters which by the Act or these Statutes are to be or may be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
36. Ordinances how made. —(1) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the 
previous approval of the Central Government.  
(2) The said Ordinances may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the Executive Council 
provided that — 
(a) no Ordinance shall be made affecting the conditions of residence or discipline of students, 
except after consultation with the Academic Council;  
(b) no Ordinances shall be made ,— 
(i) affecting the admission or enrolment of students or prescribing examinat ions to be 
recogni sed as equivalent to the University examinations, or  
(ii) affecting the conditions, mode of appointment or duties of examiners or the conduct or 
standard of examination or any course of study,  
unless a draft of such Ordinance has been pr oposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft proposed by the Academic 
Council under clause ( 2) but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic Council for 
reconsideration, either in whole  or in part, together with any amendments which the Executive Council 
may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the Academic 
Council, the Academic Council may, within two months of the date of such reje ction, appeal to the 
Visitor and he may, by order, direct that the proposed Ordinance shall be laid before the next meeting of 27 
 the Court for its approval and that pending such approval, it shall have effect from such date as may be 
specified in the order:  
Provided that if the Ordinance is not approved by the Court at such meeting, it shall cease to have 
effect.  
(5) All Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the 
Visitor and the Court, and shall be considered by the  Court at its next meeting; and the Court shall have 
power, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, 
to cancel any Ordinance made by the Executive Council, and any such Ordinance shall, from the da te of 
such resolution, cease to have effect.  
(6) The Visitor may, by order, direct that the operation of any Ordinance shall be suspended until he 
has had an opportunity of exercising his power of disallowance, and any order of suspension under this 
clause  shall cease to have effect on the expiration of one month from the date of such order or on the 
expiration of fifteen days from the date of consideration of the Ordinance by the Court, whichever period 
expires later.  
(7) The Visitor may, within three mont hs after any Ordinance has been considered by the Court, 
signify to the Executive Council his disallowance of the Ordinance, and from the date of receipt by the 
Executive Council of intimation of such disallowance, the Ordinance shall cease to have effect.  
37. Regulations. —(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with this 
Act, these Statutes and the Ordinances — 
(a) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(b) providing for all matters which by this Act, these Statutes or the Ordinances are to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(c) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by this Act, th ese Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping o f a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment, in such manner as it may specify, of any 
Regulation made under this Statute or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI LAND REFORMS (AMENDMENT) ACT,  1966  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title .  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. Validation of action taken under sections 11 and 13.  
5. Repeal and saving.  
  2 
 THE DELHI LAND REFORMS (AMENDMENT) ACT,  1966 
ACT NO. 1 OF 1966  
[18th March, 1966 .] 
An Act further to amend the Delhi Land Reforms Act 1954.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 196 6. 
1*                               *                               *                                     *                                    * 
4. Validation of action taken under sections 11 and 13 .—Notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in the principal Act or in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
judgment, decree or order of any court, — 
(a) all declarations (whether general or individual) conferring or purporting to con fer 
Bhumidhari rights in favour of any person or class of persons under any of the clauses ( a) to ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11, or in favour of any tenant or class of tenants  or class of tenants  
under any of the clauses ( a) to ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13, of the principal Act, made 
before the 5th day of February, 1966, by the Deputy Commissioner or a Revenue Assistant 
(whether or not such Revenue Assistant was empowered by the Chief Commissioner to  discharge 
all or any of the functions of a Deputy Commissioner), shall be deemed to be, and to have always 
been, made by such Deputy Commissioner or, as the case may be, Revenue Assistant in 
accordance with law and the persons or class of persons or the tenants or class of tenants in whose 
favour  any such declaration has been made shall be deemed to have been validly and lawfully 
declared as Bhumidhars:  
Provided that nothing herein  contained shall affect the right of any person to call in question 
any such declaration on the ground only that the e ntries in the revenue records on the basis of 
which such declaration has been made are incorrect;  
(b) all suits, appeals and other proceeding s relating to any such declaration pending before 
any court or other authority immediately before the 5th day of Fe bruary, 1966, other than those 
based on the ground referred to in the proviso to clause ( a), shall,  on that date, be deemed to have 
abated.  
5. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Delhi Land Refor ms (Amendment) Ordinance,                     
1966 (2 of 1966), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 
5th day of February, 1966.  
                                                           
1. Sections 2 and 3 rep.  by Act 56 of 1974 , s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
--------------------------The Police-Forces (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE POLICE -FORCES (RESTRICTION OF RIGHTS) ACT, 1966  
________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc . 
4. Penalty . 
5. Power to amend Schedule . 
6. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE POLICE -FORCES (RESTRICTION OF RIGHTS) ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1966  
[2nd December,  1966 .] 
An Act to provide for the restriction of certain rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution in 
their application to the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order 
so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the ma intenance of discipline                
among them.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) Th is Act may be called the Police -Forces 
(Restriction of Rights) Act, 1966.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such 1date as may be appointed in this behalf by notification in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) in a 2Union territory, by the Central Government; and  
(b) in a 3State by the Government of that State : 
Provided that different dates may be appointed by the Central Government for different                         
Union territories.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “member of a police -force” means any person appointed or enrolled under any enactment 
specified in the Schedule;  
(b) “police -force” includes any force charged with the maintenance of public order ; 
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.   
3. Restrictions resp ecting right to form association, freedom of speech , etc.—(1) No member of a 
police -force shall, without the express sanction of the Central Government or of the                              
prescribed authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labo ur union, political 
association  or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any other society,  institution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of the force of which he is a member or is not of a purely 
social, recreational or religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, le tter or other 
document except where such communication or publication is in the bona fide discharge of his duties 
or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed nature . 
Explanation. —If any question arises as to whether a ny society, institution, association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section, the decision of 
the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
                                                           
1. 3rd December, 1966 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 1848, dated 3 rd December, 1966,  in respect of the Union territory of Delhi , 
see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
2. 1st  August,  1967, vide notification No. S.O. 1122(E), dated 20th July, 1967, in respect of the Union territories of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part  II, sec . 3(ii). 
3. 4th  September , 1967 , vide Panjab Govt. notification  No. S.O. 67 C. A. 33/66/S. 1/67 , dated 2nd, September, 1967 , in respect 
of the State of Panjab, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary.  3 
 (2) No member of a police -force shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any 
demonstration organised by any  body of persons for any political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be prescribed.  
4. Penalty .—Any person who contravenes the provisions of sect ion 3 shall, without prejudice to any 
other action that may be taken against him, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both . 
5. Power to amend Schedule .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Schedule by including therein any other enactment relating to a force charged with the 
maintenance of public order or by omitting there from any enactment already specified ther ein and on the 
publication of the notification such enactment shall be deemed to be specified in, or as the case may be, 
omitted from, the Schedule . 
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament , as soon as may be, after it is issued.  
6. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one 
session or  1[in two or more successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have  effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be ; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and  the Schedule , for certain words (w.e.f. 15-5-1986).  
 4 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 2 and 5)  
1. 1[The Tamil Nadu District Police Act, 1859 (2 4 of 1859) .] 
2. The Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) District Police Act, 1859 (24 of 1859).  
3. The Police Act, 1861 (5 of 1861) . 
4. The Calcutta Suburban Police Act, 1866 (Bengal Act 2 of 1866).  
5. The Calcutta Police Act, 1866 (Bengal Act 4 of 1866).  
6. The Bengal Police Act, 1869 (Bengal Act 7 of 1869).  
7. The Police Act, 1888 (3 of 1888).   
8. The Madras City Police Act, 1888 . 1[(Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1888)].  
9. The Bengal Military Police Act, 1892 (5 of 1892).  
10. The Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) District Police Act, 1329 Fasli (10 of 1329  F). 
11. The Eastern Frontier Rifles (West Bengal Battalion) Act, 1920 (Bengal Act 2 of 1920).  
12. The Police Act, 1983 (1927 A.D.) (J. & K. Act 2 of 1983).  
13. The Hyderaba d City Police Act, 1348 Fasli (9 of 1348  F). 
14. The Assam Rifles Act, 1941 (5 of 1941).  
15. The Orissa Military Police Act, 1946 (Orissa Act 7 of 1946).  
16. The Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946),  
17. The U.P. Pradeshik  Armed Constabulary Act, 1948 (U.P. Act 40 of 1948).  
18. The Central Reserve Police Act, 1949 (66 of 1949).  
19. The Rajasthan Armed Constabulary Act, 1950 (Rajasthan Act 12 of 1950).  
20. The Bombay Police Act, 1951 (Bombay Act 22 of 1951).  
21. The Bombay State Reserve Police Force Act, 1951 (Bombay Act 38 of 1951).  
22. The Kerala Police Act, 1960 (Kerala Act 5 of 196 1). 
23. The Mysore Police Act, 1963 (Mysore Act 4 of 1964).  
2[24. The Nagaland Armed Police Act, 1966 (Nagaland Act No. 6 of 1966).]  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  the Madras State (Alteration of Name) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1970 (w.e.f. 14 -1-1969).  
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 1720, dated 6 th Nevember, 1967 . 
--------------------------The Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Act 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE POST -GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND  
RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH  ACT, 1966  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, as an 
institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Incorporation of Institute.  
5. Composition of Institute.  
6. Term of office of, and vacancies among, members.  
7. President of Institute.  
8. Allowances of President and members.  
9. Meetings of Institute.  
10. Governing Body and other Committees of Institute.  
11. Staff of Institute.  
12. Objects of Institute.  
13. Functions of Institute.  
14. Vesting of property.  
15. Payment to Institute.  
16. Fund of Institute.  
17. Budget of Institute.  
18. Accounts and audit.  
19. Annual report.  
20. Pension and provident funds.  
21. Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute.  
22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
23. Grant of medical degrees, diplomas, etc., by Institute.  
24. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Institute.  
25. Control by Centr al Government.  
26. Disputes between Institute and Central Government.  
27. Returns and information.  
28. Transfer of service of existing employees.  
29. Continuance of facilities at Institute.  
30. Power to remove difficulties.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to make regulation.  
  2 
 THE  POST -GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND  
RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH , ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 51 OF 1966  
[17th December , 1966 .] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, to be an institution of national importance and to provide for its 
incorporation and matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Post -Graduate Institute of 
Medical Education and Research , Chandigarh, Act 1966.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, as 
an institution of national importance .—Whereas the objects of the institution known as the                    
Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh in the Union territory of 
Chandigarh are such as lo make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the 
institution known as the Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh is an 
institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act , unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Fund ” means the Fund o f the Institute referred to in  section 16; 
(b) “Governing Body ” means the Governing Body of the Institute;  
(c) “Institute ” means the institution known as the Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education 
and Research, Chandigarh, incorporated under this Act;  
(d) “member ” means a member of the Institute;  
(e) “regulation ” means a r egulation made by the Institute;  
(f) “rule” means a rule made by the Central Government.  
4. Incorporation of Institute .—The Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research , 
Chandigarh, is hereby constituted a body corporate by the name afores aid and as such body corporate , it 
shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract and shall, by that name , sue and be sued.  
5. Composition of Institute .—The Institute shall consist of the fol lowing members, namely: — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor of th e Punjab University, ex officio ; 
(b) the Director -General of Health Services , Government of India, ex officio ; 
(c) the Director of the Institute, ex officio;  
(d) three representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government, one 
each from the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health  and Family 
Planning;  
(e) seven persons of whom one shall be a non -medical scientist representing the Indian Science 
Congress Association, to be nomi nated by the Central Government;  
  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1967, vide notification No. S.O. 1115(E), dated 29th March, 1967, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,              
sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (f) four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities to be nominated by the 
Central Government in  the Manner prescribed by rules;  and 
(g) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of the House of the People (Lok Sabha) and one from among themselves by the members of 
the Council of Slates (Rajya Sabha).  
6. Term of office of, and vacancies among, members .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this  
section , the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomination or election.  
(2) The term of office of a member elected under clause ( g) of section 5  shall come to an end as soon 
as he  1[becomes a Minister or Mi nister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy 
Speaker of the House of the People, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, or] ceases to be a 
member of the House from which he was elected.  
(3) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is such a member.  
(4) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to  fill a casual vacancy shall continue for 
the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is nominated or elected.  
(5) An out -going member other than a member elected under clause ( g) of section  5 shall unless the 
Central Government otherwise dir ects, continue in office until another person is nominated as a member 
in his place.  
(6) An out -going member shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(7) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Governmen t 
but he shall continue in office until his resignation  is accepted by that Government.  
(8) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.  
7. President of Institute .—(1) There  shall be a President of the Institute who shall be nominated by 
the Central Government from among the members other than the Director of the Institute.  
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this 
Act or as may be prescribed by rules or regulations.  
8. Allowances of President and members .—The President and other members shall receive such 
allowances, if any, from the Institute as may be prescribed by rules.  
9. Meetings of Institute .—The Institute shall hold its first meeting at such time and place as may be 
appointed by the Central Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government;  and thereafter the 
Institute shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by regulations.  
10. Governing Body and other committees of Institute .—(1) The re shall be a Governing Body of 
the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute in such manner as may be prescribed by 
regulations:  
Provided that the number of persons who are not members of the Institute shall not exceed one -third 
of the total m embership of the Governing Body.  
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the Institute and shall exercise such 
powers and discharge such functions as the Institute may, by regulations made in this behalf, confer or 
impose upon it.  
(3) The President of the Institute shall be the Chairman of the Governing Body and as Chairman 
thereof shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by regulations.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -8-2001).  4 
 (4) The procedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers and  discharge of its functions by the 
Governing Body, and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of 
the Governing Body shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(5) Subject to such control and restrictions as ma y be prescribed by rules, the Institute may constitute 
as many standing committees and as many ad hoc  committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power or 
discharging any function of the Institute or for inquiring into, or reporting or advising upon , any matter 
which the Institute may refer to them.  
(6) The Chairman and members of the Governing Body and the Chairman and members of a 
standing committee or an ad hoc  committee shall receive such allowances, if any, as may be prescribed 
by regulations.  
11. Staff of Institute .—(1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Institute who shall be 
designated as the Director of the Institute and shall, subject to such rules as may be made by the Central 
Government in this behalf,  be appointed by the institute:  
Provided that the first Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
1[(1A) The Director shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon 
his office or until he atta ins the age of sixty -five years , whichever is earlier:  
Provided that any person holding office as a Director immediately before the commencement of the 
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences and the Past -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (Amendment) Act, 2007  (42 of 2007) , shall in so far as his appointment is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this sub -section, cease to hold office on such commencement as such Director and shall be 
entitled to claim compensation not exceeding th ree months ’ pay and allowances for the premature 
termination of his office or of any contract of service.]  
(2) The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as well as the Governing Body.  
(3) The Director shall exercise such powers and discharge  such functions as may be prescribed by 
regulations or as may be delegated to him by the Institute or the President of the Institute or by the 
Governing Body or the Chairman of the Governing Body.  
(4) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Gov ernment in this behalf, the Institute may 
appoint such number of other officers and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its powers 
and discharge of its functions and may determine the designations and grades of such other officers and 
employe es. 
(5) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Director and 
other officers and employees of the Institute shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be 
governed by such conditions of service in res pect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as 
may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf.  
12. Objects of Institute .—The objects of the Institute s hall be— 
(a) to develo p patterns of teaching in under graduate and post -graduate medical education in all its 
branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education.  
(b) to bring together, as far as may be, in one place educational facilities of the highest order for 
the training of personnel in all import ant branches of he alth activity;  and 
(c) to attain self -sufficiency in post -graduate medical education to meet the country ’s needs for 
specialists and medical teachers.  
13. Functions of Institute .—With a view to the promotion of the objects spec ified in  section  12, the 
Institute may — 
(a) provide for under graduate and post -graduate teaching in the science of mode rn medicine and 
other allied sciences, including p hysical and biological sciences;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 2007, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -9-2007).  5 
 (b) provide facilities for research in the va rious branches of such sciences;  
(c) provide  for the teaching of humanities;  
(d) conduct experiments in new methods o f medical education, both under graduate and                 
post-graduate, in order to arrive at satisfactory standards of such education;  
(e) prescribe  courses and curricula for both under -graduate and post -graduate studies;  
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being i n force, establish and 
maintain— 
(i) one or more medical colleges with different departments, including a department of 
preventive and social medicine, sufficiently staffed and equipped to undertake not only              
under -graduate medical education but also post -graduate medical education in different subjects,  
(ii) one or more well -equipped hospitals,  
(iii) a dental college with such institutional facilities for the practice of dentistry and for the 
practical training of students as may be necessary,  
(iv) a nursing college sufficiently staffed and equi pped for the training of nurses,  
(v) rural and urban health organisations which will form centres for the field training of the 
medical, dental and nursing students of the Institute as well as for research into community health 
problems, and  
(vi) other institutions for the training of diffe rent types of health workers, such as 
physiotherapists, occupational therapists, pharmacists, drug analysts and medic al technicians of 
various kinds;  
(g) train teachers for the differ ent medical colleges in India;  
(h) hold examinations and grant such degre es, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles 
in undergraduate and post -graduate medical education as may be laid down in the regulations;  
(i) institute, and appoint persons to , professorships, readerships, lect urerships and posts of any 
descript ion in accordance with regulations;  
(j) receive grants from the Government and gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers 
of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or transferors, as the 
case may be;  
(k) dea l with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner which is 
considered necessary for promoti ng the objects specified in  section   12; 
(l) demand and receive such fees and other charges as m ay be prescribed by regulations;  
1[(m) construct quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in accordance with such 
regulation s as may be made in this behalf;  
(n) borrow money, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the Institute;]  
2[(o)] do all such other acts and things as may be necessary to further the objects specified 
in section 12. 
14. Vesting of property .—The properties of the Institute which had, by virtue of the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966  (31 of 1966) , vested in the Central Government  shall , on the commencement of 
this Act, vest in the Institute.  
15. Payment to Institute .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial  year such sums of money and in 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1987 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 8-9-1987).  
2. Clause ( m) re-lettered as clause ( o) thereof by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  6 
 such manner as may be considered necessary by that Government for the exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
 16. Fund of Institute .—(1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall he credited— 
(a) all moneys pro vided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other char ges received by the Institute ; 
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, bene factions, bequests 
or transfers;  and 
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and di scharge of its functions under  section 13. 
17. Budget of Institute .—The Institute shall prepare in such form and at such time every year as may 
be prescribed by rules a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure of the Institute and shall forward to the Central Gover nment such number of 
copies thereof as may he prescribed by rules.  
18. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form as t he Central 
Government may by rules prescribe, and in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by 
that Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the C omptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute as well as of the institutions established and maintained by it.  
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall  be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament.  
19. Annual report .—The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that 
year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may be 
prescribed by rules and a copy of this report shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament within one 
month of its receipt.  
 20. Pension and provident funds .—(1) The Insti tute shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, 
teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by 
regulations, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit.  
(2) Where any such pension or provid ent fund has been constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund as if it 
were a Government Provident Fund.  
21. Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute .—All orders and decisions of the 
Institute shall be authenticated by the signature of the President or any other member authorised by the 
Institute in this behalf and all other instruments shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director o r 
any other officer of the Institute authorised in like manner in this behalf.  7 
  22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc .—No act done or proceeding 
taken by the Institute, Governing Body or any standing or ad hoc  committee under thi s Act shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in or defect in the constitution of the 
Institute, Governing Body or such standing or  ad hoc committee.  
1[23. Grant of medical  degrees, di plomas, etc., by  Institute.—Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law for the time being in force, the Institute sh all have power to grant medical  degrees, 
diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act.]  
2[24. Recognition of medical qualifica tions granted by  Institute. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), the medical degrees and diplomas 
granted by the Institute under this Act shall be recogni sed medical qualifications for the purposes of that 
Act and shall be deemed to be included in the First Schedule to that Act. ] 
 25. Control by Central Government .—The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of  this Act.  
 26. Disputes between Institute and Central Government .—If in , or in connection with , the 
exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the institute under this Act , any dispute arises 
between the Institute and the Central Government,  the decision of the Central Government on such 
dispute shall be final.  
27. Returns and information .—The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, 
returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time.  
28. Transfer of service of existing employees .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person 
who is employed in the Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 
immediately before the commencement of this Act , shall, on and from suc h commencement, become an 
employee of the Institute and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same 
remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension, leave, gratuity, pro vident fund and other matters as he would have held the same on the date of 
commencement of this Act if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and  conditions are duly altered by 
regulations : 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such person shall 
not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government.  
29. Continuance of facilities at Institute .—The Institute shall continue to provide facilities to the 
Governments of the States of Haryana and Punjab and the Central Government in relation to the Union 
territories of Chandigarh and Himachal Pradesh and the people of the Stat es and territories aforesaid and 
such facilities shall not, in any respect, be less favourable to such Governments and people than what 
were being provided to them before the 1st day of November, 1966 and shall be made available for such 
period and upon su ch terms and conditions (including those relating to any contributions to be made for 
                                                           
1. Section 23 shall stand substituted  (date to be notified) by Act 3 of 2009, s. 2 to read as under:  
“23. Grant of medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas, etc., by the institute. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Institute shall have power to grant medical, dental or nursing 
degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act .”. 
2. Section 24 shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by s. 3, ibid., to read us under:  
“24. Recognition of medical , dental and nursing qualifications granted by the Institute. — Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Medical Council Act, 19 56 (102 of 1956) , the Dentists Act, 1948  (16 of 1948)  and the Indian Nursing 
Council Act, 1947  ( 48 of 1947) , the medical dental or nursing degrees or diplomas, as the case may be, granted by the Institute 
under this Act shall be recognised — 
(a) medical qualifications for the purpose of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and shall be deemed to be included 
in the First Schedule to that Act;  
(b) dental qualifications for the purpose of the Dentists Act, 1948 and shall be deemed to be included in the Sched ule to 
that Act; and  
(c) nursing qualifications for the purpose of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 and shall be deemed to be included 
in the Schedule to that Act. ”. 8 
 the provision of such facilities) as may be agree d upon between the Institute , Governments of the States 
of Haryana and Punjab and the Central Government before the1st da y of April, 1967, or if no agreement 
is reached by the said date, as may be fixed by order of the Central Government.  
30. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, wit hin a period of three years from the commencement of this Act , by 
order published in the Official Gazelle, make such provision or give such directions not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for remov ing the difficulty.  
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government, after consultation with the Institute , may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to car ry out the purposes of this Act : 
Provided that consultation with the Institute shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the making 
of rules  under this  section , but the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions 
which the Institute may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after they are made.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —  
(a) the manner of nomination of members under clause ( f) of  section 5; 
(b) the control and restrictio ns in relation to the constitution of standing and ad hoc  committees 
under sub -section  (5) of  section 10; 
(c) the conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed by, and the manner of filling 
vacancies among, members of the Institute;  
(d) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by  the President of the Institute;  
(e) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the President and other members of the Institute;  
(f) the number of officers and employees that may be appointed by the Institute and  the manner of 
such appointment;  
(g) the form in which, and the time at which, the budgets and reports shall be prepared by the 
Institute and the number of copies thereof to be for warded to the Central Government;  
(h) the form and manner in which returns and information are to be furnished by the Inst itute to 
the Central Government;  
(i) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this   section, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive  sessions aforesaid]  both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.   
32. Powe r to make regulation. —(1) The Institute 2[, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, may, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette ], make regulations consistent with this Act and 
the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of 
this power, su ch regulations may provide for — 
(a) the summoning and holding of meeting s, other than the first meeting  of the Institute, the time 
and place where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meetings and the 
number of memb ers necessary to form a quorum;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “in two successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid., for “ may, with the previous approval of the Central Governmen t” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  9 
 (b) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc  committees, t he term 
of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of, the Governing Body and 
standing and ad hoc  committees;  
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute and 
the Chairman of the Go verning Body;  
(d) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairman and the members of the Governing Body 
and of standing and ad hoc  committees;  
(e) the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc  committees i n 
the conduct of th eir business , exercise of their powers and  discharge of their functions;  
(f) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the Director and 
other officers and employees of the Institute including teach ers appointed by the  Institute;  
(g) the powers and duties of the Chairman of the Governing Body;  
(h) the powers and duties of the Director and other officers and employees of the Institute;  
(i) the management of t he properties of the Institute;  
(j) the degrees, diplomas and o ther academic distinctions and titles which ma y be granted by the 
Institute;  
(k) the professorships, readerships, lecturerships and other posts which may be instituted and 
persons who may be appointed to such professorships, readerships, lecturerships and other posts;  
(l) the fees and other charges which may be demanded  and received by the Institute;  
(m) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which,  pension and provident funds may 
be constituted for the benefit of officers, teachers and oth er employees of the Institute;  
(n) any other matter for which under this Act provisi ons may be made by regulations.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the first regulations under this Act shall  be 
made by the Central Govern ment; and any regulations so made may be altered or rescinded by the 
Institute in exercise of it s powers under sub -section ( 1). 
1[(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while i t is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agr ee in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modificat ion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previou sly done 
under that regulation. ]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE PUNJAB REORGANISATION ACT, 1966  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions.  
PART  II 
REORG ANISATION OF THE STATE OF PUNJAB  
3. Formation of Haryana State . 
4. Formation of Union territory of Chandigarh . 
5. Transfer of territory from Punjab to Himachal Pradesh . 
6. State of Punjab and territorial divisions thereof . 
7. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution . 
8. Saving powers of Government . 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
9. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution . 
10. Allocation of sitting members . 
11. Filling up of vacancies . 
The House of the People  
12. Provision as to existing House . 
The Legislative Assemblies  
13. Provision s as to Legislative Assemblies . 
14. Amendment of  Delimitation Orders . 
15. Allocation of sitting members . 
16. Duration of Legislative Assembly  of Haryana . 
17. Duration of Legislative Assemblies of Punjab and Himachal Pradesh . 
18. Speakers and Deputy Speakers . 
19. Rules of procedure . 
The Legislative Council  
20. Legislative Counc il of Punjab . 
21. Council constituencies . 
22. Provision as to certain sitting members . 
Delimitation of constituencies  
23. Allocation of seats in the House of the People . 2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Allocation of seats in the Legislative Assembly . 
25. Delimitation of constituencies . 
26. Amendment of article 371 of the Constitution . 
27. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders.  
28. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders . 
PART IV 
HIGH COURT  
29. Common High Court for Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh . 
30. Jurisdiction of the common High Court . 
31. Special provision relating to Bar Council and Advocates . 
32. Practice and procedure in common High Court . 
33. Custody of seal of common High Court . 
34. Form of writs and other processes . 
35. Powers of Judges . 
36. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court . 
37. Procedure as  to appeals to Supreme Court . 
38. Extension of jurisdiction of the Court of Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh . 
39. Transfer of pending proceedings . 
40. Interpretation . 
41. Savings . 
PART V 
AUTHORISATION OF THE EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
42. Authorisation  of expenditure of the State of Haryana . 
43. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territory . 
44. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing State of Punjab . 
45. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Haryana . 
46. Distribution of revenues . 
PART VI 
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
47. Application of Part . 
48. Land and goods . 
49. Treasury and bank balances . 
50. Arrears of taxes . 
51. Right to recover loans and advances . 
52. Investments and credits in certain funds . 
53. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings . 
54. Public debt. 
55. Refund of taxes collected in excess . 
56. Deposits, etc . 
57. Provident fund . 
58. Pensions . 
59. Contracts . 3 
 SECTIONS  
60. Liability in respect of actionable wrong . 
61. Liability as guarantor . 
62. Items in suspense . 
63. Residuary provision . 
64. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement . 
65. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases . 
66. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund . 
PART VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
67. Provisions as to certain Corporations . 
68. Continuance of arra ngements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and supply of 
water . 
69. Provisions as to Punjab State Financial Corporation . 
70. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942 . 
71. Provision as to co -operative banks . 
72. General provisions as to statutory corporations . 
73. Provision as to certain companies . 
74. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
75. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases . 
76. Special provision as to income -tax. 
77. Continuance of facilities in  certain State institutions . 
PART VIII 
BHAKRA -NANGAL  AND BEAS PROJECTS  
78. Rights and liabilities in regard to Bhakra -Nangal and Beas Projects . 
79. Bhakra Management Board . 
80. Construction of Beas Project . 
PART IX 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
81. Provisions relating to All-India Services . 
82. Provisions relating to other Services . 
83. Provisions as to continuan ce of officers in the same post . 
84. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
85. Provisions as to State Public Service Commissions . 
PART X 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
86. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 . 
87. Power to extend enactments to Chandigarh . 
88. Territorial extent of laws . 
89. Power to adapt laws . 
90. Power to construe laws . 
91. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions . 
92. Legal proceedings . 4 
 SECTIONS  
93. Transfer of pending proceedings.  
94. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases . 
95. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws . 
96. Power to remove difficulties . 
97. Power to make rules . 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE.  
THE NINTH SCHEDULE.  
THE TENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTEENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FIFTEENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTEENTH SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
  5 
 THE PUNJAB REORGANISATION ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1966  
[18th September , 1966.]  
An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Punjab and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator of a Union territory appointed by the President under 
article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “appointed day ” means  the 1st day of November, 1966;  
(c) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(d) “assembly consti tuency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the  People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);  
(e) “Delimitation Commission ” means the Delimitation Commission constituted under section 3 
of the Delimi tation Com mission Act, 1962 (61 of 1962);  
(f) “existing State of Punjab ” means the State of Punjab as existing immedi ately before the 
appointed day;  
(g) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or othe r instrument having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of law in the 
whole or in any part o f the existing State of Punjab;  
(h) “notified order ” means an order published in the Official Gazet te; 
(i) “population ratio ”, in relation to the States of Haryana and Punjab and the Union, means the 
ratio of 37.38 to 54.84 to 7.78;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of the existing 
State of Punjab, means a person who immediately before the appointed  day is a member of that 
House;  
(l) “State of Punjab ” means the State with the same name, comprising the territories referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 6;  
(m) “successor State ”, in relation to the existing State of Punjab, means the State of Punjab or 
Haryana, and includes also the Union in relation to the Union territory of Chandigarh  and the 
transferred territory;  
(n) “transferred territory ” means the territory which on the appoint ed day is transferred from the 
existing State of Punjab to the Union  territory of Himachal Pradesh;  
(o) “treasury ” includes a sub -treasury; and  
(p) any reference to a district, tahsil or other territorial division of the existing State of Punjab 
shall be c onstrued as a reference to the area comprised within that territorial divisio n on the 1st day of 
July, 1966.  
  6 
 PART II  
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE  OF PUNJAB  
3. Formation of Haryana State .—(1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new 
State to be known as the State of Haryana comprising the following territories of the exis ting State of 
Punjab, namely: — 
(a) Hissar, Rohtak, Gurgaon, Kar nal and Mahendragarh districts;  
(b) Norwana  and Ji nd tahsils of Sangrur district;  
(c) Ambala, Jagadhri and Naraing arh tahsils of Ambala district;  
(d) Pinjore kanungo circle of Kharar  tahsil of Ambala district; and  
(e) the territories in Manimajra kanungo circle of Kharar tahsil of Ambala district s pecified in the 
First Schedule,  
and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part o f the existing State of Punjab.  
(2) The territories referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall form a separate district known as 
the Jind di strict in the State of Haryana.  
(3) The territories referred to in clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) shall form a separate district 
to be known as Ambala district in the State of Haryana and in that district,  — 
(i) the territories referred to in clauses ( d) and (e) of sub -section ( 1) shall be included in, and form 
part of, the Naraingarh tahsil, and  
(ii) the territories referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) shall be included in, and form part of, 
Pinjore kanungo circle in the Naraingarh tahsil.  
4. Formation of  Union territory of Chandigarh .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be 
formed a new Union territory to be known as the Union territory of Chandigarh comprising such of the 
territories of Manimajra and Manauli kanungo circles of Kharar ta hsil of Ambala district in the existing 
State of Punjab as are specified in the Second Schedule and thereupon the territories so specified shall 
cease to form part o f the existing State of Punjab.  
5. Transfer of territory f rom Punjab to Himachal Pradesh .—(1) On and from the appointed day, 
there shall be added to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh the territories in the existing  State of 
Punjab comprised in — 
(a) Simla, Kangra, Kulu and Lahaul and Spiti districts;  
(b) Nala garh tahsil of Ambala district;  
(c) Lohara, Amb and Una kanungo circles of Una  tahsil of Hoshiarpur district;  
(d) the territories in Santokhgarh kanungo circle of Una tahsil of Hoshiarpur district specified i n 
Part I of the Third Schedule;  
(e) the territories  in Una tahsil of Hoshiarpur  district specified in Part I I of the Third Schedule; 
and 
(f) the territories of Dhar Kalan kanungo circle of Pathankot tahsil of Gurdaspur district specified 
in Part III of the Third Schedule,  
and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part o f the existing State of Punjab . 
(2) The territories referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be included in, an d form part of, 
Simla district.  
(3) The territories referred to in clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) shall be included in, an d 
form part of, Kangra district, and  7 
 (i) the territories referred to in clauses ( c) and ( d) shall form a separate tahsil known as Una tahsil 
in that district and in that tahsil the territories referred to in clause ( d) shall form a separate kanungo  
circle known as the Santokhgarh k anungo circle; and  
(ii) the territories referred to in clause ( e) shall form part of the Hamirp ur tahsil in the said 
district.  
(4) The territories referred to in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shall be included in, and form  part of, the 
Bhattiyat tahsil of Chamba district in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh and in that tahsil, the 
villages Dalhousie and Balun shall be included in, and form part of, Banikhet kanungo circle and the 
village Bakloh shall form part of Chow ari kanungo circle.  
6. State of Punjab and  territorial divisions thereof .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the State 
of Punjab shall comprise the territories of the existing State of Punjab other than those specified in  
sub-section ( 1) of section 3, sec tion 4 an d sub -section ( 1) of section 5.  
(2) The territories which immediately before the appointed day were part of Ambala  district in the 
existing State of Punjab but are not transferred by virtue of sections 3, 4 and 5, shall, together with the 
territories which immediately before that day were part of the Una tahsil of Hoshiarpur district in the 
existing State of Punjab bu t are not transferred by virtue of section 5, form a separate district known as 
the Rupar district in the State of Punjab and in that district — 
(i) the territories which immediately before the appointed day were part of Manimajra kanungo 
circle of Kharar t ahsil of Ambala district but are not transferred by virtue of sections 3 and 4, shall 
form in that tahsil a separate kanungo circle calle d the Mullanpur kanungo circle;  
(ii) the territories which immediately before the appointed day were part of Una tahsil  of 
Hoshiarpur district but are not transferred by virtue of section 5, shall form a separate tahsil known as 
Anandpur Sahib tahsil, and in that tahsil, the territories which immediately before the appointed day 
were part of Santokhgarh kanungo circle of U na tahsil of Hoshiarpur district but are not transferred 
by virtue of section 5, shall be included in, and form part  of Nurpur Bedi kanungo circle.  
7. Amendment of the Firs t Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in the 
First Schedule  to the Constitution, — 
(a) under the heading “I. THE STATES ”,— 
(i) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Punjab, the following shall  be 
added at the end, namely: — 
“and the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3, section 4 and sub -section ( 1) 
of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 ”; 
(ii) after entry 16, the following ent ry shall be inserted, namely: — 
“17. Haryana… The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Punjab 
Reorganisation  Act, 1966 ”; 
(b) under the heading “II. THE UNION TERRITORIES ”,— 
(i) in the paragraph relating to the extent of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, the 
following shal l be added at the end, namely: —  
“and the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation 
Act, 1966 ”; 
(ii) after entry 9, the following ent ry shall be inserted, namely: — 
“10. Chandigarh… The territories specified in section 4 of the Punjab Reorganisation 
Act, 1966. ”. 
8. Saving powers of Government .—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be deemed 
to affect the power of the Government of Punjab or Haryana or the Administrator of the Union territory of 8 
 Himachal Pradesh to alter, after the appointed day, the name, area or boundaries of any  district or other 
territorial division in the State or Union  territory, as the case may be.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
9. Amendment of the fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in the 
Fourth Schedule to th e Constitution, in the Table, — 
(a) entries 5 to 21 shall be re -numbered a s entries 6 to 22 respectively;  
(b) after entry 4, the following entry shall be inserted , namely: — 
“5. Haryana....5 ”; 
(c) in entry 12 as so re -numbered, for the figures “11”, the figure “7” shall be substituted;  
(d) in entry 19 as so re -numbered, for the figure “2”, the figure “3” shall be substituted; and  
(e) for the figures “226”, the figures “228” shall be substituted.  
10. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the eleven sitting members 
of the Council of States representing the existing State of Punjab shall be deemed to have been elected to 
fill the seats allotted to the States of Haryana and Punjab and the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, as 
specified in the Fourth Schedule.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
11. Filling up of vacancies .—(1) As soon as may be after the appointed day, bye -elections shall be 
held to fill the vacancies existing on the appointed day in the seats al lotted to the State of Haryana.  
(2) The term of office of such one of the two members so elected , as the Chairman of the  Council of 
States may determine by drawing lot, shall expire on the 2nd day of April, 1968, and the term of office of 
the other member shall expire  on the 2nd day of April, 1972.  
The House of the People  
12. Provision as to existing House .—Nothing in Part II shall be deemed to affect the constitution or 
duration of the existing House of the People or the extent of the constituency of an y sitting member of 
that House.  
The Legislative Assemblies  
13. Provisio n as to Legislative Assemblies .—(1) The number of seats as on the appointed day in the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States of Haryana and Punjab and the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh 
shall be fifty -four, eighty -seven and fifty -six respectively.  
(2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of th e People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) — 
(a) after entry 4, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: —  
“4A. Haryana . . . 54 ”; 
(b) in entry 11, for the figures “154”, the figures “87” shall be substituted; and  
(c) in entry 16, for the figures “40”, the figures “54” shall be substituted.  
14. Am endment of Delimitation Orders .—On and from the appointed day, Part B of Schedule XI to 
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1961, and the Schedule to the 
Delimitation of Terri torial Council Constituencies (Himachal Pradesh) Order, 1962, shall stand amended 
as directed in the F ifth Schedule to this Act.  
15. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of 
Punjab elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from a constituency which on the appointed day by virtue of 
the provisions of section 14 stands allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of 9 
 Haryana or to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, shall, on and from that day, cease to be a member 
of the Legislative Assembly of Punjab and shall be deemed to have been elected to fill a seat in the 
Legislative Assembly of Haryana or in the  Legislative Assembly of Himachal Pradesh, as the case may 
be, from th at constituency as so allotted.  
(2) All other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Punjab shall continue to be members of 
the Legislative Assembly of that State and any such si tting member representing a constituency the 
extent, or the name and extent, of which are altered by virtue of the provisions of section 14 shall be 
deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Punjab by that constituency as so altered.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Legislativ e 
Assemblies of Haryana, Punjab and Himachal Pradesh shall be deemed to be duly co nstituted on the 
appointed day.  
16. Duration of Leg islative Assemblies of Haryana .—The period of five years referred to in  
clause (1) of article 172 shall, in the case of the Legislative Assembly of Haryana, be deemed to have 
commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in the case of the Legislative Assembly of 
Punjab.  
17. Duration of Legislative Assembl ies of Punjab and Himachal Pradesh .—The changes in the 
composition of the Legislative Assemblies of Punjab and Himachal Pradesh shall not affect the duration  
of either of those Assemblies.  
18. Speakers and Deputy Speakers .—(1) The person who immediately before the appointed day is 
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Punjab shall continue to be the Speaker of that  Assembly on 
and from that day.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative As sembly of Haryana shall choose a 
member of that Assembly to be Speaker of that Assembly.  
(3) The person who immediately before the appointed day is the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly of Punjab shall be the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Asse mbly of Haryana . 
(4) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative Assembly of Punjab shall choose a 
member of that Assembly to be D eputy Speaker of that Assembly.  
19. Rules of procedure .—The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of Punjab as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are made under 
clause (1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legi slative Assembly of 
Haryana, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.  
The Legislative Council  
20. Legislative Council of Punjab .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be forty seats in the 
Legislative Council of Punjab, and in the Third Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 
(43 of 1950), for the existing entry 7, the following entry shall be substituted, namely :— 
“7. Punjab  . .          40  14  3  3  14  6”.  
21. Council constitu encies .—On and from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (Punjab) Order, 1951, shall stand amended as directed in the Sixth Schedule.  
22. Provision  as to certain sitting members .—(1) On the appointed day, the sitting members of the 
Legislative Council of Punjab specified in the Seventh Schedule shall cease  to be members of that 
Council.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, all sitting members of the Le gislative Council of Punjab, other  
than those referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall continue  to be members of that Council.  
(3) Any of the sitting members continuing as aforesaid, representing a council constituency the extent 
of which is altered by virtue  of the provisions of section 21 shall be deemed to have been elected to the 
Legislative Council of Punjab by t hat constituency as so altered.  10 
 (4) Every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before the appointed day any 
of the council  constituencies specified in column ( 1) of the Table below shall be deemed to have been 
elected to the said Council by the council constituency specified against that constituency in column ( 2) 
of the said Table: — 
TABLE  
(1) (2) 
Punjab West Central Graduates  Punjab Central Graduates.  
Punjab East Central Graduates  Punjab South Graduates.  
Punjab West Central Teachers  Punjab Central Teachers.  
Punjab East Central Teachers  Punjab South Teachers.  
Patiala Local Authorities                        Patiala -cum-Rupar Local Authorities.  
(5) The term of office of the members referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall remain unalte red. 
(6) As soon as may be after the appointed day, elections shall be held to fill the vacancies existing on 
the appointed day in the seats allotted to the several council constituencies by the Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (Punjab) Order, 1951, as amended by this Act and to fill the vacancy existing on that day 
in the seats to be filled by persons elected by the membe rs of the Legislative Assembly.  
(7) The term of office of the three members so elected from Ferozepur Local Authorities ’ 
constituency, Jullundur Local Authorities ’ constitutency and Ludhiana Local Authorities ’ constituency 
and of the member so elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly shall expire on the 26th day of 
April, 1968, and the term of office of the member so elected from Patiala -cum-Rupar Local Authorities ’ 
constituency shall expire on the 26th day of April, 1972.  
(8) The pers on who immediately before the appointed day is the Chairman of the Legislative Council 
of Punjab shall continue to be the Chairman of that Council on and from that day.  
(9) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative Council of Punjab shall choose one of 
its members to be the Deputy Chairman thereof.  
Delimitation of Constituencies  
23. Allocation of se ats in the House of the People .—In the House of the People to be constituted 
after the commencement of this Act, there shall be allotted, — 
(a) nine seats to the State of Haryana of which two seats shall be reserved for the Schedul ed 
Castes;  
(b) thirteen seats to the State of Punjab of which three seats shall be res erved for the Scheduled 
Castes;  
(c) six seats to the Union territory of Himachal Pr adesh of which one seat shall be reserve d for the 
Scheduled Castes; and  
(d) one seat to the Union territory of Chandigarh which shall form one Parliamentary 
constituency.  
24. Allocation of sea ts in the Legislative Assembly .—(1) The total number of seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of Haryana to be constituted at any time after the appointed day, to be filled by 
persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies, shall be eighty -one of which fifteen seats 
shall be  reserved for the Scheduled Castes.  
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Punjab to be constituted at any time after 
the appointed day, to be filled by persons chosen by direct electi on from territorial consti tuencies, shall be 
one hundred and four of which twenty -three seats shall be reser ved for the Scheduled Castes.  
  11 
 (3) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Himachal Pradesh to be constituted at 
any time after the appointed day, to be filled by persons chosen b y direct election from territorial 
constituencies, shall be sixty of which fourteen seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and three 
seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.  
25. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) The Delimitation Commission shall, in the manner herein 
provided, distribute the seats in the House of the People allotted to Haryana, Punjab and Himachal 
Pradesh under section 23 and the seats assigned to the Legis lative Assembly of each of them under 
section 24 to single -member territorial constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest census  
figures, having regard to the provisions of the Constitution and to the following provisions, namely: — 
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable be geographical ly compact areas, and in 
delimiting them regard shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of commun ication and public convenience;  
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall wholly with in one parliamentary 
constitue ncy; 
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes shall be distributed in 
different parts of the State or Union territory, as the case may be, and located, as far as practicable, in 
those areas where  the proportion of their population to the total population is comparatively large; and  
(d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, 
be located in areas where the proportion of their population to th e total population is the larg est. 
(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions under sub -section ( 1), the 
Delimitation Commission shall associate with itself in respect of each State and Union territory such six 
persons as the C entral Government may by order specify, being persons who are members either of the 
House of the People or of the Legislative Assembly of Harya na, Punjab or Himachal Pradesh:  
Provided that such persons shall be chosen, as far as practicable, from among tho se members who 
were associated  before the com mencement of this Act with the Delimitation Commission in delimiting 
constituencies  of Punjab or Himachal Pradesh:  
Provided further that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any de cision 
of the Delimitati on Commission.  
(3) The Delimitation Commission shall, by one or more orders, determine the delimitation of the 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The provisions of sections 7, 10 and 11 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 (61 of 1962), 
shall apply in relation to the delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies under this Part as 
they apply in relation to the delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies under th e said Act.  
(5) Upon publication in the Gazette of India of the order or orders of the Delimitation Commission 
made under sub -section ( 3), the orders previously made by it delimiting the parliamentary and assembly 
constituencies of Punjab and Himachal Prad esh shall stand cancelle d. 
26. Amendment of a rticle 371 of the Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in article 371 
of the Constitution, in clause ( 1), the words “or Punjab ” shall be omitted.  
27. Amendm ent of Scheduled Castes Orders .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as d irected in the Eighth Schedule.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 
1951, shall stand amende d as directed in the Ninth Schedule.  
28. Amendm ent of Scheduled Tribes Orders .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Tenth Schedule.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the  Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 
1951, shall stand amended as dir ected in the Eleventh Schedule.  
  12 
 PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
29. Common High Court for Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh .—(1) On and from the appointed 
day,— 
(a) there shall be a common High Court for the States of Punjab and Haryana and for the Union 
territory of Chan digarh to be called the High Court of Punjab and Haryana (hereinafter referre d to as 
the common High Court);  
(b) the Judges of the High Court of Punjab holding o ffice immediately before that day shall, 
unless they have elected otherwise, become on that day the J udges of the common High Court.  
(2) The expenditure in respect of salaries and allowances of the Judges of the common High Court 
shall be allocated amongst  the States of Punjab and Haryana and the Union  territory of Chandigarh in 
such proportion as the Pres ident may, by order, determine.  
30. Jurisdi ction of the common High Court .—On and from the appointed day, the common High 
Court shall have, in respect of the territories comprised in the States of Punjab and Haryana and the Union 
territory of Chandigarh, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the law in force immediately 
before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of those territorie s by the High Court of Punjab and 
shall, save as otherwise provided in this Part, have no jurisdiction in respect of the transferred territory.  
31. Special provision relatin g to Bar Council and Advocates .—(1) On and from the appointed  
day,— 
(a) in the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), in sub -section ( 1) of section 3, for clause ( d), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(d) for the States of Punjab and Haryana and the Union territories of Chandigarh and 
Himachal Pradesh, to be known as the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana ”; 
(b) the Bar Council of Punjab shall be deemed to be the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana with 
the Advocate -General of the State of Haryan a also as an ex officio  member.  
(2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practice  in the 
High Court of Punjab shall be entitled to practise as an adv ocate in the common High Court.  
(3) All persons who immediately before the appointed day are advoca tes on the roll of the Bar 
Council of Punjab shall, as from that day, become advocates on the roll of the Bar Cou ncil of Punjab and 
Haryana.  
(4) The right of audience in the common High Court shall be regulated in accordance with the like 
principles as imm ediately before the appointed day are in force with respect to the right of audience in the 
High Court of Punjab:  
Provided that as between the Advocate -General of Punjab and the Advocate -General of Haryana, the 
right of audience shall be determined with r eference to their dates of enrolment as a dvocates.  
32. Practice and procedure in common High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law 
in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court of 
Punjab shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in rel ation to the common High Court.  
33. Custod y of seal of common High Court .—The law in force immediately before the appointed 
day with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Punjab shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the  seal of the common High Court.  
34. For m of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other proces ses used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Punjab 
shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, 
issued or aw arded by the common High Court.  13 
 35. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court of Punjab and with 
respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifica tions, 
apply in rel ation to the common High Court.  
36. Principal seat and other places of si tting of the common High Court .—(1) The principal seat 
of the common High Court shall, unless otherwise determined by the President after consultation with the 
Chie f Justice of that High Court and the Governors of Punjab and Haryana, be at the same place as the 
principal seat of the High Court of Punjab immedi ately before the appointed day.  
(2) The President may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of the commo n High Court and the 
Governors of the States of Punjab and Haryana, by notified order, provide for the establishment of a 
permanent bench or benches of that High Court at one or more places within the territories to which the 
jurisdiction of the High Court  extends, other than the principal seat of the High Court, and for any 
matters conne cted therewith.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division 
courts of the common High Court may also sit at such other place or places in the States of Punjab and 
Haryana as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the Governors of the States of Punjab and 
Haryana, appoint.  
37. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Punjab and the Judges and 
division courts thereof, shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common High 
Court.  
38. Extension of jurisdiction of the Court of Judicial Com missioner for Himachal Pradesh .—On 
and from the appointed day, the jurisdiction of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Himachal 
Pradesh shall exten d to the transferred territory.  
39. T ransfer of pending proceedings .—(1) All proceedings pending in the High Court of Punjab 
immediately  before the appointed day shall, on that day, stand transf erred to the common High Court.  
(2) Such proceedings which stand transferred to the common High Court under sub -section ( 1) as are 
certified by the Chief Justice of the common High Court, having reg ard to the place of accrual of the 
cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the 
Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh shall, as soon as may be after such 
certification, be transferr ed to the Court of the Judicial Com missioner for Himachal Pradesh.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Part, but save as 
hereinafter provided, the common High Court shall have, and the Court of the Judicial Commission er for 
Himachal Pradesh shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for 
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such 
proceedings seek any relief in respect of any  order passed by the High Court of P unjab before the 
appointed day:  
Provided that if, after any such proceedings have been entertained by the common High Court, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the Cou rt of the 
Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Prades h, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such 
proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order — 
(a) made by the High Court of Punjab before the appointed day, in any proceeding transferred to 
the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Himachal Pradesh by virtue of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) made by the common High Court in any proceeding with respect to which that High Court has 
jurisdictio n by virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall for all purposes have effect not only as an order of the High Court of Punjab or, as the case may be, 
of the common High Court, but also as an order made by the Court of the Judicial Com missioner for 
Himachal Pradesh.  14 
 40. Interpretation .—For the purposes of this Part, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues 
between the parties including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings 
and shall include appeal s, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revisio n and petitions for writs; and  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
court thereof, and refer ences to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that court or Judge.  
41. Savings .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the common High Court of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made 
on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority havin g 
power to make such provision.  
PART V  
AUTHOR ISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
42. Authorisation of expen diture of the State of Haryana .—The Governor of the existing State of 
Punjab may at any time, before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure f rom the Consolidated 
Fund of the State of Haryana as he deems necessary for any period not extending beyond the 31st day of 
March, 1967, pending the sanction of such expenditure by the L egislative Assembly of Haryana:  
Provided that the Governor of Haryana may, after the appointed day,  authorise such further 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State as he deems necessary for the sai d period pending 
such sanction.  
43. Appropriation of moneys for expend iture in transferred territory .—(1) On and from the 
appointed day, any Act pa ssed by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh 
before that day for the appropriation of any money out of the Consolidated Fund of that Union Territory 
to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year 1966 -67 shall have effect also in 
relation to the transferred territory and it shall be lawful for the Government of Himachal Pradesh to 
spend any amount in the transferred terri tory out of the amount authorised by such Act to be expended for 
any s ervice in that Union territory.  
(2) The Administrator of Himachal Pradesh may, after the appointed day, authorise such expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory as he  deems necessary for any purpose or service in the 
transferred territory for any period not extending beyond the 31st day of March, 1967, pending the 
sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of Himachal Pradesh.  
44. Reports relating to the  accounts o f the existing State of Punjab .—(1) The reports of the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India referred to in clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts 
of the existing State of Punjab in respect of any period prior to the appointed day , shall be submitted to 
the Governor of each of the States of Punjab and Haryana and the Administrator of Himachal Pradesh 
who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of that State or Union territory, as the case may be.  
(2) The President may by  order — 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of Punjab on any service in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial year 1966 -67 or in respect of any 
earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year as disclosed in 
the reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to hav e been duly authorised, and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter a rising out of the said reports.  
45. Allowances and pri vileges of G overnor of Haryana .—The allowances and privileges of the 
Governor of Haryana shall, until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under clause (3) of 
article 158, be such as the Pres ident may, by order, determine.  
46. Distribution of revenues .—The Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1965, the Union 
Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1962 (3 of 1962), the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special 15 
 Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957), and the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act 1962 , (9 of 1962), shall on 
and from the appointed day, stand amended as directed in the Tw elfth Schedule.  
PART VI  
APPORTIO NMENT OF ASSETS  AND LIABILITIES  
47. Application of Part .—The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment of 
the assets and liabilities of the existing State of Punjab immedi ately before the appointed day.  
48. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all  stores, articles 
and other goods belonging to the existing State of Punja b shall, — 
(a) if within that State, pass to the successor State in whose te rritories they are situated; or  
(b) if outside that Stat e, pass to the State of Punjab:  
Provided that where  the Central Government is of the opinion that any goods or class of goods should 
be distributed among the successor States otherwise than according to the situation of the goods, the 
Central Government may issue such directions as it thinks fit for a just  and equitable distribution of the 
goods and the goods shall pass to the successor States accordingly.  
(2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular institutions, workshops or 
undertakings or on particular works under cons truction, shall pass to the successor State in whose 
territories such institutions, workshops, und ertakings or works are located.  
(3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having jurisdiction over the 
whole of the existing State of Punjab shall be divided between the successor States in accordance with 
such directions as the Central Government may think fit to issue for a just and equitab le distribution of 
such stores.  
(4) Any other unissued stores of any class in the existi ng State of Punjab shall be divided between the 
successor States in proportion to the total stores of that class purchased in the period of three years ending 
with the 31st day of March, 1966, for the territories of the existing State of Punjab included re spectively 
in each of the successor States:  
Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in respect of any class of stores or where 
the value of any class of such stores does not e xceed rupees ten thousand, that class of stores shall be 
divided between the successor States acc ording to the population ratio.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the lands specified in the Thirteenth Schedule 
which were acquired by the Government of  the existing State  of Punjab — 
(i) for the  sewerage scheme of Chandigarh,  
(ii) for soil conservation measures in the cat chment area of Sukhna lake, and  
(iii) for the setting up of brick kilns of the Chandigarh Capital Project,  
together with all connected works in or over suc h land (including any plant, machinery or imple ments) 
shall vest in the Union.  
(6) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property of every kind and any rights in 
or over such property, and the expression “goods ” does not include coins, bank notes and currency notes.  
49. Treasury and bank balances .—The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the existing 
State of Punjab and the credit balances of that State with the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of  
India or any other bank immediately before the appointed day shall be divided between the successor 
States acc ording to the population ratio:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash balances from any 
treasury to  any other treasury and the apportionment shall be effec ted by adjusting the credit balances of 
the successor States in the books of the Reserve Bank  of India on the appointed day:  16 
 Provided further that if any successor State has no account with the Reserv e Bank of India, the 
adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Central Government ma y by order, direct.  
50. Arrears of taxes .—The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property, including arrears 
of land revenue, shall belong to the successor  State in whose territories the property is situated, and the 
right to recover arrears of any other tax or duty shall belong to the successor State in whose territories the 
place of assessment o f that tax or duty is included.  
51. Right  to recover loans and  advances .—(1) The right to recover any loans or advances made 
before the appointed day by the existing State of Punjab to any local body, society, agriculturist or other 
person in an area within that State shall belong to the successor State in whose territories that area is 
included:  
Provided that the right to recover loans or advances of pay and travelling allowance to a Government 
servant made before the appointed day by the existing State of Punjab shall pass to the successor State to 
which such Government servant is allotted.  
(2) The right to recover any loans or advances made before the appointed day by the existing State of 
Punjab to any person or institution outside that State shall  belong to the State of Punjab:  
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any  such loan or advance shall be divided between all 
the successor States acc ording to the population ratio.  
52. Investment s and credits in certain funds .—(1) The investments made from the Cash Balance 
Investment Account, the Famine Relief Fund and any other general fund of the existing State of Punjab, 
the sums at the credit of that State in the Central Road Fund and the sums held in the Defence and 
Security Relief Fund shall be divided between the successor States according to the population ratio; and 
the investments in any special fund the objects of which are confined to a local area in the existing State 
of Punjab shall pass to the successor State in whos e territories that area is included.  
(2) The investments of the existing State of Punjab immediately before the appointed day in any 
private commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as such investments have not been made or are 
deemed not to have be en made from the Cash Balance Investment Account, shall pass to the successor 
State in whose territories the principal seat of business of the undertaking is located and where on that day 
the principal seat of business of the undertaking is located outside  the territories of the existing State of 
Punjab such investments shall be divided between all the successor States in the population ratio.  
(3) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the 
existing State of Punjab or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an inter -
State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or advances to, any such body corporate by the existing 
State of Punjab made before the appointed day shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by or under 
this Act, be divided between the successor States in the same proportion in which the assets of the body 
corporate are divided un der the provisions of Part VII.  
53. Assets and lia bilities of State undertakings .—(1) The assets and liabilities relating to any 
commercial or industrial undertaking of the existing State of Punjab shall pass to the successor State in 
whose territor ies the undertaking is located.  
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the ex isting State of Punjab for any 
commercial or industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund 
shall pass to the successor State in whose territor ies the undertaking is located.  
(3) Where any such undertaking is loca ted in more than one successor State, the assets and liabilities 
and the securities referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) respectively shall be divided in such manner as 
may be agreed upon between the successor States before the 1st day of November, 1967 , or in default of 
such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct.  
54. Public debt .—(1) The public debt of the existing State of Punjab attributable to loans raised by 
the issue of Government securities and outstanding with the public immediately before the appointed day 
shall, on and from that day, be the deb t of the State of Punjab, and — 
(a) the other successor States shall be liable to pay to the State of Punjab their shares of the sums 
due from time to time for the servicing and rep ayment of the debt, and  17 
 (b) for the purpose of determining the said shares, the debt shall be deemed to be divided between 
the successor States as if it were a debt refe rred to in sub -section ( 4). 
(2) The public debt of the existing State of Punjab attribu table to loans taken from the Central 
Government, the National Co -operative Development Corporation or the Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission or from any other source for the purpose of re -lending the same to a specific institution or 
class of institu tions and outstanding immediately b efore the appointed day shall — 
(a) if re -lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any local area, be the debt of 
the successor State in whose territories the local area is included on the appoint ed day; or  
(b) if re -lent to the Punjab State Electricity Board or any other institution which becomes an inter -
State institution on the appointed day, be divided between the successor States in the same proportion 
in which the assets of such body corporate o r institution are divided under the provisions of Part VII.  
(3) The public debt of the existing State of Punjab attributable to loans taken from the Central 
Government for the Beas Project and the Bhakra -Nangal Project as defined in sub -section ( 4) of  
section 78 shall be divided between the successor States in such proportion as may be agreed upon 
between them, or if no agreement is entered into within two years from the appointed day, as may be 
fixed by o rder of the Central Government.  
(4) The remaining p ublic debt of the existing State of Punjab attributable to loans taken from the 
Central Government, the Reserve Bank of India or any other body or bank before the appointed day shall 
be divided between the successor States in proportion to the total expend iture on all capital works and 
other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred up to the appointed day in the territories of 
the existing State of Punjab included respectively in each of those successor States:  
Provided that in computing suc h expenditure, the expenditure on the Beas Project and the  
Bhakra -Nangal Project as defined in sub - section ( 4) of section 78 shall be excluded and the expenditure 
on other assets for which capital accounts have been ke pt shall be taken into account.  
Explanation .—Where  any expenditure on capital works or other capital outlays cannot be allocated 
between the territories included in the successor States, such expenditure shall, for the purposes of this 
sub-section, be deemed to have been incurred in those territories acco rding to the population ratio.  
(5) Where a sinking fund or depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State of Punjab for 
repayment of any loan referred to in sub -section ( 3), the securities held in respect of the investments made 
from that fund shall  be divided between the successor States in the same proportion and in the same 
manner as the public debt referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(6) Where a sinking fund or depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State of Punjab for the 
repayment of any l oan raised by it other than a loan referred to in sub -section ( 3), the securities held in 
respect of the investments made from that fund shall be divided between the successor States in the same 
proportion as the public debt referred to  in sub -section ( 4). 
(7) In this section, the expression “Government security ” means a security created and issued by a 
State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in, or 
prescribed under clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944 ( 18 of 1944).  
55. Refun d of taxes collected in excess .—The liability of the existing State of Punjab to refund any 
tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor 
State in whose territories the property is situated, and the liability of the existing State of Punjab to refund 
any other tax or duty collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor State in whose territories 
the place of assessment o f that tax or duty  is included.  
56. Deposits, etc .—(1) The liability of the existing State of Punjab in respect of any civil deposit or 
local fund deposit shall, on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the successor State in whose 
territo ries the deposit has been  made:  
Provided that if the deposit is made in any area outside the existing State, the liability shall be that of 
the State of Punjab in the first instance and shall be adjusted between the successor States acc ording to the 
population ratio.  18 
 (2) The liability of the existing State of Punjab in respect of any charitable or other endowment shall, 
on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the successor State in whose territories the institution 
entitled to the benefit of the endowment is located  or of the successor State to which the objects of the 
endowment, under the t erms thereof, are confined.  
57. Provident fund .—(1) The liability of the existing State of Punjab in respect of the provident fund 
account of a Government servant in service on th e appointed day shall, on and from that day, be the 
liability of the successor State to which that Government s ervant is permanently allotted.  
(2) The liability of the existing State of Punjab in respect of the provident fund account of a 
Government servan t who has retired from service before the appointed day shall be the liability of the 
State of Punjab in the first instance and shall be adjusted between the successor States acc ording to the 
population ratio.  
58. Pensions .—The liability of the existing State of Punjab in respect of pensions shall pass to, or be 
apportioned between, the successor States in accordance with the provisions contained in the  Fourteenth 
Schedule.  
59. Contracts .—(1) Where before the appointed day the existing State of Punjab has  made any 
contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purpose of the State, that contract shall be deemed 
to have been made in the ex ercise of the executive power — 
(a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appointed day, exclusiv ely purposes of an y 
one of the successor States, —of that State; and  
(b) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from that day, not exclusively purposes of any one 
of the successor S tates, —of the State of Punjab,  
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the existing State of Punjab, be rights or 
liabilities of the successor State or, as the case  may be, the S tate of Punjab specified above:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( b), the initial allocation of rights an d 
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon 
between all the successor States concerned, or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government 
may by order direct.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be dee med to be included in the liabilities which have 
accrued or may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any  liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connec tion with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other  financial obligations; and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of contractual rights, be dea lt 
with under those provisions.  
60. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appoint ed day, the 
existing State of Punjab is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong other than breach of 
contract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which on and from that day are the 
territories of one of the successor States, be a liabili ty of that successor State; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Punjab, but subject to such financial 
adjustment as may be agreed upon between all the successor States conce rned, or in default of such 
agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct.  19 
 61. Liability as guarantor .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of 
Punjab is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co-operative society or other person, 
that liability of the e xisting State of Punjab shall — 
(a) if the area of the operations of such society or person is limited to the territories which on and 
from that day are the territories of one of the successor Sta tes, be a liabili ty of that successor State; 
and 
(b) in any other case, be a li ability of the State of Punjab:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( b) the initial allocation of liabilities under 
this section shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between all the successor 
States, or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct.  
62. Items in suspens e.—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in acco rdance 
with that provision.  
63. Residuary p rovision .—The benefit or burden of  any assets or liabilities of the existing State of 
Punjab not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of Punjab in the first 
instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between all the successor  States 
before the 1st day of November, 1967, or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may 
by order direct.  
64. Apportionment of assets or liabilit ies by agreement .—Where the successor States agree that 
the benefit or burden of any partic ular asset or liability should be apportioned between them in a manner 
other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be apport ioned in the manner agreed 
upon.  
65. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor States becomes entitled to any 
property or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government is of 
opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed day by any State that it is 
just and equitable that that property or those benefits should be tran sferred to, or shared with, one or more 
of the other successor States, or that a contribution towards that liability should be made by one or more 
of the other successor States, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner, or the other 
successor State or States shall make to the State primarily subject to the liability such contribution in 
respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with State Government s concerned by 
order determine.  
66. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund .—All sums payable by the 
Union to any State or by any State to any other State or to the Union by virtue of the provisions of this 
Part, or sub -section ( 4) of section 72, or section 77, or Part VIII shall be charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of India, or as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of the State by which such sums are payable:  
Provided that where any sums are payable as aforesaid by the Union in relation to the transferred 
territory, the Central Government may by  order direct that sums payable in respect of such liabilities as 
may be specified therein shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union  territory of Himachal 
Pradesh.  
PART VII  
PROVIS IONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
67. Provisi ons as to certain Cor porations .—(1) The following bodies corporate constituted for the 
existing State of Punjab, namely: — 
(a) the State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricit y Supply Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) ; 
and 20 
 (b) the  State Warehousing Corporation established under the Warehousing Corpor ations Act, 
1962 (58 of 1962 ), 
shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which they were 
functioning immediately before that day subject to  the provisions of this section and to such directions as 
may, from time to time, be is sued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by th e Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the Board or 
the Corporation may include a direct ion that the Act under which the Board or the Corporation was 
constituted shall, in its application to that Board or Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions 
and modifications as the  Central Government thinks fit.  
(3) The Board or the Corporatio n referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall cease to function as from, and 
shall be deemed to be dissolved on, the 1st day of November, 1967, or such earlier date as the Central 
Government may, by order, appoint; and upon such dissolution, its assets, rights an d liabilities shall be 
apportioned between the successor States in such manner as may be agreed upon among them within one 
year of the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, or if no agreement is reached, 
in such manner as the Cen tral Gover nment may, by order, determine.  
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of any of the successor States from constituting at any time on or after the appointed day, a 
State Electricity Board or a State Warehousing Corporation for that State under the provisions of the Act 
relating to such Board or Corporation; and if such a Board or a Corporation is so constituted in any of the 
successor States before the dissolution of the B oard or the Corporation re ferred to in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the new Board or the 
new Corporation to take over from the existing Board or Corporation all or any of its undertakings, 
assets, rights and lia bilities in that State, and  
(b) upon the dissolution of the existing Board or Corporation, any assets, rights and liabilities 
which would otherwise have passed to that State by or under the provisions of sub -section ( 3) shall 
pass to the new Board or the new Corpor ation instead of to that State.  
68. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of elec tric power and 
supply of water .—If it appears to the Central Government that the arrangement in regard to the 
generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any area or in regard to the execution of 
any project for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvantage of that 
area by reason of the fact that it has been transferred  by the provisions of Part II from the State in which 
the power stations and other installations for the generation and supply of such power, or the catchment 
area, reservoirs and other works for the supply of water, as the case may be, are located, the Ce ntral 
Government may give such directions as it deems fit, to the State Government or other authority 
concerned for the maintenance, so far as practicabl e, of the previous arrangement.  
69. Provisions as to Punj ab State Financial Corporation .—(1) The Punjab  State Financial 
Corporation Established under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 ( 53 of 1951), shall on and from 
the appointed day continue to function in those areas in respect of which it was functioning immediately 
before that day subject to th e provisions of this section and to such directions, as may from time to time, 
be issued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by th e Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the 
Corporation may include a direction that the said Act, in its application to the Corporation, shall have 
effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may  be specified in the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Board of Directors 
of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and shall, if so required by 
the Central Government, convene at any time after the appointed day a meeting for the consideration of a 
scheme for the reconstitution or reorganisation or  dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation, 
including proposals regarding the formation of new corporations and the transfer thereto of the assets, 
rights and liabilities of the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at a general meeting by 
a resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be submitted to 
the Central G overnment for its sanction.  21 
 (4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without modifications or with 
modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify the scheme, 
and upon such certification the scheme shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
law for the time being in force, be binding on th e Corporations affected by the scheme as well as the 
shareholders and creditors thereof.  
(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Central Government may refer the scheme to 
such Judge of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana as may be nominat ed in this behalf by the Chief 
Justice thereof and the decision of the Judge in regard to the scheme shall be final and shall be binding on 
the Corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shar eholders and creditors thereof.  
(6) Nothing in the preced ing provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of the State of Haryana or Punjab from constituting, at any time after the appointed day and 
with the approval of the Central Government, a State Financial Corporation for that State under the State 
Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951).  
70. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942 .—In the Multi -Unit Co -operative Societies Act, 1942, after  
section 5C, the following secti on shall be inserted, namely: — 
“5D. Transitional provision relating to certain mu ltiunit co -operative societies .—(1) Where, 
in respect of any co -operative society specified in the Fifteenth Schedule to the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966, which under the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 5A would become 
a multi-unit co-operative society, the Board of Directors adopts, by a majority of not less than three -
fourths of the directors, any scheme for the reconstitution, reorganisation or dissolution of the society, 
including proposals regarding — 
(a) the formation of new co -operative societies and the transfer thereto, in whole or in part, of 
the assets and liabilities and employees of that society; or  
(b) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets and liabilities and employees of that society 
to any other co -operative society in the existing State of Punjab or in the Union  territory of 
Himachal Pradesh;  
and the State Government of Punjab certifies the scheme at any time before the 1st day of November, 
1966, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section (3) or sub -section ( 4) 
of the said section or any other law, regulation or bye -law for the time being in force in relation to 
that society, the scheme so certified shall be binding on all societies affected by the scheme, as well 
as the shareholders, creditors and employees of all such societies, subject to such financial 
adjustments as may be directed in this behalf under sub -section ( 3), but no such scheme shall be given  
effect to before the said day:  
Provided that where a scheme includes any proposal regarding the transfer of assets and liabilities 
and employees to any co -operative society referred to in clause ( b), the scheme shall not be binding 
on that existing society or the shareholders and creditors thereof, unless the proposal relating to such 
transfer is accepted by the existing society by a resolution passed by a majority of the members 
present at a meeting of  its general body.  
(2) When a scheme in respect of a co -operative society is so certified, the Central Registrar shall 
place the scheme at a meeting, held in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act, of 
all the persons who, immediately before the date of c ertification of the scheme, were members of the 
society, and the scheme may be approved by a resolution passed by a majority of the members present 
and voting at the said meeting.  
(3) If the scheme is not so approved or is approved with modifications, the Central Registrar may 
refer the scheme to such Judge of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana as may be nominated in this 
behalf by the Chief Justice thereof and the Judge may direct such financial adjustments to be made among 
the societies affected as he d eems necessary, and the scheme shall be deemed to be approved subject to 
those financial adjustments.  22 
 (4) If, in consequence of the directions given under sub -section ( 3), a society becomes liable to pay 
any sum of money, the successor State within whose a rea the society is located shall be deemed to be 
guarantor in respect of the payment of such money and shall be liable as such. ”.  
71. Prov ision as to co -operative banks .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 22 of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), where on account of the reorganisation of the existing State 
of Punjab, a co -operative bank is newly formed on the appointed day or within three months there of in 
any of the successor States, it may commence and conduct banking business without obtaining a licence 
under that section from the Reserve Bank of India, until it is granted such a licence or until it is informed 
by the Reserve Bank of India that such  a licence cannot be  granted to it;  
Provided that such bank applies to the Reserve Bank of India for such a licence within a period of 
three months from the  date of formation of the bank.  
72. General provisions as to statut ory corporations .—(1) Save as oth erwise expressly provided by 
the foregoing prov isions of this Part, where any  body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act 
or Provincial Act for the existing State of Punjab or any part thereof serves the needs of the successor 
States or has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an inter -State body corporate, then, the body 
corporate shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function and operate in those areas in respect 
of which it was functioning and operating immediately be fore that day, subject to such directions as may 
from time to time be issued by the Central Government, until other provisions is made by law in resp ect 
of the said body corporate.  
(2) Any direction issued by the Central Go vernment under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any such body 
corporate may include a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed shall, in its 
application to that body corporate, have effect, subject to such exceptions and modifications as may  be 
specified in the  direction.  
(3) For the removal of doubt it is hereby declared that the provisions of this section shall apply also to 
the Punjab University constituted under the Punjab University Act, 1947 (East Punjab Act 7 of 1947), the 
Punjab Agricultural University  constituted under the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961 (Punjab 
Act 32 of 1961), and the Board constituted under the provisions of Part III of the Sikh Gurdwaras Ac t, 
1925 (Punjab Act 8 of 1925).  
(4) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions  of this section in so far as it relates to the Punjab 
University and the Punjab Agricultural University referred to in sub -section ( 3) the successor States shall 
make such grants as the Central Government may, from tim e to time, by order, determine.  
73. Provision as to certain companies .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this Part, each of the  following companies, namely: — 
(i) the Punjab Export Corporation;  
(ii) the Punjab State Small Industries Corporat ion; 
(iii) the P unjab  Dairy Development Corporation;  
(iv) the Punjab Poultry Corporation;  
(v) the Land De velopment and Seed Corporation;  
(vi) the Industri al Development Corporation; and  
(vii) the Agro -Industrial Corporation,  
shall, on and from the appointed day and until otherwise provided for in any law, or in any agreement 
among the successor States, or in any direction issued by the Central Government, continue to function in 
the areas in which it was functioning immediately before that day; and the Central Government m ay from 
time to time issue such directions in relation to such functioning as it may deem fit, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1  of 1956), or in any other law.  
  23 
 (2) Any directions issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a company referred to in that sub -section, 
may include directions — 
(a) regarding the division of the interests and shares of the existing State of Punjab in the 
comp any among the successor States;  
(b) requiring  the reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the company so as to give adequate 
representati on to all the successor States.  
74. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain e xisting road transport permits .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in  section 63 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939), a permit 
granted by the State or a Regional Transport Authority in the existing State of Punjab shall, if such permit 
was, immediately before the appointed day, valid and effective in any area therei n, be deemed to continue 
to be valid and effective in that area after that day subject to the provisions of that Act as for the time 
being in force in that area and it shall not be necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by any 
State or Regional Transport Authority for the purpose of vali dating it for use in such area:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government or 
Governments concerned, add to, amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the a uthority b y 
which the permit was granted.  
(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in 
respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor States under any such permit, if 
such vehicle was immediately before that day exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees or 
other charges for its operations withi n the existing State of Punjab:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Govern ment or 
Governments concerned, authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fees or oth er charges, as the case 
may be.  
75. S pecial provision relating to re trenchment  compensation in certain cases .—Where, on 
account of the reorganisation  of the existing Stat e of Punjab under this Act, any  body corporate 
constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co -operative society registered under any 
law relating to co -operative societies or any commercial or industrial undertaki ng of that State is 
reconstituted or reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body corporate, 
co-operative society or undertaking, or is dissolved and in consequence of such reconstitution, 
reorganisation, amalgamation or disso lution, any workman employed by such body corporate or any such 
co-operative society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re -employed by any other body corporate, or in 
any other co-operative society or undertaking then notwithstanding anything contained in section 25F, 
25FF or 25FFF, of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), such transfer or re -employment shall 
not entitle him to any c ompensation under that section:  
Provided that — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or  
re-employment are not less favourable to the workman than those applicable to him immediately 
before the  transfer or re -employment; and  
(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the cooperative society or the undertaking 
where the workman transferred or re -employed is, by agreement or otherwise, legally liable to pay to 
the workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation under section 25F, 25FF or 25FFF  of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), on the basis that his service has been continuous and 
has not been interrupted by  the transfer or re -employment.  
76. Spec ial provision as to income -tax.—Where the assets , rights and liabilities of any  body 
corporate carrying on business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies 
corporate which after the transfer carry on the same business, the losses of profits  or gains sustained by 
the body corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried 
forwar d and set off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 
1961), shall be apportioned  amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with the rules to be 24 
 made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, the share of loss allotted to 
each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the 
said Act as if the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a business carried on by it in 
the years in which these losses were sustained.  
77. Continuance of facilities  in certain State institutions .—(1) The Government of the State of 
Haryana or Punjab, or, as the case may be, the Central Government in relation to the transferred territory 
or the Union territory of Chandigarh, shall in respect of the institutions specified in the Sixteenth 
Schedule located  in the State or territory aforesaid continue to provide facilities to any other Government 
aforesaid and the people of the States and territories aforesaid which shall not, in any respect, be less 
favourable to such Government and people than what were be ing provided to them before the appointed 
day for such period and upon such terms and conditions (including those relating to any contributions to 
be made for the provision of such facilities) as may be agreed upon between the said Governments before 
the 1 st day of April, 1967, or if no agreement is reached by the said date, as may be fixed by o rder of the 
Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, at any time before the 1st day of April, 1967, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in th e Sixteenth Schedule any other institution existing on the appointed day in 
the said States and territories and on the issue of such notification, the Schedule shall be deemed to be 
amended by the inclusion o f the said institution therein.  
PART VIII  
BHAKRA -NANGAL  AND BEAS PROJECTS  
78. Rights and liabilities in regard to B hakra -Nangal and Beas Projects .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act but subject to the provisions of sections 79 and 80, all rights and liabilities 
of the existing State o f Punjab in relation to Bhakra -Nangal Project and Beas Project shall, on the 
appointed day, be the rights and liabilities of the successor States in such proportion as may be fixed, and 
subject to such adjustments as may be made, by agreement entered into by the said States after 
consultation with the Central Government or, if no such agreement  is entered into within two years of the 
appointed day, as the Central Government may by order determine having regard t o the purposes of the 
Projects:  
Provided that the order so made by the Central Government may be varied by any subsequent 
agreement entered into by the successor States after consultati on with the Central Government.  
(2) An agreement or order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, if there has been an extension or further 
development of either of the projects referred to in that sub -section after the appointed day, provide also 
for the rights and liabilities of the successor States in relation to such extension or further development.  
(3) The rights and  liabilities referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall include — 
(a) the rights to receive and to utilise the water available for distribution a s a result of the 
projects, and  
(b) the rights to receive and to utilise the power generated as a result of t he projects,  
but shall not include the rights and liabilities under any contract entered into before the appointed day by 
the Government of the existing State of Punjab with any person or a uthority other than Government.  
(4) In this secti on and in sections 79 and 80, — 
(A) “Beas Project ” means the works which are either under construction or are to be constructed 
as components of the Beas -Sutlej Link Project (Unit I) and Pong Dam Project on the B eas river  
(Unit II) including — 
(i) Beas -Sutlej Lin k Project (Unit I) comprising — 
(a) Pandoh Dam  and works appurtenant thereto,  
(b) Pandoh -Baggi Tunnel,  
(c) Sundernagar Hydel Channel,  25 
 (d) Sundernagar -Sutlej Tunnel,  
(e) By-pass Tunnel,  
(f) four generating units each of 165 M.W. capacity at Dehar  Power House on the right 
side of Sutlej river,  
(g) fifth generating unit of 120 M.W. capacity at  Bhakra Right Bank Power House,  
(h) transmission lines,  
(i) Balancing Reservoir;  
(ii) Pong Dam  Project (Unit II) comprising — 
(a) Pong Dam  and works appurtenan t thereto,  
(b) Outlet Works,  
(c) Penstock Tunnels,  
(d) Power plant with four ge nerating units of 60 M.W. each;  
(iii) such other works as are ancillary to the works aforesaid and are of common i nterest to 
more than one State;  
(B) “Bhakra -Nangal Project ” means — 
(i) Bhakra Dam, Reservoir and works appurtena nt thereto;  
(ii) Nanga l Dam and Nangal -Hydel Channel;  
(iii) Bha kra Main Line and canal system;  
(iv) Bhakra Left Bank Power House, Ganguwal Power House and Kotla Power House, 
switchyards, sub -stations and  transmission lines;  
(v) Bhakra Right Bank Power House wi th four units of 120 M.W. each.  
79. Bhakra Management Board .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be called 
the Bhakra  Management Board for the administration, maintenance and operation of the following wo rks, 
namely: — 
(a) Bhakra Dam and Reservior  and works appurtenant thereto;  
(b) Nangal Dam and Nangal -Hydel C hannel up to Kotla Power House;  
(c) the irrigation headworks at Rupar, Harike and Ferozepur;  
(d) Bhakra Power Houses:  
Provided that the administration, maintenance and operation by the said Board of the generating 
units of the Right Bank Power House as have not been commissioned shall commence as and when 
any s uch unit has been commissioned;  
(e) Ganguwal and Kotla Power Houses;  
(f) Sub -stations at Ganguwal, Ambala, Panipat, Delhi, Ludhiana, Sangrur and Hissar and the main 
220 KV transmission lines connecting the said sub -stations with the power stations specified in 
clauses ( d) and ( e); and  
(g) such other works as the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, 
specify.  
(2) The Bhakra Mana gement Board shall consist of — 
(a) a whole -time Chairman and two whole -time members to be appoi nted by the Central 
Government;  26 
 (b) a representative each of the Governments of the States of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan and 
the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh to be nominated by the respective Governments or 
Adm inistrator, as the case may be;  
(c) two represen tatives of the Central Government to b e nominated by that Government.  
(3) The functions of the Bhakra M anagement Board shall include — 
(a) the regulation of the s upply of water from the Bhakra -Nangal Project to the States of Haryana, 
Punjab a nd Rajasthan ha ving regard to — 
(i) any agreement entered into or arrangement made between the Governments of the existing 
State of Punjab and the State of Rajasthan, and  
(ii) the agreement or the order referred to in  sub-section ( 1) of section 78;  
(b) the  regulation of the supply of power generated at the power houses referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) to any Electricity Board or other authority in charge of the distribut ion of power 
having regard to — 
(i) any  agreement entered into or arrangement made between the Governments of the existing 
State of Pun jab and the State of Rajasthan,  
(ii) the agreement or the order referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 78; and  
(iii) any agreement entered into or arrangement made by the existing State of Punjab or the 
Punjab Electricity Board or the State of Rajasthan or the Rajasthan Electricity Board with any 
other Electricity Board or authority in charge of distribution of power before the appointed day in 
relation to the supply of power generated at the power house s specified in sub -section ( 1); 
(c) the construction of such of the remaining works connected with the Right Bank Power House 
as the Central Government may specify;  
(d) such other functions as the Cent ral Government may, after consultation with the Governments 
of the States of Haryana, Punja b and Rajasthan, entrust to it.  
(4) The Bhakra Management Board may employ such staff as it may consider necessary for the 
efficient discharge o f its functions under  this Act:  
Provided that every person who immediately before the constitution of the said Board was engaged in 
the construction, maintenance or operator of the works in sub -section ( 1) shall continue to be so employed 
under the Board in connection with the  said works on the same terms and conditions of service as were 
applicable to him before such constitution until the Central Government by order directs otherwise:  
Provided further that the said Board may at any time in consultation with State Government o r the 
Electricity Board concerned and with the previous approval of the Central Government return any such 
person for service under that Government or Boar d. 
(5) The Governments of the successor States and of Rajasthan shall at all times provide the necessary 
funds to the Bhakra Management Board to meet all expenses (including the salaries and allowances of the 
staff) required for the discharge of its functions a nd such amounts shall be apportioned among the 
successor States, the State of Rajasthan and Electricity Boards of the said States in such proportion as the 
Central Government may, having regard to the benefits to each of the said States or Boards, spe cify. 
(6) The Bhakra Management Board shall be under the control of the Central Government and shall 
comply with such directions, as may from time to time, be given to it by that Government.  
(7) The Bhakra Management Board may with the approval of the Central G overnment delegate such 
of its powers, functions and duties as it may deem fit to the Chairman of the said Board or to any of ficer 
subordinate to the Board.  
(8) The Central Government may, for the purpose of enabling the Bhakra Management Board to 
function  effectively, issue such directions to the State Governments of Haryana, Punjab and Rajasthan 27 
 and the Administrator of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh or any other authority, and the State 
Governments, Administrator or authority shall comp ly with s uch directions.  
(9) The Bhakra Management Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules ma de 
thereunder, to provide for — 
(a) regulating t he time and place of meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed for 
the transactio n of business at such meetings;  
(b) delegation of powers and duties to the Chairm an or any officer of the Board;  
(c) the appointment, and the regulation of the conditions of service, of the officer s and other staff 
of the Board;  
(d) any other matter for which regulations are con sidered necessary by the Board.  
80. Construction of Beas Project .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any 
other law, the construction (including the completion of any work already commenced) of the Beas 
Project shall, on and from the appointed day, be undertaken by the Central Government on behalf of the 
successor States and the  State of Rajasthan:  
Provided that the Governments of the successor States and the State of Rajasthan shall at all times 
provide the necessary funds to the Central Government for the expenditure on the project [including the 
expenses of the Board referred to in sub -section ( 2)] and such amounts shall be apportioned among the 
successor States and the State of Rajasthan in such proportion as may be fixed by the Central Government 
after consultation with the Governments of the said States.  
(2) For the discharg e of its functions under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may — 
(a) by notification in the Official Gazette and in consultation with the Governments of the 
successor States and the State of Rajasthan, constitute a Board to be called the Beas Construc tion 
Board with such members as it may deem fit and assign to the Board such functions as  it may 
consider necessary; and  
(b) issue such directions to the State Governments of Haryana, Punjab and Rajasthan and the 
Administrator of the Union territory of Him achal Prad esh or any other authority, and the State 
Governments, Administrator or other authority sha ll comply with such directions.  
(3) The notification constituting a Board under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) may empower the Board 
to appoint such staff as may be necessary for the effici ent discharge of its functions:  
Provided that every person who immediately before the constitution of the Board was engaged in the 
construction or any work relating to the Beas Project shall continue to be so employed by t he Board in 
connection with the said works on the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable to him 
before such constitution until the Central Governm ent by order directs otherwise:  
Provided further that the Board may at any time in consultati on with the State Government or the 
Electricity Board concerned and with the previous approval of the Central Government return any such 
person for service under that Government or Board.  
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as enabling  the Central Government to reduce 
or enlarge the scope of the Beas Project as agreed to between the Governments of the State of Rajasthan 
and the existing State of Punjab except after consultation with the Governments of the States of Haryana, 
Punjab a nd R ajasthan.  
(5) Any component of the Beas Project in relation to which the construction has been completed after 
the appointed day may be transferred by the Central Government to the Board constituted under section 
79 whereupon the provisions of that section  shall apply as if it were a work included in s ub-section ( 1) of 
that section.  
(6) The Bhakra Management Board constituted under section 79 shall be re -named as the Bhakra 
Beas Management Board when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transf erred under  28 
 sub-section ( 5), and the Beas Construction Board shall cease to exist when all the components of the Beas 
Project have been so transferred.  
PART IX  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
81. Provisions relating to All -India Services .—(1) In this section, the expression “State cadre ”— 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian 
Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954, an d 
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Poli ce 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954.  
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service for the 
existing State of Punjab, there s hall, on and from the appointed day, be two separate cadres, one for the 
State of Punjab and the other for the State of Haryana, in res pect of each of these Services.  
(3) The initial strength and composition of each of the State cadres for the States of Pu njab and 
Haryana and the strength and composition of the Delhi -Himachal Pradesh State cadres shall be such as 
the Central Government may, by order, dete rmine before the appointed day.  
(4) The members of each of the said Services borne on the State cadres f or the existing State of 
Punjab immediately before the appointed day shall be allocated to the State cadres of the same Service for 
each of the States of Punja b and Haryana and to the Delhi -Himachal Pradesh State cadres in such manner 
and with effect from such date or dates as the Central Gov ernment may, by order, specify.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the appointed day, of 
the All -India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951), or the rules made thereunder in relat ion to the State cadres 
of the said Services referred to in sub -section ( 3) and in relation to the members of those Ser vices borne 
on the said cadres.  
82. Provisi ons relating to other Services .—(1) Every person who immediately before the appointed 
day is serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Punjab shall, on and from that day, 
provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab unless he is required, 
by general or special order of the Central Gove rnment, to serve provisionally in connection with the 
affair s of any other successor State.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by general or special 
order, determine the successor State to which every person referr ed to in sub -section ( 1) shall be finally 
allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to 
have taken effect.  
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to a successor State 
shall, if he is not already serving therein, be made available for serving in the successor State from such 
date as may be agreed u pon between the Governments concerned or in default of such agreement, as may 
be determ ined by the Cen tral Government.  
(4) The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more advisory committees for the 
purpose  of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the division and integration of the services among the successor States; and  
(b) the ensuring of fair and  equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
section and the proper consideration of any repres entations made by such persons.  
(5) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to any person to whom the 
provisions of section 81 apply.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect  on or after the appointed day the operation of the 
provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions 
of service of persons serving in connection with the aff airs of the Union or any State:  29 
 Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of 
any person referred to in sub - section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except 
with the previous appr oval of the Central Government.  
83. Provisions as to continuance  of officers in the same posts .—Every person who immediately 
before the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the 
affairs of the existing State of Punjab in any area whi ch on that day falls within any of the successor 
States shall continue to hold the same post or office in that successor State and shall be deemed, on and 
from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or other 
appro priate auth ority in, that successor State:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority on or after the 
appointed day from passing in relation to such person any order affecting his cont inuance in such post or 
office.  
84. Power of Central  Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions to the State Governments of Punjab and Har yana and to the Administra tors of the Union 
terriories  of Himachal Pradesh and Chandigarh as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of 
giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the State Governments and the Administrators 
shall comply with such directions.  
85. Provisions as to St ate Public Service Commissions .—(1) The Public Service Commission for 
the existing State of Punjab shall, on and from the appoi nted day, cease to exist.  
(2) The person holding office immediately before the appointed day as Chairman of the Public 
Service Commi ssion for the existing State of Punjab shall become the Chairman of the Public Service 
Commission for the State of Haryana or Punjab as the President shall, by order, specify and every other 
person holding office immediately before that day as member of th at Commission shall become a 
member, or if so specified by the President, the Chairman, of such one of the said Commissions as the 
President shall, by order, specify.  
(3) Every person who becomes the Chairman or other member of a Public Service Commission on the 
appointed da y under sub -section ( 2) shall — 
(a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State conditions of service not less 
favourable than those to which he was entitled under the provisions applicable to him immedi ately 
before the appointed day;  
(b) subject to the proviso to clause (2) of article 316, hold office or continue to hold office until 
the expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions applicable to him immedi ately 
before the appointed day.  
(4) The rep ort of the Punjab Public Service Commission as to the work done by the Commission in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be presented under clause (2) of article 323 to the 
Governors of Punjab and Haryana, and the Governor of Punjab shal l, on receipt of such report, cause a 
copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining as far as possible, as respects the cases, if any, 
where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non -acceptance to be laid 
before the Legis lature of the State of Punjab and it shall not be necessary to cause such report or any such 
memorandum to be laid before the Leg islative Assembly of Haryana.  
PART X  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
86. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 .—In clause ( a) of section 15 of the Sta tes Reorganisation Act, 
1956, — 
(i) for the word “Punjab ”, the words “Haryana, Punjab ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) for the words “and Himachal Pradesh ”, the words “Himachal Pradesh and Chandigarh ” shall 
be substituted.  30 
 87. Power to e xtend enactments to Chandigarh .—The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, extend with such restrictions or modifications as it thinks fit, to the Union territory of 
Chandigarh any enactment which is in force in a State a t the dat e of the notification.  
88. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Punjab shall, until otherwise provided by 
a competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed as meaning the territories within that 
State immedi ately before the appointed day.  
89. Power to adapt la ws.—For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of 
Punjab or Haryana or to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh or Chandigarh of any law made before 
the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of  two years from that day, by 
order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as 
may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations 
and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent legislatur e or other 
competent authority.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means — 
(a) as respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in the Union Li st, the Central 
Government; and  
(b) as respects any other law, — 
(i) in its application to a State , the State Government, and  
(ii) in its application to a Union ter ritory, the Central Government.  
90. Po wer to construe laws .—(1) Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 
been made under section 89 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal 
or authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its 
application in relation to  the State of Punjab or Haryana, or to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh or 
Chandigarh construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or 
proper in regard to the matter before th e court, tribunal or authority.  
(2) Any reference to the High Court of Punjab in any law shall, unless the context otherwise requires, 
be construed, on and from the appointed day, as a reference to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.  
91. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising st atutory functions .—The Central Government, 
as respects the Union territory of Chandigarh or the transferred territory, and the Government of the State 
of Haryana as respects the territories thereof may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the 
authority, officer or person who, on and from the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such 
functions exercisable under any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and such 
law shall have effect accordingly.  
92. Legal pro ceedings .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Punjab 
is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities subject to 
apportionment under this Act, the successor State which succeeds to, or a cquires a share in, that property 
or those rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be substituted for the 
existing State of Punjab or added as a party to those proceedings, and the procee dings may continue 
accordingl y. 
93. T ransfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on 
that day falls within a State or Union territory shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the 
territories which as from that day are the territories of another State or Union territor y, stand transferred to 
the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer in that other State or Union  territory, as the case 
may be.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Court having jurisdiction in respect of the area in which the court, tribunal, 31 
 authorit y or officer before which or whom such proceeding is pending on the appointed day, is 
functioning, and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section — 
(a) “proceeding ” include s any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding court, tr ibunal, authority or officer ” in a State or a Union territory me ans— 
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State or a Union territory in which or before 
whom, the proceeding would have lain if it had been institu ted after the appointed day;  or 
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State or Union territory, 
as may be determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State or the Central 
Government, as the case may be, or before the appointed day by the Government of the existing 
State of Punjab, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
94. Right of pleader s to practise in certain cases .—Any person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to  practise in any subordinate courts in the existing State of 
Punjab shall, for a period of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, 
notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of  those courts has 
been transferred to the State of H aryana or to a Union territory.  
95. Effect of provisions of the Ac t inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therew ith contained in any other law.  
96. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him 
to be necessary or expedient for t he purp ose of removing the difficulty.  
97. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Bhakra Management Board and the Beas Construction 
Board for the conduct of business and for the proper functioning of the Boards and the manner of 
filling casual vacancies among the members of the said Boards;  
(b) the salaries and allowances to be paid to the whole -time Chairman and whole -time members 
of the Bhakra Management Board;  
(c) the salaries and allowances and other c onditions of service of the members of the staff of the 
Bhakra Management Board or the Beas Construction Board;  
(d) the maintenance of records of all business transacted at the meetings of the Bhakra 
Management Board or the Beas Construction Board and the submission of copies of such rec ords to 
the Central Government;  
(e) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, contracts may be made on behalf of 
the successor States and the State of Rajasthan in relation to the functions of the Bhakra  Management 
Board or the Beas Construction Board;  
(f) the preparation of the budget estimates of the receipts and expenditure of the said Boards and 
the authority by which su ch estimates shall be approved;  
(g) the conditions subject to which the said Board s may incur expenditure or re -appropriate funds 
from any bu dget head to another such head;  
(h) the preparation and submission of annual report s; 
(i) the maintenance of accounts of the expenditu re incurred by the said Boards;  
(j) any other matter which i s to be, or may be, prescribed.  32 
 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or 1[in tw o or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,  the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validly of anything p reviously done under that rule.  
__________________  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 1)(e)] 
TERRITORIES  TRANSFERRED FROM  MANIMAJRA  KANUNGO  CIRCLE  OF KHARAR  TAHSIL  OF AMBALA  
DISTRICT IN THE EXISTING STATE  OF PUNJAB TO THE NEW STATE OF HARYANA  
1. The following patwar circles: — 
Bhareli  
Batawar  
Barwala  
Majri 
Kalka.  
2. So much of the territories of the following patwar circles as have not been transferred to form the 
Union territory o f Chandigarh under section 4: — 
Manimajra  
Mauli  
Chandimander.  
_____________  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 4 ) 
TERRITORIES TRANSFERRED FROM THE EXISTING STATE OF PUNJAB TO FORM TH E UNION  TERRITORY OF                 
CHANDIGARH  
1. The following patwar circles of Manimajra kanungo circle of Kha rar tahsil of Ambala district: —  
Dhanas  
Kalibar  
Kailer  
Dadu Majra  
Kanthala  
Hallo Majra.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  33 
 2. The following villages of Manimajra kanungo circle of Kharar tahsil of Ambala district: — 
Name of village  Hadbast No.  Name of patwar circle in which 
village is included  
1 2 3 
Lahora . . . .  348 Lahora  
Sarangpur . . . .  347 Sarangpur  
Khuda Alisher . . .  353 Kansal  
Daria . . . .  374  
Manimajra . . . .  375 Manimajra  
Mauli Jagran . . .  373  
Bara Raipur . . . .  371 Mauli  
Chota Raipur . . .  232  
3. The following portions, the extent whereof is specified in column 3 of the Table below, of the 
village specified in corresponding entry in column 1 below, of Manimajra kanungo circle of Kharar tahsil 
of Ambala district, acquired by the Government of the  existing State of Punjab by their notifications 
referred to in the corresponding entry i n column 4 of the said Table: — 
TABLE  
Name of Village  Hadbast No.  Area  acquired (in acres)  Punjab Government notification under 
which acquired  
1 2 3 4 
Suketri . . .  376 77.74  C-11544 -55/VI -1003,  dated the 12th 
November, 1955.  
C-11544 -55/VI -1008, dated the 12th 
November, 1955.  
Karoran . . .  352 214.59  C-2707 -51/1232, dated the 22nd/23rd 
May, 1951.  
C-1058 -53/1111,  dated the 26th 
February, 1953.  
C-539-52/351 , dated the 29th January, 
1952.  
C-3144/53/21 06, dated the 15th April, 
1953.  
C-2352 -W-64/I/6710, dated the 14th 
March, 1964.  
Kansil . . .  354 199.78  C-542-52/399, dated the 1st February, 
1952.  
C-1152 -52/734, dated the 15th 
February, 1952.  
4. The following villages of Manuali kanungo circle of Khar ar tahsil of Ambala district: — 
Name of village  Hadbast No.  Name of patwar circle in which village 
is included  
1 2 3 
Behlana . . . .  231                        Bhabat  
Chuharpur . . .  233  
Bair Majra . . .  224 Dharamgarh  34 
 Name of village  Hadbast No.  Name of patwar circle in which village 
is included  
1 2 3 
Nizampur Kumbra . .  197 Kumbra  
Budheri . . . .  12  
Kujheri . . . .  198 Kujheri  
Attawa . . . .  199  
Palsora . . . .  11 Mataur  
Maloya  . . . . 13 Maloya  
Salahpur . . . .  201  
Burail  . . . . 222  
Nizampur Burail . .  259 Burail  
Jhumro . . . .  260  
__________  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 5( 1)] 
TERRITORIES REFERRED TO IN CLAUSES ( d), (e) AND ( f) OF SUB -SECTION ( 1) OF SECTION 5 TRANSFERRED 
FROM THE EXISTING STATE OF PUNJAB TO THE UNION  TERRITORY  OF HIMACHAL  PRADESH  
PART I  
1. The following patwar circles of Santokhgarh kanungo circle of Una ta hsil of Hoshiarpur district: — 
Name of patwar circle  Patwar circle No.  
Palkwah . . . . . . . .  60 
Pubowal . . . . . . . .  62 
Polian . . . . . . . .  63 
Dulehar . . . . . . . .  64 
Bietan . . . . . . . .  65 
Kungrat . . . . . . . .  66 
Nangal Kalan . . . . . . .  67 
Nangran . . . . . . . .  68 
Bathu . . . . . . . .  74 
  35 
 2. The following villages of Santokhgarh kanungo circle of Una tahsil of Hoshiarpur district: — 
Name of village  Hadbast No.   No. and name of patwar circle in which 
village is included  
1 2  3 
Fattewal . . . .  460 61 Jakhera  
Bangarh . . . .  461  
Charatgarh . . . .  225  72 Charatgarh  
Khanpur  . . . . 226  
Chhatharpur . . .  227   
Jatpur . . . .  245 73 Santokhgarh  
Takhatpur . . . .  247  
Santokhgarh . . .  246  
75  
Bathri . . . .  476 Bathri  
3. The following villages of Santokhgarh kanungo  circle of Una tahsil of Hoshiarpur district except 
portions of those villages as have been included in the local area comprising Naya Nangal which has been 
declared to be a notified area for the purposes of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, by the notificat ion of 
the Government of Punjab No. 2225 -C1 (3C1) -61-9484, dated the 21st March, 1961: — 
Name of village              Hadbast No.   No. and name of patwar circle in 
which village is included  
1 2  3 
Jakhera . . . .  229    61               Jakhera  
Malikpur  . . . . 242  
Binewal . . . .  243 69               Kanchehra  
Majara . . . .  248  
Mehatpur . . . .  230 70              Bhabhaur  
Bhatoli . . . .  231   
Basdehra . . . .  228  
71 
              Basdehra  
Ajauli . . . .  237  
Puna . . . .  244  
Raipur  . . . . 218 72              Charatgarh  
Sanoli . . . .  249 77              Sanoli  
PART II  
4. Village Kosar forming part of Una tahsil of Hoshiarpur district.  
PART III  
5. The following villages of Dhar Kalan kanungo circle of Pathankot tahsil of Gurd aspur distric t:— 
Name of village  Hadbast No.  
Bakloh . . . . . . .  421 
Balun . . . . . . .  422 
Dalhousie . . . . . . .  423 36 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 10 ) 
1. Of the three sitting members whose term of office will expire on the 2nd April, 1968, Shri Surjit 
Singh and such one of the two members, namely, Shri Abdul Ghani and Shri Chaman Lal, as the 
Chairman of the Council of States may determine by drawing lot, shall be deemed to have been elected to 
fill two of the seats allotted to the State of Punjab  and the remaining member shall be deemed to have 
been allotted to fill one of the seats al lotted to the State of Haryana.  
2. Of the four sitting members whose term of office will expire on the 2nd April, 1970, namely, Shri 
Anup Singh, Shri Jagat Narain, S hrimati Mohinder Kaur and Shri Uttam Singh Duggal, such one as the 
Chairman of the Council of States may determine by drawing lot, shall be deemed to have been elected to 
fill one of the seats allotted to the State of Haryana, and the other three sitting m embers shall be deemed 
to have been elected to fill three of the seats a llotted to the State of Punjab.  
3. Of the four sitting members whose term of office will expire on the 2nd April, 1972, Shri Neki  
Ram shall be deemed to have been elected to fill one of the seats allotted to the State of Haryana; Shri 
Narinder Singh and Shri Raghubir Singh shall be deemed to have been elected to fill two of the seats 
allotted to the State of Punjab; and Shri Salig R am shall be deemed to have been elected to fill one of the 
seats allotted to the Union territ ory of Himachal Pradesh.  
________  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 14 ) 
I. A MENDMENT OF PART B OF SCHEDULE  XI TO THE  DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND 
ASSEMBLY  CONSTITUENCIES  ORDER , 1961  
1. Below the heading “B-Assembly Constituencies ”, insert the sub -heading “I-HARYANA ”.  
2. Delete the heading “Lahaul and Spiti, Kulu and Kangra Districts Area ” and entries 1 to 13.  
3. For entry 14, substitute the following, namely: — 
“14. Naraingarh                     Naraingarh tahsil (excluding Sad haura, Haveli and Gadauli                      
zailsand Sadhaura M.C. in Sadhaura thana). ” 
4. Delete the heading “SIMLA DISTRICT ” and entry 20.  
5. Before entry 21, for the heading “KARNAL DISTRICT AREA ”, substitute the heading 
“KARNAL AND JIND DISTRICTS ”. 
6. In entry 26, for the word “Sangrur ”, substitute the word “Jind”. 
7. After entry 68, insert the sub -heading “II-PUNJAB ”. 
8. In entry 129, for the words “and Dalhousie thana ”, subs titute the words and brackets “and zail 
Tarhari (Part) in Dalhousie thana ”. 
9. After entry 130, for the heading “HOSHIARPUR DISTRICT AREA ”, substitute “HOSHIARPUR 
AND RUPAR DISTRICTS ”. 
10. Delete entries 136 and 137 and re -number entries 138 and 13 9 as 136  and 137, respectively.  
11. For entry 1 40, substitute the following: — 
“138. Anandpur .………. Anandpur Sahib tahsil in Rupar District;  and Rattewal zail in Balachaur 
thana in Garhshankar  tahsil in Hoshiarpur District.  
139. Rupar .…………… Rupar thana in Rupar tahsil; and Khizrabad, Sialba and Tira zails in  
Kharar thana in Kharar tahsil.  
140. Morinda (SC) .…..Morinda and Chamkaur thanas in Ru par tahsil; and Kurali town and 
Kurali zail in  Kharar thana in Kharar tahsil.  37 
 140A. Kharar.…… ……… Kharar tahsil (excluding K hizrabad, Sialba, Tira and Kurali zails and 
Kurali town in Kharar thana). ” 
12. In the Appendix, omit the entri es relating to Ambala district.  
13. Insert the following Note at  the end of this Part, namely: —  
“NOTE.—Any reference in entries 14, 26, 138 and 140A of this Part to a district, tahsil, kanungo 
circle, patwar circle or other territorial division shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that 
district, tahsil, kanungo circle, pa twar circle or other ter ritorial division on the 1st day of November, 
1966, including all municipal towns and forest villages lying within the periphery. ”. 
II. A MENDMENT  OF THE  SCHEDULE  TO THE  DELIMITATION  OF TERRITORIAL  COUNCIL  
CONSTITUENCIES  (HIMACHAL  PRADESH ) ORDER , 1962  
1. In paragraph 5, for the words “shall be taken ”, substitute “shall, save as otherwise expressly 
provided, be taken ”. 
2. After entry 4 1, add the following, namely: — 
“LAHAUL AND S PITI, KULU AND KANGRA DISTRICTS  
42. Kulu . . . . . Lahaul and Spiti  district and Kulu thana (excluding 
Kanawar, Har kandhi, Chung, Kot Kandhi, 
Bhallan and Sainsar zails) in Kulu tahsil of Kulu 
district; and Bir Bhangal zail in Palampur thana 
in Palampur tahsil of Kangara district.  
 
43. Seraj (SC) . .  Seraj thana and Kanaw ar, Har kandhi, Chung, Kot 
Kandhi, Bhallan and Sainsar zails in Kulu thana 
in Kulu tahsil of Kulu district.  
 
44. Palampur . . .    Palampur thana (excluding Naura and Bir Bhangal 
Zails) in Palampur tahsil.  
 
45. Kangra . . .  Kangra tahsil (excluding Dharam sala thana, 
Shahpur part -thana and Narwana, Chetru, 
Tayara and Ramgarh part -zails in Kangra thana) 
Chengar zail in Dera Gopipur tahsil; Sujanpur 
part-thana and Naura zail in Palampur thana in 
Palampur tahsil.  
 
46. Dharamsala . . .  Dharamsala thana, Shahpu r part -thana and 
Narwana Chetru, Tayara and Ramgarh part -zails 
in Kangra thana in Kangra tahsil.  
 
47. Nurpur . . .  Nurpur tahsil; and Dhameta and Nagrota zails in 
Dera Gopipur tahsil.  
  
48. Dera Gopipur . .  Dera Gopipur tahsil (excluding Dhameta, Nagrota  
and Changar zails).  
 
49. Hamirpur (SC) . .  Sujanpur, Rajgir, Ugialta, Mewa and Mehlta zails 
in Hamirpur tahsil.  
 
50. Barsar . . .  Hamirpur tahsil (excluding Sujan pur, Rajgir, 
Ugialta, Mewa and Mehlta zails).  
 
  38 
 51. Amb     .           .           .          .         .      Amb thana and Pandoga and Basal zails and Khad 
part-zail in Una thana in Una tahsil.  
 
52. Una      .           .            .          .          .  Una tahsil (excluding Amb thana and Pandoga and 
Basal zails and Khad part -zail in Una thana) in 
Kangra district.  
 
SIMLA DISTRICT  
53. Simla    .          .            .         .           .  Simla district (excluding Nalagarh tahsil).  
54. Nalagarh   .      .           .          .           .  Nalagarh tehsil in Simla district”.  
3. Insert the following Note  at the end of the Schedule, namely: — 
“NOTE.—Any reference in entries 3, 4, 42, 43, 50, 53 and 54 of this Schedule to a district, tahsil, kanungo 
circle, patwar  circle or other territorial division shall be taken to mean the area comprised 
within that district, tahsil, kanungo circle, patwar circle or other territorial division on the 1st 
day of November, 1966, including all municipal areas, notified areas, small  town areas and 
forest villages lying within the periphery. ”. 
____________  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 21 ) 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONS TITUENCIES  (PUNJAB ) ORDER , 1951  
In the Tab le appended to the said Order — 
(1) in the entries under the sub -heading “Graduates ’ Constituencies ”— 
(i) in column 2 against the entry “Punjab North Graduates ”, for the existing entry, subs titute the 
following, namely: — 
“Amritsar, Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur Districts ”; 
(ii) for the existing entries 2 and 3, substitute the following, namely: — 
“2. Punjab Central Graduates                     Ferozepur, Kapur thala and Jullundur Districts I 
3. Punjab South Graduates                       Ludhiana, Rupar, Patiala, Sangrur and Bhatinda  Districts I”; 
and 
(iii) omit entry 4;  
(2) in the entries under the sub -heading “Teachers’ Constituencies ”— 
(i) in column 2, against the entry “Punjab North Teachers ”, for the existing entry, subs titute the 
following, namely: — 
“Amritsar, Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur Districts ”; 
(ii) for the existing entries 2 to 4, su bstitute the following, namely: — 
“2. Punjab Central Teachers            Ferozepur, Kapur thala and Jullundur Districts I 
3. Punjab South Teachers             Ludhiana, Rupar, Patiala, Sangrur  and Bhatinda Districts I”; 
(3) under the sub -heading “Local Authorities ’ Constituencies ”— 
(i) omit entries 3 and 11 to  15; 
(ii) for entry 10, subs titute the following, namely: — 
“10. Patiala -cum-Rupar Local  Authorities           Patiala and Rupar Districts 2”; and  39 
 (iii) in column 3, against entries 5, 6 and 9, relating to Jullundur Local Authorities, Ferozepur 
Local Authorities and Ludhiana Local Authorities, for the existing figure “1”, substitute the figure 
“2”; 
(4) in paragraph 3 of the Order, for the word and figures “April, 1965 ”, substitute the word and 
figures “November, 1966 ”. 
____________  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 22 ) 
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE  COUNCIL OF PUNJAB WHO SHALL CEASE TO BE SUCH  
MEMBERS  ON THE 1ST DAY OF NOVEMBER, 1966  
1. Shri Chander Bhan  7. Shri Premsukh Das  13. Shrimati Lajja  
2. Shri Amir Singh  8. Shri Birender Singh  14. Shri Beli Ram  
3. Shri S. L. Chopra  9. Shri Sher Singh  15. Shri Siri Chand  
4. Shri Shri Chand Goyal  10. Shri Dharam Singh  16. Shrimati Savita Behan  
5. Shrimati Lekhwati Jain  11. Shri Nasib Singh   
6. Shri Om Prakash  12. Shri Sultan Singh   
_____________  
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 27( 1)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  CASTES ) ORDER , 1950  
(1) For paragraph 4, substitute — 
“4. Any reference in this Order, except in Parts IV, IVA, VIIA and X of the Schedule, to a State or to 
a district or other territorial division thereof, shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other 
territorial division, constituted as from the first day of November, 1956; any reference in Parts IV and 
VIIA of the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as a 
reference to the State, district or other territoria l division constituted as from the first day of May, 1960; 
and any reference in Parts IVA and X of the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial division 
thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other territorial division constituted as 
from the first day of November, 1966. ”. 
(2) After Part IV, the following Part sha ll be inserted, namely: — 
“PART IVA. —Haryana  
1. Throughout the State: —   
1. Ad Dharmi    
2. Bangali    
3. Barar, Burar or Berar    
4. Batwal    
5. Bauria or Bawaria    
6. Bazigar    
7. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi    
8. Bhanjra    
9. Chamar, Jatia Chamar, Rehgar, Raigar, Ramdas  or Ravidasi    40 
 10. Chanal    
11. Dagi    
12. Dhanak    
13. Dumna, Mahasha or Doom    
14. Gagra    
15. Gandhila or Gandil Gondola    
16. Kabirpanthi or Julaha    
17. Khatik    
18. Kori or Koli    
19. Marija or Marecha    
20. Mazhabi    
21. Megh    
22. Nat    
23. Od    
24. Pasi    
25. Perna    
26. Pherera    
27. Sanhai    
28. Sanhal    
29. Sansi, Bhedkut or Manesh    
30. Sapela    
31. Sarera    
32. Sikligar    
33. Sirkiband    
2. Throughout the State except  in the Mah endragarh and Jind districts: — 
1. Darain  
2. Dhogri, Dhangri or Siggi  
3. Sansoi    
3. In the Mahendragarh and Jind dist ricts: — 
Deha, Dhaya or Dhea. ” 
(3) In Part X omit the word “Mohindergarh ” occurring  in paragraphs 2 and 3 thereof.  
 
  41 
 THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 27( 2)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  CASTES ) (UNION  TERRITORIES )  
ORDER , 1951  
(1) For paragraph 4, substitute: — 
“4. Any reference in this Order, except in Parts II and V of the Schedule, to a Union territory shall be 
construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory as from the 1st day of November, 
1956; and any reference to a Union territory in Par ts II and V of the Schedule shall be construed as a 
reference to that territory as existing on the 1st day of November, 1966. ”. 
(2) In Part II of the Schedule — 
(a) for the words “Throughout the Union territory ”, the figures, words and brackets “1. Througho ut 
the Union territory except  the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966 ” shall be substituted;  
(b) the following shall be added at the end: — 
“2. In the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Pun jab Reorganisation Act, 
1966: — 
1. Ad Dharmi    
2. Bangali    
3. Barar, Burar or Berar    
4. Batwal    
5. Bauria or Bawaria    
6. Bazigar    
7. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi    
8. Bhanjra    
9. Chamar, jatia Chamar, 
Rehgar, Raigar, Ramdasi  or 
Ravidasi    
10. Chanal    
11. Dagi    
12. Darain    
13. Dhanak    
14. Dhogri, Dhangri or Siggi    
15. Dumna, Mahasha or Doom    
16. Gagra    
17. Gandhila or Gandil Gondola    
18. Kabirpanthi or Julaha    
19. Khatik    
20. Kori or Koli    
21. Marija or Marecha    
22. Mazhabi    
23. Megh    
24. Nat   42 
 25. Od   
26. Pasi   
27. Perna    
28. Pherera    
29. Sanhai    
30. Sanhal    
31. Sansoi    
32. Sansi, Bhedkut or Manesh    
33. Sapela    
34. Sarera    
35. Sikligar    
36. Sirkiband. ”.   
 (3) After Part IV,  the foll owing Part shall be inserted: — 
PART V.—Chandigarh  
1. Ad Dharmi    
2. Bangali    
3. Barar, Burar or Berar    
4. Batwal    
5. Bauria or Bawaria    
6. Bazigar    
7. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi    
8. Bhanjra    
9. Chamar, jatia Chamar, Rehgar, 
Raigar, Ramdasi or Ravidasi    
10. Chanal    
11. Dagi    
12. Darain    
13. Dhanak    
14. Dhogri, Dhangri or Siggi    
15. Dumna, Mahasha or Doom    
16. Gagra    
17. Gandhila or Gandil Gondola    
18. Kabirpanthi or Julaha    
19. Khatik    
20. Kori or Koli    
21. Marija or Marecha    
22. Mazhabi    43 
 23. Megh    
24. Nat   
25. Od   
26. Pasi   
27. Perna    
28. Pherera    
29. Sanhai    
30. Sanhal    
31. Sansoi    
32. Sansi, Bhedkut or Manesh    
33. Sapela    
34. Sarera    
35. Sikligar    
36. Sirkiband. ”.   
_________  
THE TENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 28( 1)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE  CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  TRIBES ) ORDER , 1950  
Part X shall be omitted.  
__________  
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 28( 2)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  TRIBES ) (UNION  TERRITORIES ) ORDER , 1951  
(1) For paragraph 3, substitute — 
“3. Any reference in this Order, except in Part I of the Schedule, to a Union territory shall be 
construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory as from the 1st day of November, 
1956; and any  reference to a Union territory in Part I of the Schedule shall be construed as a reference to 
that territory constituted as a Union territory as existing on the 1st day of November, 1966. ”. 
(2) In Part I of the Schedule — 
(a) for the words “throughout the Union territory ”, the figures, words and brackets “1. Throughout the 
Union territory except th e territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation 
Act, 1966 ” shall be substituted; and  
(b) the followi ng shall be added at the end:— 
“2. In Lahaul and Spiti district: — 
1. Gaddi    
2. Swangla  
3. Bhot or Bodh. ”.   
 
  44 
 THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 46 ] 
I. A MENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION  (DISTRI BUTION OF REVENUES ) ORDER , 1965  
The following provisos shall be inserted immediately below the Table in sub -paragraph ( 2) of 
paragraph 3 of the Order, namely: — 
“Provided that the share of taxes on income payable to the State of Punjab as it existed 
immediately before the 1st day of November, 1966, shall be construed, as from that date, as payable 
to the State of Haryana and the State of Punjab and the Union in the proportion of  
37.38  : 54.84  : 7.78 : 
Provided further that the share allocable to the Union shall be retained by it and shall be deemed 
to form part of the Consolidated Fund of I ndia. ”. 
II. A MENDMENTS TO THE UNION  DUTIES  OF EXCISE (DISTRIBUTION ) ACT, 1962  
The following provisos shall be inserted immediately after the Table in section 3 of the Act, 
namely: — 
Provided that the share of the distributable Union duties of excise payable to the State of Punjab 
as it existed immediately before the 1st day of November, 1966, shall be construed, as from that date, 
as payable to the State of Haryana and the State of Pu njab and the Union in the proportion of  
37.38:  54.84:  7.78:  
Provided further that the share allocable to the Union shall be retained by it and shall not be 
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India. ”. 
III. A MENDMENTS TO THE ADDITIONAL  DUTIES OF EXCISE  (GOODS O F SPECIAL  IMPORTANCE )  
                                                                           ACT, 1957  
The following provisos shall be inserted at the end of the Table in paragraph 2 of the Second  
Schedule to the Act, namely: — 
“Provided that the share of the additional duties of excise payable to the State of Punjab as it 
existed immediately before the 1st day of November, 1966, shall be construed, as from that date, as 
payable to the State of Haryana and the State of Punjab and the Union in the proportion of  
37.38:  54.84:  7.78:  
Provided further that the share allocable to the Union shall be retained by it and shall not be 
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India. ”. 
IV. A MENDMENTS TO THE  ESTAT E DUTY (DISTRIBUTION ) ACT, 1962  
The following provisos shall be inserted at the end of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 of the 
Act, namely: — 
“Provided that the share payable under clause ( b) to the State of Punjab, as it existed imm ediately 
before the 1st day of November, 1966,  shall be construed, as from that date, as payable to the State of 
Haryana and the State of Punjab and the Union in the proportion of 37.38:  54.84:  7.78:  
Provided further that the share allocable to the Union shall be retained by it and shall be deemed 
to form part of the Consolidated Fund of India. ”. 
 
  45 
 THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 48)  
(1) Lands acquired for the sewerage scheme of Chandigarh: — 
S.No  Name of village  Hadbast  
   No. Area in  
acres  Punjab Government notification under which 
acquir ed 
1 2 3 4 5 
1. Jagatpura . .  261 4.58 C-3097 -W-60/X/4564, dated 11th May, 1960.  
2. Kambali . .  225 4.18 C-47-(I)-W-I/7649, dated 14th March, 1966 . 
3. Taraf Kumbra .  5 6.07  
4. Kumbra . .  6 5.38  
5. Kumbala . .  226 20.28  C-2985 -W-62/I/13254, dated 10th May, 1962.  
6. Chilla . . .  3 5.62   C-6718 -W-63/I/6071, dated 11th March, 1964.  
7. Papri . . .  269 5.21  
8. Manauli . .  270 4.28  
9. Chacho Majra  268 8.52    10430 -W-4-62/34079, dated 6/8th November,  
1962.  
10. Matran . . .  267 2.78  
11. Bakarpur . .  264 3.68  
 TOTAL   70.58   
(2) Lands acquired for soil conservation measures in the catchment area of Sukhna Lake: — 
S.No  Name of village  Hadbast  
   No. Area in  
acres  Punjab Government notification under which 
acquir ed 
1 2 3 4 5 
1 Suketri . .  376 2452.07  517-Ft.-IV/63/474, dated 13th February, 1963.  
2 Manakpur 
(Khol -Gama)  104 346.45  1789 -Ft.-IV/63/898, dated 15th March, 1963.  
3 Kuranwala . .  105 461.00   
4 Dhamala . . .  122 198.94   
5 Dara Khurani....  390 557.82   
6   Kansil. . .  
    TOTAL   354 2155.81  
6172.09   
 
 (3) Lands acquired for the setting up of brick kilns of the Chandigarh Capital Project :— 
S.No  Name of village  Hadbast  
   No. Area in  
acres  Punjab Government notification under which 
acquired  
1 2 3 4 5 
1 Judian . .  379 68.93 C-73-52/58, dated 8th January, 1952.  
C-504-56/VI/526, dated 21st January, 1956.  
C-1650 -W-60/X/37469, dated 5th September, 1960.  
 46 
 THE FOURTEENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 58 ) 
APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILI TY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS  
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the successor States shall, in respect 
of pensions granted before the appointed day by the existing State of Punjab, pay the pe nsions drawn in 
its treasuries.  
2. Subject to the said adjustments, the liability in respect of  pensions of officers serving in connection 
with the affairs of the existing State of Punjab who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement 
before the appointed day, but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that day, 
shall  be the li ability of the State of Punjab.  
3. There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on 
the 31st day of March, 1967, and in respect of each subsequent financial year, the total payments made in 
all the s uccessor States in respect of the pensions referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. That total representing 
the liability of the existing State of Punjab in respect of pensions shall be apportioned between the 
successor States in the population ratio and any suc cessor State paying more than its due share shall be 
reimbursed the excess amount by the success or State or States paying less.  
4. The liability of the existing State of Punjab in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day 
and drawn in any area o utside the territories of the existing State shall be the liability of the State of 
Punjab subject to adjustments to be made in accordance with paragraph 3 as if such pensions had been 
drawn in any treasury in the Sta te of Punjab under paragraph 1.  
5. (1) The liability in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before the appointed 
day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Punjab and retiring on or after that day, shall be 
that of the successor State granting the pension;  but the portion of the pension attributable to the service 
of any such officer before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Punjab 
shall be allocated between the successor States in the population ratio, and the Governm ent granting the 
pension shall be entitled to receive from each of the other successor Stat es its share of this liability.  
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed day in connection with the affairs of more than 
one successor State, the succ essor State or States other than the one granting the pension shall reimburse 
to the Government by which the pension is granted an amount which bears to the portion of the pension 
attributable to his service after the appointed day the same ratio as the pe riod of his qualifying service 
after the appointed day under the reimbursing State bears to the total qualifying service of such officer 
after the appointed day reckoned for the purposes of pensio n. 
6. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension shall be c onstrued as including a reference to the  
commuted value of the pension.  
________________  
THE FIFTEENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 70 ) 
1. The Punjab State Co -operative Bank Ltd., Chandigarh.  
2. The Punjab State Co -operative Land Mortgage Bank Ltd., Chandigarh.  
3. The Punjab State Co -operative Supply and Marketi ng Federation Ltd., Chandigarh.  
4. The Punjab Co -operative Union Ltd., Chandigarh.  
5. The Punjab State Co -operative Labour and Construction  Federation Ltd., Chandigarh.  
6. The Punjab State Handloom Weavers  Apex Co -operative Society Ltd., Chandigarh.  
7. The Punjab State Co -operative Sugar Mil ls Federation Ltd., Chandigarh.  
8. The Punjab State Federation of Consumers Co -operative Wholesale Stor es Ltd., Chandigarh.  47 
 9. The Punjab State Co -operative Industri al Federation Ltd., Chandigarh.  
10. The Rupar Central  Co-operative Bank Ltd., Rupar.  
11. The Ambala Central Co -operative Bank Ltd., Ambala City.  
12. The Hoshiarpur Central Co -operative Bank Ltd. , Hoshiarpur.  
13. The Sangrur Central C o-operative Bank Ltd., Sang rur. 
14. The Gurdaspur Central Co -operative Bank Ltd., Gurdaspur.  
15. The Jogindra Central Co -operative Bank Ltd., Nalagarh.  
16. The Hoshiarpur Primary Land Mortgage Bank Ltd., Hoshiarpur.  
17. The Gurdaspur Primary Land  Mortgage Bank Ltd., Gurdaspur.  
18. T he Sunam Primary Land Mortg age Bank Ltd., Sunam (Sangrur).  
19. The Primary Co -operative Land Mortgage Bank Ltd., Chandigarh.  
20. The Rupar Sub -Division Wholesale Co -operative Supply and Marketin g Society Ltd., Rupar 
(Ambala).  
21. The Hoshiarpur District Wh olesale Co -operative Supply and Mark eting Society Ltd., Hoshiarpur.  
22. The Gurdaspur District Wholesale Co -operative Supply and Mar keting Society Ltd., Gurdaspur.  
23. The Sangrur District Wholesale Co -operative Supply and M arketing Society Ltd., Sangrur.  
24. The Ambala Co -operative Labour and Constr uction Union Ltd., Ambala City.  
25. The Gurdaspur Co -operative Labour and Cons truction Union Ltd., Gurdaspur.  
_______________  
THE SIXTEENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 77)  
LIST OF INSTITUTIONS WHERE EXISTING  FACILITIES SHOULD BE CONTINUED  
1. Land Reclamation, Irrigation and Powe r Research Institute, Amritsar.  
2. Hydraulic Research Institute, Mal akpur.  
3. Po lice Training School, Phillaur.  
4. Finger Print Bureau, Phillaur.  
5. Recruits  Training Centre, Jahan Khe lan. 
6. Constables A dvance Training Centre, Ambala.  
7. Wirele ss Training Centre, Chandigarh.  
8. Forensic Science Laboratory, Chandigarh.  
9. Gra m Sewak Training Centre, Nabha.  
10. Gram  Sewak Training Centre, Batala.  
11. Panchayats Secretaries Trainin g Centr e, Rai, District Rohtak.  
12. Dental College, Amritsar.  
13. Ayurvedic College, Patiala.  
14. Punjab Health School, Amritsar.  
15. T.B. Centre, Patiala f or T.B. Health Visitors course.  
16. Pu njab Mental Hospital, Amritsar.  48 
 17. T.B. Sanatorium, Amritsar.  
18. T.B. Sana torium, Tanda, District Kangra.  
19. Hardinge Sanatori um, Dharampura, District Simla.  
20. T.B . Hospital, Hermitage, Sangrur.  
21. B.T. and B.Ed. Training Colleges at Simla, Dharamsala, Jullu ndur, Faridkot and Patiala.  
22. College of Physical Educati on, Patiala.  
23. Spor ts College for Boys, Jullundur.  
24. Sports College for Women, Kurukshetra.  
25. Bikra m College of Commerce, Patiala.  
26. Jail Training Centre, Hissar.  
27. Government In stitute for the Blind, Panipat.  
28. Training Centr e for the Adult Blind, Sonepat.  
29. Training -cum-Production Centre and J.B.T. Training Centre, Ga ndhi Vanita Ashram, J ullundur . 
30. After Care Home, Amrits ar. 
31. Afte r Care Home, Madhuban (Karnal).  
32. Protective Home, Sangrur.  
33. Laboratory  of Chemical Examiner, Patiala.  
34. Hygiene and Vacci ne Institute, Punjab, Amritsar.  
35. Government Press, Chandigarh.  
36. Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh.  
37. Punjab E ngineering College, Chandigarh.  
38. Colle ge of Architecture, Ch andigarh.  
39. General Hospital, Chandigarh.  
40. Government  College for Women, Chandigarh.  
41. Governme nt College for Men, Chandigarh.  
42. Home Science College, Chandigarh.  
--------------------------The Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE RAILWAY PROPERTY (UNLAWFUL POSSESSION) ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 29 OF 1966  
[16th September, 1966 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to unlawful possession of railway property.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Railway Property 
(Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the  context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Force ” means the Railway Protection Force  constituted under section 3 of the Railway 
Protection Force Act, 1957 (23 of  1957);  
(b) “member of the Force ” means a person appointed  to the Force, other than a superior officer;  
(c) “officer of the Force ” means an officer of and  above the rank of Assistant Sub -Inspector 
appointed to the Force and includes a  superior officer;  
(d) “railway property ” includes any goods, money or  valuable security or animal, belonging to, or 
in the charge or possession of, a  railway administration;  
(e) “superior officer ” means any of the officers  appointed under section 4 of the Railway 
Protection Force Act, 1957 (23 of  1957), and includes any other officer appointed by the Central 
Government as a  superior officer of the force;  
(f) words and expressions used but not defin ed in this Act and defined in the  Indian Railway s     
Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), shall have the meanings respectively  assigned to them under that Act.  
3. 2[Penalty for theft, dishonest misappropriation or unlawful possession of railway      
property ].—3[Whoever commits theft, or dishonestly misappropriates or is found, or is proved]  to have 
been, in possession of any railway property reasonably suspected of having been stolen or unlawful ly 
obtained shall, unless he proves that the railway property came i nto his possession lawfully, be 
punishable — 
(a) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with 
fine, or with both and in the absence of special and adequate reasons to be mentioned in the judgment 
of the court, such imprisonment shall not be less than one year and such fine shall not be less than one 
thousand rupees;  
(b) for the second or a subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years and also with fine and in the absence of spe cial and adequate reasons to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such imprisonment shall not be less than two years and such fine shall not 
be less than two thousand rupees.  
4[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “theft” and “dishonest misappropriation ” shall have 
the same meanings as assigned to them respectively in section 378 and section 403 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860 ).] 
4. 1[Punishment for abetment, conspiracy or connivance at offences .]—2[Whoever abets or 
conspires in the commission of an offence punishable under this Act, or any owner]  or occupier of land or 
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1968, vide notification No. S.O. 1225 , dated 1st April , 1968, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2012, s. 2, for the marginal heading  (w.e.f. 15 -8-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “Whoever is found, or is proved” (w.e.f. 15 -8-2012).  
4. Explanation  ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -8-2012).  2 
 building, or any age nt of such owner or occupier in charge of the management of that land  or building, 
who wilfully connives at an off ence against the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.  
3[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the words “abet” and “conspire ” shall have the same 
meani ngs as assigned to them respectively in sections 107 and 120A of the Indian Penal                     
Code  (45 of 1860.)]  
5. Offences under the Act not to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) , an offence under this Act shall not be cognizable.  
6. Power to arrest without warrant .—Any superior officer or member of the Force may, without an 
order from a Magistrate  and without a warrant, arrest any person who has been concerned in an offence  
punis hable un der this Act or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists of his  having been so concerned.  
7. Disposal of persons arrested .—Every person arrested for an offence punishable under this Act 
shall, if the arrest was made by a person other than an offi cer of the Force, be forwarded without delay to 
the nearest officer of the Force.  
8. 4[Inquiry how to be made ].—(1) 5[When an officer of the Force receives information about the 
commission of an offence punishable under this Act, or when any person is arrested] by an officer of the 
Force for an offence punishable under this Act or is forwarded to him under section 7, he shall proceed to 
inquire into the charge against such person.  
(2) For this purpose the officer of the Force may exercise the same powers and shall be subject to the 
same provisions as the officer incharge of a police -station may exercise and is subject to under the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), when investigating a cognizable case:  
Provided that — 
(a) if the officer of the Force is of opinion that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground 
of suspicion against the accused person, he sh all either admit him to bail to appear before a 
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or forward him in custody to such Magistrate;  
(b) if it appears to the officer of the Force that there is no t sufficient evidence or reasonable 
ground of suspicion against the accused person, he shall release the accused person on his executing a 
bond, with or without sureties as the officer of the Force may direct, to appear, if and when so 
required before the Magistrate having jurisdiction, and shall make a full re port of all the particulars of 
the case to his official superior.  
9. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce documents .—(1) An officer of the 
Force shall have power to summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary either to give 
evidence or to produce a document, or any other thing in any inquiry which such officer in making for 
any of the purposes of this Act.  
(2) A summons to produce documents or other things may be for the production of certain specified 
documents or things or for the production of all documents or things of a certain description in the 
possession or under the control of the person summoned.  
(3) All persons, so summoned, shall be bound to attend either in person or by an authori sed agent as 
such officer may dire ct; and all persons so summoned shall be bound to state the truth upon any subject 
respecting which they are examined or make statements and to produce such documents and other things 
as may be required:  
Provided that the exemptions under sections 132 and 133 of the Code of Civil                       
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), shall be applicable to requisitions for attendance under this section.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2012, s. 3, for the marginal heading (w.e.f. 15 -8-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “Any owner” (w.e.f. 15 -8-2012).  
3. Explanation  ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -8-2012).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for the marginal heading (w.e.f. 15 -8-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “When any person is arrested” (w.e.f. 15 -8-2012).  3 
 (4) Every such inquiry as aforesaid , shall be deemed to be a “judicial proceeding ” within the meaning 
of sect ions 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
10. Issue of search warrant .—(1) If an officer of the Force has reason to believe that any place is 
used for the deposit or sale of railway property which ha d been stolen or unlawfully obtained, he shall 
make an application to the Magistrate, having jurisdiction over the area in which that place is situate, for 
issue of a search warrant.  
(2) The Magistrate to whom an application is made under sub -section ( 1), may, after such inquiry as 
he thinks necessary, by his warrant authorise any officer of the Force — 
(a) to enter , with such assistance as may be required, such place;  
(b) to search the same in the manner specified in the warrant;  
(c) to take possession of an y railway property therein found which he reasonably suspects to be 
stolen or unlawfully obtained; and  
(d) to convey such railway property before a Magistrate, or to guard the same on the spot until the 
offender is taken before a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose thereof in some place of safety.  
11. Searches and arrests how to be made .—All searches and arrests made under this Act shall be 
carried out in accordance with the provisions of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , 
relating respectively to searches and arrests made under that Code.  
12. Officers required to assist .—All officers of Government and all village officers are hereby 
empowered and  required to assist the superior officers and members of the Force in the  enforcement of 
this Act.  
13. Power of courts to order forfeiture of vehicles, etc. —Any court trying an offence punishable 
under this Act may order the forfeiture to Government of any property in respect of which the Court is 
satisfied that an offence under this Act has been committed and may also order the forfeiture of any 
receptacles, packages or coverings in which such property is co ntained , and the animals, vehicles, or other 
conveyances used in carrying the property.  
14. Act to override other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time bei ng in force.  
15. Construction of references to laws not in force in Jammu and Kashmir .—Any reference in 
this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, 
be construed as a reference to the correspon ding law, if any, in force in that State.  
16. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Railway Stores (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1955 (51 of 1955) , is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to offences punishable under the Act hereby repealed 
and such offences may be investigated and tried as if this Act had not been passed.  
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 18 97 (10 of 1897), with regard to the effect of 
repeals.  
--------------------------The Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1966  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. Provision as to sitting members in certain cases.  
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. [Repealed .] 
8. [Repealed .] 
9. [Repealed .] 
10. [Repealed .] 
11. [Repealed .] 
12. [Repealed .] 
13. [Repealed .] 
14. [Repealed .] 
15. [Repealed .] 
16. [Repealed .] 
17. [Repealed .] 
18. [Repealed .] 
19. [Repealed .] 
20. [Repealed .] 
21. [Repealed .] 
22. [Repealed .] 
23. [Repealed .] 
24. [Repealed .] 
25. [Repealed .] 
26. [Repealed .] 
27. [Repealed .] 
28. [Repealed .] 
29. [Repealed .] 
30. [Repealed .] 
31. [Repealed .] 
32. [Repealed .] 
33. [Repealed .] 
34. [Repealed .] 
35. [Repealed .] 
36. [Repealed .] 
37. [Repealed .] 
38. [Repealed .] 
39. [Repealed .] 2 
 SECTIONS  
40. [Repealed .] 
41. [Repealed .] 
42. [Repealed .] 
43. [Repealed .] 
44. [Repealed .] 
45. [Repealed .] 
46. [Repealed .] 
47. [Repealed .] 
48. [Repealed .] 
49. [Repealed .] 
50. [Repealed .] 
51. [Repealed .] 
52. [Repealed .] 
53. [Repealed .] 
54. [Repealed .] 
55. [Repealed .] 
56. [Repealed .] 
57. [Repealed .] 
58. [Repealed .] 
59. [Repealed .] 
60. [Repealed .] 
61. Omission of section 137 and saving.  
62.   [Repealed .] 
63.  Act not to apply to pending elections, etc . 
 
 
  3 
 THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 47 OF 1966  
[13th December,  1966.]  
An Act further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950, and the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951 . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventee nth Year of the Republic of India as follow: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People 
(Amendment) Act, 1966.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2*                                       *                                    *                                    *                                   * 
3. Provision as to sitting members in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 2 the members representing immediately before the commencement of this Act each of the 
State s of Jammu and Kashmir and Nagaland an d each of the Union territories of the Andaman and 
Nicobar Island s, the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands and Dadra and Nagar Haveli in the 
present House of the People shall continue to represent each such State or each such Union territory 
until the dissolution of the present House of the People and so often as before such dissolution any seat 
allotte d to each such State or to each such Union territory in the present House of the People becomes 
vacant, it shall be filled by a p erson nominated by the President and that person shall represent that State 
or that territory in the present House of the People until its dissolution.  
3*                                    *                                    *                                        *                                     * 
61. Omission of section 137 and saving. —Section 137 of the 1951 -Act shall b e omitted:  
Provided that such omission shall not affect any inquiry or other proceeding under the said section 
pending immediately before such omission and any such inquiry or other proceeding may be continued 
and any prosecution may be instituted as a res ult of such inquiry or other proceeding and any penalty or 
punishment may be imposed under and in accordance with the said section as if that section had not 
been omitted.    
4*                                   *                                    *                                       *                                       * 
63. Act not to apply to pending elections, etc. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing 
herein shall apply to any election which has been called before the commencement  of this Act or to any 
election petition arising out of such election, whether such petition is pending at such commencement or 
is presented afterwards, and all such elections shall be held and petitions tried, and al l matters in 
connection w ith such elections or petitions (including the constitution of Election Tribunals) shall be 
regulated, in accordance with the provisions of the law in force immediately before such 
commencement.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1. 14 th December, 1966, vide notification No. S.O. 3873(E), dated 14 th December, 1966,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec 3( ii). 
2. Section 2  rep. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974) . 
3. Section s 4 to 60 rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974) . 
4. Section 62 rep. by s. 2 and the First  Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974) . 
 
--------------------------The Seamens Provident Fund Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE SEAMEN ’S PROVIDENT FUND ACT, 1966  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and application.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Seamen’s Provident Fund Scheme.  
4. Vesting of Fund, etc.  
5. Constitution of Board of Trustees.  
6. Committees.  
7. Appointment of employees of Board.  
8. Contributions.  
9. Determination of moneys due from employers.  
10. Mode of recovery of moneys due from employers.  
11. Fund deemed to be recognised Provident Fund under Act 43 of 1961.  
12. Protection against attachment.  
13. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts.  
14. Employer not to reduce wages.  
15. Inspectors.  
16. Penalties.  
17. Offences by companies.  
18. Power to recover damages.  
19. Transfer of account  
20. Power to exempt.  
21. Protection for acts done in good faith.  
22. Delegation.  
23. Power to remove difficulties.  
24. Scheme to be laid before Houses of Parliament.  
            THE SCHEDULE . 2 
 THE SEAMEN ’S PROVIDENT FUND ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 4 OF 1966  
[26th March,  1966 .] 
 An Act to  provide for the institution of a provident fund for seamen.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as  follows:— 
1. Short title and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Seamen ’s Provident Fund Act, 1966.  
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act shall apply to every seam an and to 
the employer of such seaman.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “agreement with the crew ” means the agreement referred to in section 100 or, as the case may 
be, section 114 of the Merchant Shipping Act;  
(b) “Board ” means the Board of Trustees of the Seamen ’s Provident Fund constituted under 
section 5;  
(c) “continuous discharge certificate ” means the certificate referred to in section 99 of the 
Merchant Shipping Act;  
(d) “contribution ” means a contribution payable in respect of a member under the Scheme;  
(e) “employer ”, in relation to a seaman, means the owner of the ship on which the seaman is 
employed or engaged, or the agent of such owner or the master of the ship;  
(f) “Fund” means the Seamen ’s Provident Fund established under the Scheme;  
(g) “Government ” means the Central Government;  
(h) “master ” and “ship” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Merchant 
Shipping Act;  
(i) “member ” means a seaman who is in possession of a continuous discharge certificate and who 
is admitted as a member of t he Fund;  
(j) “Merchant Shipping Act ” means the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958  (44 of 1958);  
(k) “Scheme ” means the Seamen ’s Provident Fund Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(l) “seaman ” means a person employed or engaged as a member of the cre w of a ship under the 
Merchant Shipping Act but does not include  1[a welfare officer, nurse, musician, pilot or deck 
barber] ; 
(m) “service ” means the period of employment of a seaman under the agreement with the crew 
and includes any period in respect of which wages are paid or are payable to him;  
(n) “wages ” means the basic wages for the time being payable to a seaman under the agreem ent 
with the crew and includes — 
 (i) any remuneration to which he is entitled in respect of holidays or any leave period;  
 (ii) any increase of such wages in accordance with such agreement or any other  agreement 
between the parties;  
but does not include the overtime allowance.  
3. Seamen’s Provident Fund Scheme .—(1) The Government may, by notification in the                 
Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Seamen ’s Provident Fund Scheme for the establishment 
of a provident fund for seamen and there shall be established, as soon as may be after the framing of the 
Scheme, a Fund in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Scheme.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1997, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 12 -11-1998).  3 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Scheme may provide for all or any of the matters 
specified in  the Schedule to this Act.  
(3) The Scheme may provide that any of its provisions shall take effect either prospectively or 
retrospectively on such date as may be specified in this behalf in the Scheme.  
(4) The Scheme shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force other than this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
(5) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, amend, v ary or rescind the 
Scheme.  
4. Vesting of Fund, etc. —(1) The Fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 3  shall vest in, and be 
administered by, the Board constituted under section 5.  
(2) The moneys  in the Fund shall be applied for — 
(a) meeting  the pay and allowances of the employees of the Board and other  administrative  
expenses of the Board;  
(b) carrying  out the purposes of this Act.  
(3) All moneys  in the Fund shall be deposited in  1[an approved bank] or  be invested in such securities 
as may be  approved by the Government.  
2[Explanation .—In this section, “approved  bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted under 
section 3 of the  State Bank of India Act, 1955  (23 of 1955), or a subsidiary bank as defined in  clause ( k) 
of section 2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,1959  (38 of 1959), or a corresponding new 
bank constituted under section 3 of the  Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970 (5 of  1970), or a corresponding new bank constituted under s ection 3 of the Banking  
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 1980).]  
5. Constitution of Board of Trustees .—(1) The Government shall, by notification in the                   
Official Gazette, constitute, with effect from such date as may be specified therein, a Board to be known 
as the Board of Trustees of the Seamen ’s Provident Fund which shall be a body corporate having 
perpetual succession and a common seal and may, by that name, sue and be sued.  
(2) The head office of the Board shall be in Bombay or at such other place as the Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(3) The Board shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Government;  
(b) not more than three persons appointed by the Government from amongst its officials;  
(c) three persons representing employers, to be appointed by the Government after consultation 
with such organisation or organisations of employers as may be recognised by the Government in this 
behalf;  
(d) three persons representing seamen, to be appointed by the Government after consultation with 
such organisation or organisations of seamen as may be recognised by the Government in this behalf.  
(4) The terms and conditions subject to which a member of the Board m ay be appointed and the time, 
place and procedure of the meetings of the Board, including the quorum, shall be such as may be 
provided for in the Scheme.  
(5) The Board shall administer the Fund vested in it in such manner as may be specified in the 
Scheme.  
(6) The Board shall perform such other functions as it may be required to perform by or under any 
provision of the Scheme.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1997, s. 3, for “the State Bank of India” (w.e.f. 12 -11-1998).  
2. Explanation  added by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -11-1998).  4 
 6. Committees .—(1) The Board may, from time to time, constitute one or more committee or 
committees for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the Board or for inquiring into, or 
reporting and advising on, any matter which the Board may refer to such committee or committees.  
(2) A committee may include persons who are not members of the Board but their number shall not 
exceed one -half of its strength.  
7. Appointment of employees of Board .—(1) The Government shall appoint a Seamen ’s Provident 
Fund Commissioner who shall be the chief executive officer of the  Board and shall be subject to the 
general control and superintendenc e of the  Board.  
(2) The  Government may also appoint as many Deputy Seamen ’s Provident Fund Commissioners  
1***, as it may consider necessary, to assist the Seamen ’s Provident Fund Commissioner in the discharge 
of his duties.  
(3) The Board  may appoint such other officers and employees as it may consider necessary for  the 
efficient administration of the Scheme.  
(4) No appointment to the post of the Seamen ’s Provident Fund Commissioner or Deputy  Seame n’s 
Provident Fund Commissioner 2*** shall be made except af ter consultation with the Union Public Service 
Commission:  
Provided that  no such consultation shall be necessary in r egard to any such appointment — 
(a) for a  period not exceeding one year; or  
(b) if the  person to be appointed is a t the time of his appointment — 
(i) a member  of the Indian Administrative Service; or  
(ii) in the  service of the Government in a Class I or Class II post or in the service of the  
Board.  
(5) The method  of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of  service of 
the Seamen's Provident Fund Commissioner and of the officers referred  to in sub -section ( 2) shall be such 
as may be specified by the Government.  
(6) The method  of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of  service of 
other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be  specified by the Board with the 
approval of the Government.  
(7) All persons appointed under this section shall be the employees of the Board.  
8. Contributions .—(1) Every employer to whom this Act applies shall, in respect of each seaman 
(being a member) employed by him, contribute to the Fund for the period beginning with the 1st day of 
July, 1964 and ending with the 31st day of March, 1968, at the rate of six per cent ., 3[for the period 
beginning with the 1st day of April, 1968 and ending with the 31st day of December, 1977, at the rate of 
eight per cent.  and thereafter at the rate of ten per cent. or such higher rate as may be specified in the 
Scheme]  of the wages paid or payable to each such seaman and every such seaman shall also contribute to 
the Fund an amount equal to the contribution payable by the employer in respect of him:  
Provided that the amount of contribution aforesaid shall, in so far as it relates to the period prior to the 
commencement of the Scheme, be payable by the employer or, as the case may be, by the seaman only on 
such date (being a date not earlier than sixty days after the commencement of the Scheme) as the 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, s pecify in this behalf.  
(2) The employer shall pay, in respect of each seaman (being a member) employed by him, both the 
employer ’s contribution and the employee ’s contribution and shall be entitled to recover from the seaman 
the employee ’s contribution by deduction from his wages and not otherwise.  
                                                           
1. The words  “and other officers whose maximum monthly salary is not less than six hundred rupees”  omitted                                
by Act 29 of 1997 , s. 4  (w.e.f. 12 -11-1998).  
2.  The words  “or to any other post carrying a maximum monthly salary of not less than six hundred rupees”  omitted                                
by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -11-1998).  
3.  Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “and thereafter at the rate of eight per cent. ” (w.e.f. 12-11-1998).  5 
 (3) Every employer shall also pay such sums of money as may be specified in the Scheme towards the 
cost of administering the Fund.  
(4) Where the amount of any contribution under sub -section ( 1) or any sum payable  under                     
sub-section ( 3) contains a part of a rupee , then, if such part if fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to 
one complete rupee and if such part is less than fifty paise it shall be ignored.  
9. Determination of moneys due from employers .—(1) The Seamen ’s Provident Fund 
Commissioner or any Deputy Seamen ’s Provident Fund Commissioner may, by order, determine the 
amount due from any employer under any provision of this Act or of the Scheme and for this purpose 
may conduct such inquiry as he may deem necessary.  
(2) The officer conducting the inquiry under sub -section ( 1) shall, for the purposes of such inquiry, 
have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), for 
trying a suit in respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person or examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) issuing commission for the examination of witn esses;  
and any such inquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 
228, and for the purpose of sectio n 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
(3) No order shall be made under this section unless the employer  has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of representing his case.  
(4) An order made under this section shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court of law.  
10. Mode of recovery of moneys due from employers .—Any amount due from an employer in 
respect of any contribution payable to the Fund, or damages recoverable under section 18 or any charges 
payable by him under any other provision of this Act or under any provision of the Scheme, may, if the 
amount is in a rrear , be recovered by the Government in the same manner as an arrear  of land revenue.  
11. Fund deemed to be recognised Provident Fund under Act 43 of 1961 .—For the purposes of 
the Income -tax Act, 1961 , the Fund shall be deemed to be a recognised provident  fund within the 
meaning of that Act.  
12. Protection against attachment .—(1) The amount standing to the credit of any member in the 
Fund shall not in any way be capable of being assigned or charged and shall not be liable to attachment 
under any decree or order of any court in respect of any debt or liability incurred by the member , and 
neither the official assignee appointed under the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909  (3 of 1909), nor 
any receiver appointed under the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920  (5 of 1920), shall be entitled to, or have 
any claim on, any such amount.  
(2) Any amount standing to the credit of any member in the Fund at the time of his death and payable 
under the Scheme to his nominee shall, subject to any deduction authorised by the Sc heme, vest in the 
nominee and shall be free from any debt or other liability incurred by the deceased or the nominee before 
the death of the member.  
13. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts .—Where any employer is adjudicated 
insolvent, or,  being a company, an order for winding up is made, the amount due from the employer                 
in respect of any contribution payable to the Fund, damages recoverable under section 18 or any charges 
payable by him under any other provision of this Act or under any provision of the Scheme shall,                
where the liability therefor has accrued before the order of adjudication or winding up is made, be 
deemed to be included among the debts which under section 49 of the Presidency Towns Insolvency           
Act, 1909  (3 of 1909), or under section 61 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920  (5 of 1920), or under 
section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), are to be paid in priority to all other debts in the 
distribution of the property of the insolvent or the assets of the company being wound up, as the case may 
be. 6 
 14. Employer not to reduce wages .—No employer shall, by reason only of his liability for the 
payment of any contribution to the Fund or any charges under this Act or the Scheme, red uce, whether 
directly or indirectly, the wages of any seaman to whom the Scheme applies or the total quantum of 
benefits in the nature of old age pension, gratuity or provident fund to which the seaman is entitled under 
the agreement with the crew or any o ther agreement between the parties.  
15. Inspectors .—(1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  appoint such 
employees of the Board, as the Government thinks fit, to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and 
the Scheme, and may de fine their  jurisdiction.  
(2) Every  Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purpose of inquiring into  the 
correctness of any information furnished in connection with this Act or the  Scheme or for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any of the  provisions of this  Act or of the S cheme have been complied with — 
(a) require an employer to furnish such information as he  may consider necessary in relation to 
the Scheme;  
(b) at any  reasonable time and with such assistance, if any, as he may think fit, enter any  office or 
board any ship, search the same and require any one found in charge  thereof to produce before him 
for examination any accounts, books, registers and  other documents in relation to the employment of 
seamen or the payment of wages  to seam en; 
(c) examine,  with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes aforesaid, the  employer, 
his agent or servant or any other person found in charge of the office  or the ship or whom the 
Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be , or to  have been, an employee in the office or on the 
ship;  
(d) make  copies of, or take extracts from, any book, register or other document  maintained in 
connection with the Fund and, where he has reason to believe that  any offence under this Act has 
been  committed by  an employer, seize with such assistance as he may think fit such  book, register or 
other document or  portions thereof as he may consider relevant in respect of that offence;  
(e) exercise  such other powers as the Scheme may provide.  
1[(3) The  provisions of  the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) shall, as far as  may be, 
apply to any search or seizure under sub -section ( 2) as they apply to  any search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section  94 of the said Code.]  
(4) Ever y Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant  within the meaning of sect ion 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
16. Penalties .—(1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be made by himself under 
this Act or under the Scheme or of enabling any other person to avoid such payment, knowingly makes or 
causes to be made any false statement or false representation shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend  to 2[one year , or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees], or with 
both.  
(2) The Scheme may provide that any person who contravenes, or makes default in complying with 
any of the provisions thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
(3) Whoever contravenes or makes default in complying with any provision  of this Act shall, if no 
other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under this Act for such co ntravention or non -compliance, be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
(4) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or under the Sc heme 
except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by the Seamen ’s Provident Fund 
Commissioner or by an Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 15, with the previous 
sanction of such authority as may be specified in  this behalf by the Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1997 , s. 6, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 12 -11-1998).  
2. Subs. by  s. 7, ibid., for “six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees ” (w.e.f. 12 -11-1998).  7 
 17. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act or the Scheme 
is a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for t he conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such p erson liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act or the 
Scheme has been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary 
or other  officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
(3) Where any offence under this Act or the Scheme is committed b y a company not registered in 
India and such a company has an agent in India which agent is also a company, then the provisions of this 
section shall apply to such agent as if the offence was committed by that agent.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this s ection— 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm and other association of 
individuals; and  
 (b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
18. Power to recover damages .—Where any employer makes default in the payment of                          
any contribution to the Fund or in the payment of any charges payable under any other provision of this 
Act or under the Scheme, the Government may recover from the employer such d amages, not exceeding 
twenty -five per cent.  of the amount of arrears, as it may think fit.  
19. Transfer of account .—Where a seaman leaves the seafaring profession with no present intention 
of resuming that profession and obtains employment in any establish ment to which the Employees ’ 
Provident Funds Act, 1952  (19 of 1952), applies, the amount standing to the credit of such seaman in the 
Fund shall be transferred, within such time as may be specified by the Board in this behalf, to the credit of 
his account in the provident fund of that establishment, if the seaman so desires and the rules in relation to 
that provident fund permit such transfer.  
20. Power to exempt .—(1) The Board may, by order in writing, exempt any seaman to whom this 
Act applies and his employer from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act if, in the 
opinion of the Board, the seaman is in enjoyment of benefits in the nature of provident fund or pension 
and such benefits, separately or jointly are on the whole not less fa vourable to the seaman than the 
benefits provided by or under this Act.  
(2) Where an exemption has been granted under sub -section ( 1), the employer shall not at any time 
after the grant of the exemption, without the leave of the Board, reduce the total qua ntum of benefits in 
the nature of provident fund, pension or gratuity to which the seaman was entitled at the time of grant of 
such exemption.  
(3) Any exemp tion granted under this section  may be cancelled by the Board, by order in writing, if 
the employer fails to comply with the requirements of sub -section  (2): 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the employer has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed cancellation.  
21. Protection for acts done in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Government or the Board or any officer or employee thereof in respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or under the Scheme.  8 
 22. Delegation .—(1) The Governm ent may, by order, direct that any power or duty which by this Act 
or by the Scheme is conferred or imposed upon the Government (other than the power to frame a scheme 
under section 3) shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
direction, be exercised or discharged also by such officer or authority as may be so specified.  
(2) The Board may, with the prior approval of the Government, delegate to its Chairman or to any of 
its employees, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as it may specify, such of its functions 
under this Act as it may deem necessary for the efficient administration of the Scheme.  
23. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisio ns of this 
Act, the Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty , and any such order 
shall be final.  
24. Scheme to be laid before Houses of Parliament .—Any Scheme framed under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is framed, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one  session or in two successive sessions, and, if before 
the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in any provision of the Scheme or both Houses agree that any provisio n in the 
Scheme should not be made, that provision of the Scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity  of anything previously done under that provision.9 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 2)] 
Matters for which provision may be made in the Scheme  
1. Seamen who shall join the Fund.  
2. The time and manner in which contribution s shall be made to the Fund by employers and by, or on 
behalf of, seamen.  
3. The payment by the employer of such sums of money as may be necessary to meet the cost of 
administering the Fund and the rate at which and the manner in which the payment shall be made.  
4. Other functions of the Board.  
5. The constitution of any committee for assisting the Board.  
6. The opening of regional and other offices of the Board.  
7. The manner in which accounts shall be kept, the investments of moneys belonging to the Fund i n 
accordance with the directions issued or conditions specified by the Government, the preparation of the 
budget, the audit of accounts and the submission of reports to the Government.  
8. The conditions under which withdrawals from the Fund may be permitte d and any deductions or 
forfeiture may be made and the maximum amount of such deduction or forfeiture.  
9. The fixation by the Government in consultation with the Board of the rate of interest payable to 
members.  
10. The form in which a seaman shall furnish  particulars about himself and his family whenever 
required.  
11. The nomination of a person by a member to receive the amount standing to his credit after his 
death and the cancellation or variation of such nomination.  
12. The registers and records to be maintained with respect to seamen and the returns to be furnished 
by employers.  
13. The fees to be levied for any of the purposes specified in this Schedule.  
14. The contraventions or defaults which shall be punishable under section 16.  
15. Further powers,  if any, which may be exercised by Inspectors.  
16. The conditions under which a member may be permitted to pay premia on life insurance from the 
Fund.  
17. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Scheme or which may be necessary or proper 
for th e purpose of implementing the Scheme.   
 
--------------------------The Seeds Act, 1966--------------------------
1 
 THE SEEDS ACT,  1966                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Central Seed Committee.  
4. Central Seed Laborat ory and State Seed Laboratory.  
5. Power to notify kinds or varieties of seeds.  
6. Power to specify minimum limits of germination and purity, etc.  
7. Regulation or sale of seeds of notified kinds o r varieties.  
8. Certification agency.  
8A. The  Central Seed Certification Board.  
8B. Other Committees.  
8C. Proceedings of Board or Committee not to be i nvalid by reason of any vacancy therein . 
8D. Procedure for Board.  
8E. Secretary and other officers.  
9. Grant of certificate by certification agency.  
10. Revocation of certificate.  
11. Appeal.  
12. Seed Analysts.  
13. Seed Inspectors.  
14. Powers of Seed Inspector.  
15. Procedure to be followed by Seed Inspectors.  
16. Report of Seed Analyst.  
17. Restriction on export and import of seeds of notified kinds o r varieties.  
18. Recognition of seed certification agencies of foreign countries.  
19. Penalty.  
20. Forfeiture of property.  
21. Offences by companies.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
23. Power to give directions.  
24. Exemption.  
25. Power to mak e rules.  
  2 
 THE SEEDS ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1966  
[29th December, 1966 .] 
An Act to provide for regulating the quality of certain seeds for sale, and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Seeds Act, 1966.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall came into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and 
for different States or for different areas thereof.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the co ntext otherwise requires, — 
(1) “agriculture ” includes horticulture;  
(2) “Central Seed Laboratory ” means the Central Seed Laboratory established or declared as such 
under  sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(3) “certification agency ” means the certification agency established under section 8 or 
recognised under section 18;  
(4) “Committee ” means the Central Seed Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of      
section 3;  
(5) “container” means a box, bottle, g asket, tin, barrel, case , receptacle, sack, bag, wrapper or 
other thing in which any article or thing is placed or packed;  
(6) “export” means taking out of India to a place outside India;  
(7) “import” means bringing into India from a place outside India;  
(8) “kind” means one or m ore related species or sub -species of crop plants each individually or 
collectively known by one common name such as cabbage, maize, paddy and wheat;  
(9) “notified kind or variety ”, in relation to any seed, means any kind or variety thereof notified 
under section 5;  
(10) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(11) “seed” means any of the following classes of seeds used for sowing or planting — 
(i) seed of food crops including edible oil seeds and seeds of fruits and vegetables;  
(ii) cott on seeds;  
(iii) seeds of cattle fodder ; 
2[(iv) jute seeds ,] 
and includes seedlings, and tubers, bulbs, rhizomes, roots, cuttings, all types of grafts and other 
vegetatively propagated material, of food crops or cattle fodder;  
(12) “Seed Analyst ” means a Seed Analyst appointed under section 12;  
  
                                                           
1. 2nd September, 1968, vide notification No. S.O. 3122 , dated 29th August, 19 68, in respect of ss. 1 to 6, ss. 8 to 11, s. 18, ss. 22 
to 25  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st October, 19 69, vide notification No. S.O. 4049, dated the 24th September , 1969, in respect of ss. 7, 12 to 17 (both inclusive) 
and 19 to 21  (both inclusive) , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 55 of 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  3 
 (13) “Seed Inspector ” means a Seed Inspector appointed under section 13;  
(14) “State Government ” in relation to a Union Territory, means the administrator thereof;  
(15) “State Seed Laboratory ”, in relation to any State, means the State Seed Laboratory 
established or declared as such under sub -section ( 2) of section 4 for that State; and  
(16) “variety” means a sub -division of a kind identifiable by growth, yield, plant, fruit, seed, or 
other characte ristic.  
3. Central Seed Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the Central Seed Committee to advice the 
Central Government and the State Governments on matters arisin g out of the administration of this Act 
and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by or under this Act.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) a Chairman to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(ii) eight persons to be nominated by the Central Government to represent such interests as th at 
Government thinks fit, of whom not less than two persons shall be representatives of growers of seed;  
(iii) one person to be nominated by the Government of each of the St ates. 
(3) The members of the Committee shall, unless their seals become vacant earlier by resignation, 
death or otherwise, be entitled to hold office for two years and shall be eligible for re -nomination.  
(4) The Committee may, subject to the previous appr oval of the Central Government, make bye -laws 
fixing the quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it.  
(5) The Committee may appoint one or more sub -committees, consisting wholly of members of the 
Committee  or wholly of other persons or partly of members of the Committee and partly of other persons, 
as it thinks fit, for the purpose of discharging such of its functions as may be delegated to such                
sub-committee or sub -committees by the Committe e. 
(6) The functions of the Committee or any sub -committee thereof may be exercised notwithstanding 
any vacancy therein.  
(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be the secretary of the Committee and shall 
provide the Committee with such cleric al and other staff as the Central Government considers necessary.  
4. Central Seed Laboratory and State Seed Laboratory .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Central Seed Laboratory or declare any seed laboratory as 
the Central Seed Laboratory to carry out the functions entrusted to the Central Seed Laboratory by or 
under this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish one or more State 
Seed Laborator ies or declare any seed laboratory as the State Seed Laboratory w here analysis of seeds of 
any notified kind or variety shall be carried out by Seed Analysts under this Act in the prescribed manner.  
5. Power to notify kinds or varieties of seeds .—If the Centr al Government, after consultation with 
the Committee, is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient to regulate the quality of seed of any kind or 
variety to be sold for purposes of agriculture, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare su ch 
kind or variety to be a notified kind or variety for the purposes of this Act and different kinds or varieties 
may be notified for different States or for different areas thereof.  
6. Power to specify minimum limits of germination and purity, etc .—The Ce ntral Government 
may, after consultation with the Committee and by notification in the Official Gazette, specify — 
(a) the minimum limits of germination and purity with respect to any seed of any notified kind or 
variety;  
(b) the mark or label to indicate that such seed conforms to the minimum limits of germination 
and purity specified under clause ( a) and the particulars which such mark or label may contain.  4 
 7. Regulation or sale of seeds of notified kinds o r varieties .—No person shall, himself or by any 
other person on his behalf, carry on the business of selling, keeping for sale, offering to sell, bartering or 
otherwise supplying any seed of any notified kind or variety, unless — 
(a) such seed is identifiable as to its kind or variety;  
(b) such seed conf orms to the minimum limits of germination and purity specified under        
clause ( a) of section 6;  
(c) the container of such seed bears in the prescribed manner, the mark or label containing the 
correct particulars thereof , specified under clause  (b) of section 6; and  
(d) he complies with such other requirements as may be prescribed.  
8. Certification agency .—The State Government or the Central Government in consultation with the 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a ce rtificate agency for the State 
to carry out the functions entrusted to the certification agency by or under this Act.  
1[8A. The Central Seed Certification Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, establish a Central  Seed Certification Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) to 
advise the Central Government and the State Governments on all matters relating to certification, and to 
co-ordinate the functioning of the agencies established under section 8.  
(2) The Bo ard shall consist of  the following members, namely :— 
(i) a Chairman, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(ii) four members, to be nominated by the Central Government from out of the persons employed 
by the State Governments as Directors of Agriculture;  
(iii) three members, to be nominated by the Central Government from out of the persons 
employed by the Agricultural Universities as Directors of Research;  
(iv) thirteen persons, to be nominated by the Central Government to represent such inter ests as 
that Government thinks fit, of whom not less than four persons shall be representatives of seed 
producers or tradesmen.  
(3) A member of the Board shall, unless his seat becomes vacant earlier by resignation or otherwise, 
be entitled to hold office for two years from the date of his nomination:  
Provided that a person nominated under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 2) shall hold office  
only for so long as he holds the appointment by virtue of which his nomination was made.  
8B. Other Committees .—The Board may appoint as ma ny Committees as it deems fit consisting 
wholly of the members of the Board or wholly of other persons or partly of members of the Board and 
partly of other persons as it thinks fit to exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
delegated to them, subject to such conditions as it may think fit, by the Board.  
8C. Proceedings of Board or Committee not to be invalid by reason of any vacancy         
therein .—No proceeding of the Board or any Committee the reof shall become invalid merely by reason 
of the existence of any vacancy therein or any defect in the constitution thereof.  
8D. Procedure for Board .—The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the                  
Central Government, make bye -laws for the purpose of regulating  its own procedure and    the procedure 
of any Committee thereof and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it or such Committee.  
8E. Secretary and other officers .—The Central Government shall — 
(i) appoint  a person to be the Secretary of the Board, and  
(ii) provide the Board with such technical and other staff as the Central Government considers 
necessary. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 1972, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  5 
 9. Grant of certificate by certification agency .—(1) Any person  selling, keeping for sale, offering 
to sell, bartering or  otherwise supplying any seed of any notified kind or variety may, if he desires  to have 
such seed certified by the certification agency, apply to the  certification agency for the grant of a 
certificate for the purpose.  
(2) Every applic ation under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form, shall  contain such particulars 
and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be  prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of any such application for the grant of a certificate, the  certification age ncy may, after 
such enquiry as it thinks fit and after  satisfying itself that the seed to which the application relates 
conforms to the  1[prescribed standards] , grant a certificate in such form and on such  conditions as may be 
prescribed:  
2[Provided  that such standards shall not be lower tha n the minimum limits of germination  and purity 
specified for that seed under clause (a) of section 6.]  
10. Revocation of certificate .—If the certification agency is satisfied, either on a reference made to it 
in this behalf or otherwise, that — 
(a) the certificate granted by it under section 9 has been obtained by misrepresentation as to an 
essential fact; or  
(b) the holder of the certificate has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply with the 
conditions subject to  which the certificate has been granted or has contravened any of the provisions 
of this Act or the rules made thereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the certificate may be liable under this 
Act, the certification a gency may, after giving the holder of the certificate an opportunity of showing 
cause, revoke the certificate.  
11. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of a certification agency under section 9 or 
section 10, may within thirty days from the date on which the decision is communicated to him and on 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed, prefer an appeal to such authority as may be specified by the 
State Government in this behalf:  
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal afte r the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the 
appell ate an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
(3) Every order of the appellate authority under this section shall be final.  
12. Seed Analysts .—The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoi nt such 
persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Seed Analysts and define the areas 
within which they shall exercise jurisdiction.  
13. Seed Inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Seed Inspectors and define the 
areas within which they shall exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) Every Seed Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of sec tion 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as the State 
Government may specify in this behalf .  
14. Powers of Seed Inspector .—(1) The Seed Inspector may — 
(a) take samples of any seed in any notified kind or variety from — 
(i) any person selling such seed; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 1972, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  
2. The p roviso added by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f.  16-1-1973).  6 
 (ii) any person who is in the course of conveying, delivering or preparing to deliver such seed 
to a purchaser or a consignee; or  
(iii) a purchaser or a consignee after delivery of such seed to him;  
(b) send such sample for analysis to the Seed Analyst for the area within which such sample has 
been taken;  
(c) enter and search at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, as he considers 
necessary, any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed and order in writing the person in possession of any seed in respect of which the 
offence has been or is being committed, not to dispose of any stock of such seed for a specific period 
not exceeding thirty days or, unless the alleged offence is such that the defect may be removed by the 
possessor of the seed, seize the stock of such seed;  
(d) examine any record, register, document o r any other material object found in any place 
mentioned in clause ( c) and seize the same if he has reason to believe that if may furnish evidence of 
the commission of an offence punishable under this Act; and  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be neces sary for carrying out the purposes of this Act or 
any rule made there under.  
(2) Where any sample  of any seed of any notified kind or variety is taken under clause ( a) of         
sub-section ( 1), its cost, calculated at the rate at which such seed is usuall y sold to the public, shall be 
paid on demand to the person from whom it is taken.  
(3) The power conferred by this section includes power to break -open any container in which any 
seed of any notified kind or variety may be contained or to break -open the do or of any premises where 
any such seed may be kept for sale:  
Provided that the power to break -open the door shall be exercised only after the owner or any other 
person in occupation of the premises, if he is present therein, refuses to open the door on bei ng called 
upon to do so.  
(4) Where the Seed Inspector takes any action under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), he shall, as far as 
possible, call not less than two persons to be present at the time when such action is taken and take their 
signatures on a memo randum to be prepared in the prescribed form and manner.  
(5) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898),  shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under th e authority 
of a warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code.  
15. Procedure to be followed by Seed Inspectors .—(1) Whenever a Seed Inspector intends to take 
sample of any seed of any notified kind or variety or analysis, he shall — 
(a) give  notice in writing, then and there, of such intention to the person from whom he intends to 
take sample;  
(b) except in special cases provided by rules made under this Act, take three representative 
samples in the prescribed manner and mark and seal or fast en up each sample in such manner as its 
nature permits.  
(2) When samples of any seed of any notified kind or variety are taken under sub -section ( 1), the Seed 
Inspector shall — 
(a) deliver one sample to the person from whom it has been taken;  
(b) send in th e prescribed manner another sample for analysis to the Seed Analyst for the area 
within which such sample has been taken; and  
(c) retain the remaining sample in the prescribed manner for production in case any legal 
proceedings are taken or for analysis by  the Central Seed Laboratory under sub -section ( 2) of    
section  16, as the case may be.  7 
 (3) If the person from whom the samples have been taken refuses to accept one of the samples, the 
Seed Inspector shall send intimation to the Seed Analyst of such refusal and thereupon the Seed Analyst 
receiving the sample for analysis shall divide it into two p arts and shall seal or fasten up one of those parts 
and shall cause it, either upon receipt of the sample or when he delivers his report, to be delivered to the 
Seed Inspector who shall retain it for production in case legal proceedings are taken.  
(4) Wher e a Seed Inspector takes any action under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, — 
(a) he shall use all despatch in ascertaining whether or not the seed contravenes any of the 
provisions of section 7 and if it is ascertained that the seed does not so contravene, forthwith revoke 
the order passed under the said clause or, as the case may be, take such action as may be necessary for 
the return of the stock of the seed seized;  
(b) if he seizes the stock of the seed, he shall, as soon as may be, inform a magistrate and take his 
orders as to the custody thereof;  
(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged offence is such that the 
defect may be removed by the possessor of the seed, he shall, on being satisfied that the defect has 
been so removed, forthwith revoke the order passed under the said clause.  
(5) Where a Seed Inspector seizes any record, register, document or any other material object under 
clause  (d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, he shall, as soon as may be, inform a magistrate and take his 
orders as to the custody thereof.  
16. Report of Seed Analyst .—(1) The Seed Analyst shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of the 
sample under sub-section ( 2) of section 15, analyse the sample at the State Seed Laboratory and deliver, 
in such form as may be prescribed, one copy of the report of the result of the analysis to the Seed 
Inspector and another copy thereof to the person from whom the s ample has been taken.  
(2) After the institution of a prosecution under this Act, the accused vendor or the complainant may, 
on payment of the prescribed fee, make an application to the court for sending any of the samples 
mentioned in clause ( a) or clause (c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 15 to the Central Seed Laboratory for its 
report and on receipt of the application, the court shall first ascertain that the mark and the seal or 
fastening as provided in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 15 are int act and may then despatch the 
sample under its own seal to the Central Seed Laboratory which shall thereupon send its report to the 
court in the prescribed form within one month from the date o f receipt of the sample, specifying the result 
of the analysis.  
(3) The report  send by the Central Seed Laboratory under sub -section ( 2) shall supersede the report 
given by the Seed Analyst under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Where the report sent by the Central Seed Laboratory under sub -section ( 2) is produced in any 
proceedi ngs under section 19, it shall not be necessary in such proceedings to produce any sample or part 
thereof taken for analysis.  
17. Restriction on export and import of seeds of notified kinds o r varieties .—No person shall, for 
the purpose of showing or planting by any person (including himself), export or import or cause to be 
exported or imported any seed of any notified kind or variety, unless — 
(a) it conforms to the minimum limits of germination and purity specified for that seed under       
clause ( a) of section 6; and  
(b) its container bears, in the prescribed manner, the mark or label with the correct particulars 
thereof specified for that seed under clause ( b) of section 6.  
18. Recognition of seed certification agencies of foreign countries .—The Ce ntral Government 
may, on the recommendation of the Committee and by notification in the Official Gazette, recognise any 
seed certification agency established in any foreign country, for the purposes of this Act.  
19. Penalty .—If any person — 
(a) contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder; or  8 
 (b) prevents a Seed Inspector from taking sample under this Act; or  
(c) prevents a Seed Inspector from exercising any other power conferred on him by or under this 
Act, 
he shall, on co nviction, be punishable — 
(i) for the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and  
(ii) in the event of such person having been previously convicted of an offence under this section, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
20. Forfeiture of property .—When a ny person has been convicted under this Act for the 
contravention of any of the provisions of th is Act or the rules made thereunder, the seed in respect of 
which the contravention has been committed may be forfeited to the Government.  
21. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as wel l as the company , shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge and that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager , secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or ot her officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other associat ion of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith .—Not suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Government for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act.  
23. Power to give directions .—The Central Government may give such directions to any State 
Government as may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying into execution in the 
State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder.  
24. Exemption .—Nothing in this Act shall apply to any seed of any notified kind or variety grown by 
a person and sold or delivered by him on his own premises direct to  another person for being used by that 
person for the purpose of sowing or planting.  
25. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules  to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,  such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the functions of the Committee and the travelling and daily allowances payable  to members of 
the Committee and members of any sub -Committee appointed under  sub-section (5) of section 3;  
(b) the functions of the Central Seed Laboratory;  
(c) the functions of a certification agency;  9 
 (d) the manner of marking or labelling the container of seed of any notified kind or  variety under 
clause ( c) of section 7 and under clause  (b) of section 17;  
(e) the requirements which may be complied with by a person carrying on the business  referred to 
in section 7;  
(f) the form of application for the grant of a certificate under section 9, the  particulars it may 
contain, the fees which should accompany it, the form of the  certificate and the conditions subject to 
which the certificate may be granted;  
1[(ff) the standards to which seeds should conform;]  
(g) the form and manner in which and the fee on payment of which an appeal may be  preferred 
under section 11 and the procedure to be followed by the appellate  authority in disposing of the 
appeal;  
(h) the qualifications and duties of Seed Analysts and Seed Inspectors;  
(i) the manner in which samples may be taken by the Seed Inspector, t he procedure  for sending 
such samples to the Seed Analyst or the Central Seed Laboratory and  the manner of analysing such 
samples;  
(j) the form of report of the result of the analysis under sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of 
section 16 and the fees paya ble in respect of such report  under the said sub -section ( 2); 
(k) the records to be maintained by a person carrying on the business referred to in  section 7 and 
the particulars which such records shall contain; and  
(l) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,  before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of  thirty days which may be comprised in one s ession 
or 2[in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately  following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in  making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule sho uld not be made, that rule shall, thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form  or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification  or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously  done under th at rule.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 1972, s. 5 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  
