--------------------------The Anti-Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1967--------------------------
1 
 THE ANTI -CORRUPTION LAWS (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 1967  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Amendment of anti -corruption law in relation to certain pending trials . 
3. Repeal and saving.  
 
 
 
 
  2 
 THE ANTI -CORRUPTION LAWS (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 1967  
ACT NO. 16 OF 1967  
[20th June , 1967 .] 
An Act further to amend the anti -corruption laws.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Anti -Corruption Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1967.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of May, 1967.  
2. Amendment of anti -corruption law in relation to certain pending                               
trials .—(1) Notwithstanding — 
(a) the substitution of new provisions for sub -section ( 3) of section 5 of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1947 (2 of 1947), (hereinafter referred to as the 1947 -Act) by section 6( 2)(c) of 
the Anti -Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964 (40 of 1964), (he reinafter referred to as         
the 1964 -Act); and  
(b) any judgment or order of any court,  
the said sub -section ( 3) as it stood immediately before the commencement of the 1964 -Act, shall 
apply and shall be deemed always to have applied to and in relation to trials of offences punishable 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 5 of the 1947 -Act pending before any court immediately before such 
commencement as if no such new provisions had been substituted for the said sub -section ( 3). 
(2) The accused person in any trial to and in relation to which sub -section ( 1) applies may, at the 
earliest opportunity available to him after the commencement of this Act, demand that the trial of the 
offence should proceed from the stage at which it was immediately before the commencement of the 
1964 -Act and on any such demand being made the court shall proceed with the trial from that stage.  
(3) For the removal of doubt it is hereby provided that any court — 
(i) before which an appeal or application for revision against any jud gment, order or sentence 
passed or made in any trial to which sub -section ( 1) applies is pending immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, or  
(ii) before which an appeal or application for revision against any judgment, order or sentence 
passed or m ade before the commencement of this Act in any such trial, is filed after such 
commencement,  
shall remand the case for trial in conformity with the provisions of this section.  
3. Repeal and saving .—(1) The  Anti-Corruption Laws (A mendment)                             
Ordinance, 1967 (3 of 1967), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Court-fees (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1967--------------------------
1 
 THE COURT -FEES (DELHI AMENDMENT) ACT, 1967  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Amendment of Section 4 . 
3. Amendment of Schedule II . 
4. Levy of fees in certain suits, etc., instituted before commencement of this Act.  
5. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE COURT -FEES (DELHI AMENDMENT) ACT, 1967  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1967  
[16th December , 1967 .] 
An Act further to amend the Court -fees Act, 1870, as in force in the Union territory of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Court -fees (Delhi Amendment)       
Act, 1967.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
 2. Amendment of Section 4 .—In the Court -fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870) , as in force in the Union 
territory of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 4 ,— 
(a) in the marginal heading to the first paragraph, for the words “in High Courts in their 
extraordinary jurisdiction ”, the words “in the High Court of Delhi in its ordinary or      
extraordinary jurisdiction ” shall be substituted;  
(b) in the first paragraph, for the words “any of the said High Courts in any case coming 
before such Court in the exercise of its extraordinary original civil  jurisdiction ”, the words       
“the High Court of Delhi in any case coming before that Court in the exercise of its ordinary or 
extraordinary original civil jurisdiction ” shall be substituted;  
(c) in the third paragraph, for the words “other than ”, the word “including ” shall                    
be substituted;  
(d) after the fifth paragraph “or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as a Court of reference          
or revision; ”, the following paragraphs shall be inserted, namely: — 
in the exercise of jur isdiction to issue writs, etc. —“or in the exercise of its jurisdiction to issue 
directions, orders or writs under the Constitution of India;  
in the exercise of any other -jurisdiction. —or in the exercise of its jurisdiction in any                    
other m atter;”. 
 3. Amendment o f Schedule II .—In Schedule II to the principal Act, in clause ( d) of article 1, 
after sub -clause ( ii), the following sub -clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(ii-A) under article 226 of the Constitution of India other than petitions for habeas corpus  
and petitions arising out of criminal proceedings.            fifty rupees. ”. 
 4. Levy of fees in certain suits, etc., instituted before commencement of this                    
Act.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act or in the principal Act as amended 
by this Act , fees  shall be levied in suits or other proceedings instituted on or after the 31st day of 
October, 1966, and pending immediately before the 7th October, 1967, in the High Court of Delhi by 
virtue, and in the exercise, of its ordinary original civil jurisdictio n as if the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act, had been in force on the respective dates on which such suits or proceedings were 
instituted.  
(2) Any fees levied in respect of suits or other proceedings instituted before the High Court of 
Delhi by virtu e, and in the exercise,  of its ordinary original civil  jurisdiction, on or after the 31st day 
of October, 1966, and disposed of before the 7th October, 1967, shall be deemed to have been levied 
in accordance with law.  
 5. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Court -fees (Delhi Amendment) Ordinance, 1967 (7 of 1967),      
is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as 
amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the cor responding 
provision of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if this Act had commenced on the                
7th October, 1967.  
--------------------------The Passports Act, 1967--------------------------
1 
 THE PASSPORTS ACT, 1967  
_________  
ARRAN GEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Passport or travel document for departure from India.  
4. Classes of passports and travel documents.  
5. Applications for passports, travel documents, etc , and orders thereon.  
6. Refusal of passports, travel documents, etc.  
7. Duration of passports  travel documents.  
8. Extension of period of Passport.  
9. Conditions and forms of passports and travel documents.  
10. Variation, impounding a nd revocation of passports and travel documents.  
10A. Suspension of passports or travel documents in certain cases.  
10B. Validation of intimations.  
11. Appeals.  
12. Offences and penalties.  
13. Power to arrest.  
14. Power of search and seizure.  
15. Previous sanction of Central Government necessary.  
16. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
17. Passports and travel documents to be property of Central Government.  
18. [Omitted ]. 
19. Passports and travel documents to be invalid for travel to certain countries . 
20. Issue of passports and travel documents to persons who are not citizens of India.  
21. Power to delegate.  
22. Power to exempt . 
23. Act to be in addition to certain enactments . 
24. Power to make rules.  
25. Change of short title of Act 34 of 1920.  
26. [Omitted .] 
27. Repeal and saving.  
 
  2 
 THE PASSPORTS ACT, 1967  
ACT NO. 15 OF 1967  
[24th June , 1967.]  
An Act to provide for the issue of passports a nd travel documents , to regulate the departure from 
India of citizens of India and other persons and for matters incidental or ancillary thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of India as follow: — 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Passports Act, 1967.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India and applies also to citizens of India who are outside India.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “departure ”, with its grammatical  variations and cognate  expressions, means departure from 
India by water, land or air;  
(b) “passport ” means a passport issued or deemed to have been issued under this Act;  
(c) “passport authority ” means an officer or authority empowered under rules made under this 
Act to issue passports or travel documents and includes the Central Government;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “travel document ” means a travel document issued or deemed to have been issued under       
this Act.  
3. Passport or travel document for departure from India. —No person shall depart from, or 
attempt to depart from India unless he holds in this behalf a valid passport or travel document.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, —  
(a) “passport” includes a passport which having been issued by or under the authority of the 
Government of a foreign country satisfies the conditions prescribed under the Passport                
(Entry into India) Act, 1920  (34 of 1920) , in respect of the class of passports to which it belongs;  
(b) “travel document ” includes a travel document which having been issued by or under the 
authority of the Government of a foreign country satisfies the conditions prescribed.  
4. Classes of passports and travel documents. —(1) The following classes of passports may be 
issued under this Act, namely: — 
(a) ordinary passport;  
(b) Official passport;  
(c) diplomatic passport.  
(2) The following classes of travel documents may be issued under this Act, namely: —  
(a) emergency certific ate authorising a person to enter India;  
(b) certificate of identity for the purpose of establishing the identity of a person;  
(c) such other certificate or document as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Central Government shall, in consonance with the usage an d practice followed by it in this 
behalf, prescribe the classes of persons to whom the classes of passports and travel documents referred to 
respectively in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) may be issued under this Act.  
5. Applications for passports, tr avel docu ments, etc,  and orders thereon. —1[(1) An application 
for the issue of a passport under this Act for visiting such foreign country or countries (not being a named 
foreign country) as may be specified in the application may be made to the passport authority and shall be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1978, s. 2, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 18 -8-1978).  3 
 accompanied by  1[such fee as may be prescribed to meet the expenses incurred on special security paper, 
printing, lamination and other connected miscellaneous services in issuing passports and other travel 
documents] .  
Explanation. —In this section, “named foreign country ” means  such foreign country as the Central 
Government may, by rules made under this Act, specify in this behalf.  
(1A) An application for the issue of — 
(i) a passport under this Act for visiting a named  foreign country; or  
(ii) a travel document under this Act, for visiting such foreign country or countries     
(including a named foreign country) as may be specified in the application or for an endorsement 
on the passport or travel document referred to in this section,  
may be made to the passport authority and shall be accompanied by such fee (if  any) not exceeding 
rupees fifty, as may be prescribed.  
(1B) Every application under this section shall be in such form and contain such particulars as 
may be prescribed.]  
 (2) On recei pt of an application  2[under this section] , the passport authority, after making such 
inquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary, shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, by order                
in writing, —  
(a) issue the passport or travel document with endorsement ,or, as the case may be, make on the 
passport or travel document the endorsement, in respect of the foreign country or countries specified 
in the application; or  
(b) issue the passport or travel doc ument with endorsement, or, as the case may be, make on the 
passport or travel document the endorsement, in respect of one or more of the foreign countries 
specified in the application and refuse to make an endorsement in respect of the other country or 
countries; or  
(c) refuse to issue the passport or travel document or, as the case may be, refuse to make on the 
passport or travel document any endorsement.  
(3) Where the passport authority makes an order under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) on 
the application of any person, it shall record in writing a brief statement of its reasons for making such 
order and furnish to that person on demand a copy of the same unless in any case the passport authority is 
of the opinion that it will not be in th e interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of 
India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country or in the interests of the general public to 
furnish such copy.  
6. Refusal of passports, travel documents, etc. —(1) Subject t o the other provisions of this Act, the 
passport authority shall refuse to make an endorsement for visiting any foreign country under clause       
(b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5 on any one or more of the following grounds, and on no 
other ground, namely: —  
(a) that the applicant may, or is likely to, engage in such country in activities prejudicial to the 
sovereignty and integrity of India;  
(b) that the presence of the applicant in such country may, or is likely to, be detrimental to the  
security of India;  
(c) that the presence of the applicant in such country may, or is likely to, prejudice the friendly 
relations of India with that or any other country;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1993, s. 2 , for “a fee of rupees fifty”  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 1978 s.  2 (w.e.f. 18 -8-1978).  
 4 
 (d) that in the opinion of the Central Government the presence of the applicant in such country is 
not in the public interest.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the passport authority shall refuse to issue a passport or 
travel document for visiting any foreign country under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5 on any 
one or more of the following grounds,  and on no other ground, namely :—  
(a) that the applicant is not a citizen of India;  
(b) that the applicant may, or is likely to, engage outside India in activities prejudicial to the 
sovereignty and integrity of I ndia;  
(c) that the departure of the applicant from India may, or is likely to, be detrimental to the 
security of India;  
(d) that the presence of the applicant outside India may, or is likely to, prejudice the friendly 
relations of India with any foreign country;  
(e) that the applicant has, at any time during the period of five years immediat ely preceding the 
date of his  application, been convicted by a court in India for any offence involving moral turpitude 
and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonme nt for not less than two years;  
(f) that proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by the applicant are 
pending before a criminal court in India;  
(g) that a warrant or summons for the appearance, or a warrant for the arrest, of the applicant has 
been issued by a court under any law for the time being in force or that an order prohibiting the 
departure from India of the applicant has been made by any s uch court;  
(h) that the applicant has been repatriated and has not reimbursed the expenditure incurred in 
connection with such repatriation;  
(i) that in the opinion of the Central Government the issue of a passport or travel document to the 
applicant wil l not be in the public interest.  
7. Duration of passports and travel documents. —A passport or travel document shall, unless 
revoked earlier, continue in force for such period as may be prescribed and different periods may be 
prescribed for different classe s of passports or travel documents or for different categories of passports or 
travel documents under each such class:  
Provided that a passport or travel document may be issued for a shorter period than the          
prescribed period —  
(a) if the person b y whom it is required so desires; or  
(b) if the passport authority, for reasons to be communicated in writing to the applicant, considers 
in any case that the passport or travel document should be issued for a shorter period.  
 1[8. Extension of period of Passport. —Where a passport is issued for a shorter period than the 
prescribed period under section 7, such shorter period shall, unless the passport authority for reasons to be 
recorded in writing otherwise determines, be extendable for a further period (w hich together with the 
shorter period shall not exceed the prescribed period) and the provisions of this Act shall apply to such 
extension as they apply to the issue thereof.]  
9. Conditions and forms of passports and travel documents .—The conditions subjec t to which, 
and the form in which, a passport or travel document shall be issued or renewed shall be such as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that different conditions and different forms may be prescribed for different classes of 
passports or travel documents  or for different categories of passports or travel documents under each such 
class:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1993, s. 3 , for section 8  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  5 
 Provided further that a passport or travel document may contain in addition to the prescribed 
conditions such other conditions as the passport authority may, with the pre vious approval of the Central 
Government, impose in any particular case.  
10. Variation, impounding and revocation of passports and travel documents. —(1) The passport 
authority may, having regard to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 6 or any noti fication under 
section 19, vary or cancel the endorsements on a passport or travel document or may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, vary or cancel the conditions (other than the prescribed conditions) 
subject to which a passport or tr avel document has been issued and may, for that purpose, require the 
holder of a passport or a travel document, by notice in writing, to deliver up the passport or travel 
document to it within such time as may be specified in the notice and the holder shal l comply with such 
notice.  
(2) The passport authority may, on the application of the holder of a passport or a travel document, 
and with the previous approval of the Central Government also vary or cancel the conditions              
(other than the prescr ibed conditions) of the passport or travel document.  
(3) The passport authority may impound or cause to be impounded or revoke a passport or travel 
document, — 
 (a) if the passport authority is satisfied that the holder of the passport or travel document is in 
wrongful possession thereof;  
(b) if the passport or travel document was obtained by the suppression of material information or 
on the basis of wrong informat ion provided by the holder of the passport or travel document or an y 
other person on his behalf :  
1[Provided that if the holder of such passport obtains another passport, the passport authority shall 
also impound or cause to be impounded or revoke such oth er passport.]  
(c) if the passport authority deems it necessary so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country, or in the 
interests of the general public;  
(d) if the holder of the passport or travel document has, at any time after the issue of the passport 
or travel document, been convicted by a court in India for any offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not le ss than two years;  
(e) if proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by the holder of the 
passport or travel document are pending before a criminal court in India;  
(f) if any of the conditions of the passport or travel document h as been contravened;  
(g) if the holder of the passport or travel document has failed to comply with a notice under      
sub-section ( 1) requiring him to deliver up the same;  
(h) if it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that a warrant or summons for the 
appearance, or a warrant for the arrest, of the holder of the passport or travel document has been 
issued by a court under any law for the time being in force or i f an order prohibiting the departure 
from India of the holder of the passport or other travel document has been made by any such court 
and the passport authority is satisfied that a warrant or summons has been so issued or an order has 
been so made.  
(4) The passport authority may also revoke a passport or travel document on the application of the 
holder thereof.  
(5) Where the passport authority makes an order varying or cancelling the endorsements on, or 
varying the conditions of, a passport or travel document under sub -section ( 1) or an order impounding or 
revoking a passport or travel document under sub -section ( 3), it shall record in writing a brief statement 
of the reasons for making such order and furnish to the holder of the passport or travel doc ument on 
                                                           
1. The proviso i ns. by Act 35 of  1993, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  6 
 demand a copy of the same unless in any case, the passport authority is of the opinion that it will not be in 
the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India with 
any foreign country or i n the interests of the general public to furnish such a copy.  
(6) The authority to whom the passport authority is subordinate may, by order in writing, impound or 
cause to be impounded or revoke a passport or travel document on any ground on which it may be 
impounded or revoked by the passport authority and the foregoing provisions of this section shall, as far 
as may be, apply in relation to the impounding or revocation of a passport or travel document by such 
authority.  
(7) A court convicting the holder  of a passport or travel document of any offence under this Act or the 
rules made thereunder may also revoke the passport or travel document:  
Provided that if the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise the revocation shall become void.  
(8) An orde r of revocation under sub -section ( 7) may also be made by an appellate court or by the 
High Court when exercising its powers of revision.  
(9) On the revocation of a passport or travel document under this section the holder thereof shall, 
without delay, su rrender the passport or travel document, if the same has not already been impounded, to 
the authority by whom it has been revoked or to such other authority as may be specified in this behalf in 
the order of revocation.  
1[10A. Suspension of passports or tr avel documents in certain cases. —(1) Without prejudice 
to the generality of the provisions contained in section 10, if the Central Government or any 
designated officer is satisfied that the passport or travel document  is likely to be impounded or caused 
to be impounded or revoked under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 10 and it is necessary in the 
public interest so to do, it or he may, — 
(a) by order, suspend, with immediate effect, any passport or travel document;  
(b) pass such other appropriate order which may have the effect  of rendering any passport or 
travel document invalid,  
for a period not exceeding four weeks:  
Provided that the Central Government or the designated officer may, if it or he consider s 
appropriate, extend , by order and for rea sons to be recorded in writing, the said period of four weeks 
till the proceeding s relating to variation, impounding or revocation of passport or travel document 
under section 10 are concluded:  
Provided further that every holder of the passport or travel d ocument, in respect of whom an 
order under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of this sub -section had been passed, shall be given an opportunity 
of being heard within a period of not later than eight  weeks reckoned from the date of passing of such 
order and thereupon the Central Government may, if necessary, by order in writing, modify or revoke 
the order passed under this sub -section.  
(2) The designated officer shall immediately communicate the order  passed under sub -section ( 1), 
to the concerned authority at an airport or any other point of embarkation or immigration, and to the 
passport authority.  
(3) Every authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall, immediately on receipt of the order passed 
under sub -section ( 1), give effect to such order.  
10B. Validation of intimation s.—Every intimation given by the Central Government or the 
designated officer, before the commencement of the Passports (Amendment) Act, 2002  (17 of 2002) , 
to any immigration authority at an airport or any other point of embarkation or immigration, 
restricting or in any manner prohibiting the departure from  India of any holder of the passport or 
travel document under sub -section  (3) of  section 10, shall be  deemed to be an order under sub -
section ( 1) of section 10A and such order shall continue to be in force for a period of three months 
                                                           
1. Ins by Act 17 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2002).  7 
 from the date of commencement of the Passports (Amendment) Act, 2002, or the date of giving such 
intimation, whichever is later.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of sections 10A and 10B, the expression “designated officer” 
means such officer or authority designated, by order in writing, as such by the Central Government.]     
11. Appeals. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the passport authority under clause ( b) or 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5 or clause ( b) of the proviso  to section 7 or sub -section ( 1), or 
sub-section ( 3) of section 10 or by an order under sub -section ( 6) of section 10 of the authority to whom  
the passport authority is subordinate, may prefer an appeal against that order to such authority (hereinafter 
referred to as the appellate authority) and within such period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order made by  the Central Government.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfied the appe llate authority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period.  
(3) The period prescribed for an appeal shall be computed in accordance with the provisi ons of the 
Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963 ), with respect to the computation of the periods of                     
limitation thereunder.  
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be made by a petition in writing and shall be accompanied 
by a copy of the statement of the reasons for the order appea led against where such copy has been 
furnished to the appellant and 1[by such fee as may be prescribed for meeting the expenses that may be 
incurred in calling for relevant records and for connected services] .  
(5) In disposing of an appeal, the appellate authority sha ll follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that no appeal shall be disposed of unless the appellant has been given a reasonable 
opportunity or representing his case.  
(6) Every order of the appellate authority confirming, modifyi ng or reversing the order appealed 
against shall be final.  
12. Offences and penalties. —(1) Whoever —  
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 3; or  
(b) knowingly furnishes any false information or suppresses any material information with a view 
to obtain ing a passport or travel document under this Act or without lawful authority alters or 
attempts to alter or causes to alter the entries made in a passport or travel document; or  
(c) fails to produce for inspection his passport or travel document (whether issued under this      
Act or not) when called upon to do so by the prescribed authority; or  
(d) knowingly uses a passport or travel document issued to another person; or  
(e) knowingly allows another person to use a passport or travel document issued to him,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend t o 2[two years or with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees ] or with both.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1993, s. 5, for “by such fee (if any) not exceeding rupees twenty -five as may be prescribed”              
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “six months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  8 
 1 [(1A) Whoever, not being a citizen of India, — 
(a) makes an application for a passport or obtains a passport by suppressing information about his 
nationality, or  
(b) holds a forged passport or any travel document,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which s hall not be less than one year but which may 
extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend 
to fifty thousand rupees.]  
(2) Whoever abets  any offence punishable under  2[sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 1A)] shall, if the 
act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, be punishable with the punishment provided in 
that sub -section for that offence.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any condition of a passport or travel document or any provisi on of this Act 
or any rule made thereunder for which no punishment is provided elsewhere in this Act shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees or with both.  
(4) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under this Act, is again convicted of an offence 
under this Act shall be punishable with double the penalty provided for the latter offence.  
13. Power to arrest .—(1) Any officer of customs empowered by a general or special order of the 
Central Gove rnment in this behalf and any 3[officer of police or emigration officer] not below the rank of 
a sub -inspector may arrest without warrant any person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he 
has committed any of fence punishable under section 12 and shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the 
grounds for such arrest.  
(2) Every officer making an arrest under this section shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send 
the person arrested before a magistrate having jurisdiction in the case or to the officer in charge of the 
nearest police station and the provisions of 4[section 57 of the Code of Criminal procedure, 1 973              
(2 of 1974) ] shall, so far as may be, apply  in the case of any such arrest . 
14. Power  of search and seizure. —(1) Any officer of customs empowered by a general or special 
order of the Central Gove rnment in this behalf and any 3[officer of police or emigration officer] not below 
the rank of a sub -inspector may search any place and seize any passport or travel document from any 
person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed any offence punishable under 
section 12.  
(2) The provisions of the  5[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ], relating to searches and 
seizu res shall, so far as may be, apply to searches and seizures under this section.  
15. Previous sanction of Central Government necessary. —No prosecution shall be instituted 
against any person in respect of any offence under this Act without the previous sanct ion of the Central 
Government or such officer or authority as may be authori sed by that Government by order in writing in 
this behalf.  
16. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer or authority for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act.  
17. Passports and travel documents to be property of Central Govern ment. —A passport or travel 
document issued under this Act shall at all  times remain the property of the Central Government . 
18. [Passports, etc., not to be issued to persons who cannot emigrate under Act 7 of  1922] .—Omitted 
by the Passports  (Amendment ) Act, 1993  (35 of 1993) , s. 8 (w.e.f . 1-7-1993).  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1993 s. 6, (w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “sub-section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “ Officer of police” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  
4. Subs. by Act 31 of 1978, s. 3, for “section 61 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 18 -8-1978).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for  “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) ” (w.e.f. 18 -8-1978).  9 
 19. Passports and travel documents to be invalid for travel to certain countries. —Upon the issue 
of a notification by the Central Government that a foreign country is —  
(a) a country which is committing external aggression against India; or  
(b) a country assisting the country committing external aggression against India; or  
(c) a country where armed hostilities are in progress; or  
(d) a country to which travel must be restricted in the public interest because such travel would 
seriously impai r the conduct of foreign affairs of the Government of India ,  
a passport or travel document for travel through or visiting such country shall cease to be valid for such 
travel or visit unless in any case a special endorsement in that behalf is made in the prescribed form by 
the prescribed authority.  
20. Issue of passports and travel documents to persons who are not citizens of                           
India.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions relating to issue of a passport or 
travel document, the Central Government may issue, or cause to be issued, a passport or travel document 
to a person who is not a citizen of India if that Government is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do in 
the public interest.  
21. Power to delega te.—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that any power or function which may be exercised or performed by it under this Act other than the power 
under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6 or the power under cla use ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of that 
section or the power under section 24, may, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if 
any, as it may specify in the notification, be exercised or performed —  
(a) by such officer or authority subordina te to the Central Government; or  
(b) by any State Government or by any officer or authority subordinate to such Government; or  
(c) in any foreign country in which there is no diplomatic mission of India, by such foreign 
Consular Officer; as may be specif ied in the notification.  
22. Power to exempt. —Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subj ect to such 
conditions, if any, as it m ay specify in the notification ,—  
(a) exempt any person or class of persons from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this 
Act or the rules made thereunder; and  
(b) as often as may be, cancel any such notification and again subject, by a like notification, the 
person or class of persons to the operation of such provisions.  
23. Act to be in addition to certain enactments. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to 
and not in derogation of the provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 (34 of 1920), 1[the 
Emigration Act, 1983 (31 of 1983)] the Registration of   Foreigners Act, 1939 (16 of 1939), the Forei gners 
Act, 1946 (31 of 1946),  2***, Trading with the Enemy (Continuance of Emergency Provisions)              
(16 of 19 47), the Foreigners Law (Application and Amend ment) Act, 1962 (42 of 1962), 3[the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973)] and other enactments relating to foreigners and foreign 
exchange.  
24. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 5 of 1993, s. 9 , for “the Emigration Act, 1922 (7 of 1922)”  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1993).  
2. The words and figures “the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (7 of 1947)” omitted  by Act 31 of 1978, s.  5               
(w.e.f. 18 -8-1978).  
3. Ins. by Act 31 of 1978, s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -8-1978).  10 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the fo llowing matters, namely :—  
(a) the appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of passport authorities;  
(b) the classes of persons to whom passports and travel documents referred to respectively in    
sub-section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) of section 4 may be issued;  
(c) the form and particulars of application for the issue or renewal of a passport or travel 
document or for endorsement on a passport or travel document and where the application is for the 
renewal, the time within which it shall be made;  
(d) the period for which passports and travel documents shall continue in force;  
(e) the form in which and the conditions subject to which the different classes of passports and 
travel documents may be issued, renewed or varied;   
1[(ee) specifying the fo reign country for the purposes of the Explanation  to sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5;]  
(f) the fees payable in respect of 2[any application for the issue of a passport under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 5 or issue  of a passp ort for visiting a foreign country referred to in sub -section ( 1A) of 
section 5 ] or travel document or for varying any endorsement or making a fresh endorsement on a 
passport or a travel document and the fees payable in respect of any appeal under this Act;  
(g) the appointment of a ppellate authorities under sub -section ( 1) of section 11, the jurisdiction 
of, and the procedure which may be followed by, such appellate authorities;  
(h) the services (including the issue of a duplicate passport or travel document  in lieu of a 
passport or travel document lost, damaged or destroyed) which may be rendered in relation to a 
passport or travel document and the fees therefor;  
(i) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which this Act makes no 
provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
necessary for the proper implementation of the Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each H ouse 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or 3[in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
25. Change of short title of Act 34 of 1920. —In the Indian Passport Act, 1920, in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 1, for the words and figures “the Indian Passport Act, 1920, ” the words, brackets and figures “the 
Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 ” shall be substituted . 
26. [Saving as to certain passports and applications .]—Omitted by the Passports  (Amendment ) Act, 
1993 (35 of 1993), s. 8 (w.e.f . 1-7-1993).  
27. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Passports Ordinance, 1967 (4 of 1967) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purporting to have been done 
or taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act 
had commenced on the 5th day of May, 1967.    
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1978, s. 6 (w.e.f. 18 -8-1978).  
2. The words “issue or renewal of a passport” of c lause ( f)  were subs. by Act 31 of 1978, s. 6  (w.e.f.18 -8-1978)  to read as 
“issue or renewal of a passport for visiting a foreign country referred to in sub -section ( 1A) of section 5”and the words 
“any application for the issue or renewal of a passport” were further subs. by Act 35 of 1993, s.10 to read as above 
(w.e.f.1 -7-1993).  
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 1978, s. 6, for certain words  (w.e.f. 18-8-1978) . 
 
--------------------------The Standards of Weights and Measures (Extension to Kohima and Mokokchung Districts) Act, 1967--------------------------
1 
 THE STANDARDS OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (EXTENSION TO KOHIMA AND 
MOKOKCHUNG DISTRICTS) ACT, 1967  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Extension of Act 89 of 1956 to Kohima and Mokokchung Districts in Nagaland . 
 
  2 
 THE STANDARDS  OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (EXTENSION TO KOHIMA AND 
MOKOKCHUNG DISTRICTS) ACT, 1967  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1967  
[26th August , 1967 .] 
An Act to extend the Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1956 to the Kohima and 
Mokokchung districts in the State of Nagaland.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Standard s of Wei ghts and Measures (Extension t o 
Kohima and Mokokchung Districts) Act, 1967.  
2. Extension of Act 89 of 1956 to Kohima and Mokokchung Districts in Nagaland .—The 
Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1956, shall, as from the commencement of this Act, extend 
to the Kohima and Mokokchung districts in the State of Nagaland and shall come into force therein on 
such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
 
                                                           
1. 1st September, 1967,  vide notification No. S.O. 3085, dated 31 st August , 1967 , see Gazette  of India,  Extraordinary,           
Part  II, sec. 3(ii). 
 
--------------------------The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967--------------------------
1 
 THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION)  ACT, 196 7                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent  and application.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
UNLAWFUL ASSOCIATION S 
3. Declaration of an association as unlawful.  
4. Reference to Tribunal.  
5. Tribunal.  
6. Period of operation and cancellation of notification.  
7. Power to prohibit the use of funds of an unlawful association.  
8. Power to notify places used for the purpose of an unlawful association.  
9. Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
10. Penalty for being member of an unlawful association , etc. 
11. Penalty for dealing with funds of an unlawful association.  
12. Penalty for contravention of an order made in respect of a notified place.  
13. Punishment for unlawful activities.  
14. Offences to be cognizable.  
CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENT FOR TERRORIST ACTIVITIES  
15. Terrorist act.  
16. Punishment for terrorist act. 
16A. [ Omitted ]. 
17. Punishment for raising fund s for terrorist act.  
18. Punishment for conspiracy, etc.  
18A. Punishment for organi sing of terrorist camps.  
18B. Punishment for recruiting of any person or persons for terrorist act.  
19. Punishment for harbouring, etc.  
20. Punishment for being member of terrorist gang or organisation.  
21. Punishment for holding proceeds of terrorism.  
22. Punishment for threatening witness.  2 
 SECTIONS  
22A. Offences by companies.  
22B. Offences by societies or trusts.  
22C. Punishment for offences by companies, societies or trusts.  
23. Enhanced penalties.  
CHAPTER V  
FORFEITURE OF PROCEEDS OF TERRORISM  OR ANY PROPERTY INTENDED TO BE  
USED  FOR TERRORISM  
24. Reference to proceeds of terrorism to include any property intended to be used for terrorism.  
24A. Forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism.  
25. Powers of investigating officer and Designated Authority and appeal against order of Designated 
Authority.  
26. Court to order forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism.  
27. Issue of show cause notice before forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism.  
28. Appeal.  
29. Order of forfeiture not to Interfere with other punishments.  
30. Claims by third party.  
31. Powers of Designated Authority.  
32. Certain transfers to be null and void.  
33. Forfeiture of property of certain persons.  
34. Company to transfer shares to Government.  
CHAPTER VI  
TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS  
35. Amendment of Schedule, etc.  
36. Denotification of a terrorist organisation.  
37. Review Committees.  
38. Offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation  
39. Offence relating to support given to a terrorist organisation.  
40. Offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Continuance of association.  
42. Power to delegate.  
43. Officers competent to investigate offence unde r Chapters IV and VI.  
43A. Power to arrest, search, etc.  
43B. Procedure of arrest, seizure , etc. 
43C. Application of provisions of Code.  
43D. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code.  3 
 SECTIONS  
43E. Presumption as to offence under section 15.  
43F. Obligation to furnish information.  
44. Protection of witnesses.  
45. Cognizance of offences.  
46. Admissibility of evidence collected through the interception of communications.  
47. Bar of jurisdiction.  
48. Effect of Act and rules, etc., inconsistent wi th other enactments.  
49. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
50. Saving.  
51. Impounding of passport and arms licence of person charge sheeted under the Act. 
51A. Certain powers of the Central Government.  
52. Power to make rules.  
53. Orders and rules to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
  4 
 THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) ACT, 1967  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1967  
[30th December, 1967 .] 
An Act to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals 
and associations  1[, and for dealing with  terrorist activities ,] and for  matters connected 
therewith.  
2[WHEREAS  the Security Council of the United Nations in its 4385th meeting adopted             
Resolution 1373 (2001) on 28th September, 2001, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations 
requiring all the States to take measures to combat international terrorism;  
AND WHEREAS  Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1333 (2000), 1363 (2001), 1390 (2002), 1455 (2003), 1526 
(2004), 1566 (2004), 1617 (2005), 1735 (2006) and 1822 (2008) of the Security Council of the United 
Nations require the States to take action against certain terrorists and t errorist organisations, to freeze the 
assets and other economic resources, to prevent the entry into or the transit through their territory, and 
prevent the direct or indirect supply, sale or transfer of arms and ammunitions to the individuals or 
entities listed in the Schedule;  
AND WHEREAS the Central Government, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 2 of the 
United Nations (Security Council) Act, 1947 (43 of 1947)  has made the Prevention and Suppression of 
Terrorism (Implementation of Security Co uncil Resolutions) Order, 2007;  
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said Resolutions and the Order and to 
make special provisions for the prevention of, and for coping with, terrorist activities and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
3[1. Short title , extent  and application .—(1) This Act may be called the U nlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967  (37 of 1967) . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India . 
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Act for every act or omission contrary to the 
provisions thereof, of which he is held guilty in India.  
(4) Any person, who commits an offence bey ond India, which is punishable under this Act, shall be 
dealt with according to the provisions of this Act in the same manner as if such act had been committed in 
India.  
(5) The provi sions of this Act apply also to — 
(a) citizens of India outside India;  
(b) persons in the service of the Government, wherever they may be; and  
(c) persons on ships and aircrafts, registered in India, wherever they may be.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “association ” means any combination or body of individuals;  
(b) “cession of a part of the territory of India ” includes admission of the claim of any f oreign 
country to any such part ; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 2004, s. 4, for section s 1, 2, 2A (w.e.f 21 -9-2004).  5 
 (c) “Code ” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974);  
(d) “court ” means a  criminal court having jurisdiction, under the Code, to try offences under this 
Act 1[and includes a Special Court constituted under section 11 or under section 21 of the National 
Investigation Agency Act, 2008] ; 
(e) “Designated Authority ” means such officer of the Central Government not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary to that Government, or such officer of the State Government not below the rank of 
Secretary to that Government, as the case may be, as may be specified by the Central Gover nment or 
the State Government, by notification pu blished in the Official Gazette ; 
2[(ea) “economic security ” includes financial, monetary and fiscal stability, security of means of 
production and distribution, food security, livelihood security, energy security, ecological and 
environmental security;]  
1[3[(eb)] “Order ” means the Prevention and Suppression of Ter rorism (Implementation of 
Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007, as may be amended from time to time;]  
 2[(ec) “person ” includes — 
(i) an individual,  
(ii) a company,  
(iii) a firm,  
(iv) an organisation  or an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not,  
(v) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding sub -clauses, and  
(vi) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any person falling  within any of the 
preceding sub -clauses;]  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
4[(g) “proceeds of terrorism ” means, — 
(i) all kinds of properties which have been derived or obtained from commission of any 
terrorist act or have been acquired through funds traceable to a terrorist act, irrespective of person 
in whose name such proceeds are standing or in whose possession they are found; or  
(ii) any property which is being used, or is intended to be used, for a terrorist act or for  the 
purpose of an individual terrorist or a terrorist gang or a terrorist organisation.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Act, it is hereby declared that the expression 
“proceeds of terrorism ” includes any property intended to be used for terrorism;]  
5[(h) “property ” means property and assets of every description whether corporeal or incorporeal, 
movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and legal documents, deeds and  6[instruments in any 
form including but not limited to] electronic or digital, evi dencing title to, or interest in, such property 
or assets by means of bank credits, travellers ’ cheques, bank cheques, money orders, shares, 
securities, bonds, drafts, letters of credit, cash and bank account including fund, however acquired;  
(ha) “Schedule ” means the Schedule to this Act;]  
(i) “secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union ” includes the assertion of any 
claim to determine whether such part will remain a part of the territory of India;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 2 (w. e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
3. Clause ( ea) renumbered clause ( eb) thereof by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
5. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 3,  for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 2, for “instruments in any form including” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  6 
 (j) “State Government ”, in relati on to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof;  
(k) “terrorist act ” has the meaning assigned to it in section 15, and the expressions “terrorism ” 
and “terrorist ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(l) “terrorist gang ” means any association, other th an terrorist organisation, whether systematic or 
otherwise, which is concerned with, or involved in, terrorist act;  
(m) “terrorist organisation ” means an organisation listed in the Schedule or an organisation 
operating under the same name as an organisation so listed;  
(n) “Tribunal ” means the Tribunal constituted under section 5;  
(o) “unlawful activity ”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such 
individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words,  either spoken or written, or by 
signs or by visible representation or otherwise), — 
(i) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the 
cession of a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part of the te rritory of India from 
the Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about such cession or 
secession; or  
(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and  
territorial integrity of India ; or 
(iii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India;  
(p) “unlawful association ” means any association, — 
(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to 
undertake any unlawful activity, or of whi ch the members undertake such activity; or  
(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under section 153A  (45 of 1860) 
or section 153B of the Indian Penal Code, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any 
such activity, or of wh ich the members undertake any such activity:  
Provided that nothing contained in sub -clause ( ii) shall apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;  
(q) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Code shall have the 
meanings respec tively assigned to them in the Code.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area. ] 
CHAPTER II  
UNLAWFUL ASSOCIATION S 
3. Declaration of an association as unlawful .—(1) If the Central Government  is of opinion that any 
association is, or has become, an unlawful association, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare such association to be unlawful.  
(2) Every such notification  shall specify the grounds on which it is issued and such  other  particulars 
as the Central Government may consider necessary:  
Provided that nothing in this  sub-section  shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact 
which it considers to  be against the public interest to disclose.  
(3) No such notification  shall have effect until the Tribunal has, by an  order made under section  4, 
confirmed the declaration made therein and the  order is published in the Official Gazette:  
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that circumstances exist which render it 
necessary for that Government to declare an association to be unlawful with immediate effect, it may, for 
reasons to be stated in writing, direct that the notification  shall,  subject to any  order that may be made 
under section  4, have effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.  7 
 (4) Every such notification shall, in addition to its publication in the Official Gazette, be published  in 
not less than one daily newspaper having circulation in the State in which the principal office, if any, of 
the association affected is situated, and  shall  also be served on such association in such manner as the 
Central Government may think fit and all or any of the following modes may be followed in  effecting 
such service, namely :— 
(a) by affixing a copy of the notification to some conspicuous part of the office, i f any , of the 
association; or  
(b) by serving a copy of the notification, where possible, on the principal office -bearers, if any , 
of the association; or  
(c) by proclaiming by beat of  drum or by  means of loudspeakers, the contents of the notification 
in the area in which the activities of the association are  ordinarily carried on; or  
(d) in such  other  manner as may be prescribed.  
4. Reference to Tribunal .—(1) Whe re any association has been declared unlawful by a notification 
issued under  sub-section ( 1) of section  3, the Central Government  shall, within thirty days from the date 
of the publication of the notification under the said  sub-section, refer the notification to the Tribunal for 
the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.  
(2) On receipt of a reference under  sub-section ( 1), the Tribunal  shall call upon the association 
affected by noti ce in writing to  show cause, within thirty days from the date of the service of such notice, 
why the association  should not be declared unlawful.  
(3) After considering the cause, if any,  shown by the association or the office -bearers or  members 
thereof, th e Tribunal  shall hold an inquiry in the manner specified in section  9 and after calling for such 
further information as it may consider necessary from the Central Government or from any office -bearer 
or member of the association, it  shall decide whether or  not there is sufficient cause for declaring the 
association to be unlawful and make, as expeditiously as possible and in any case within a period of six 
months from the date of the issue of the notification under  sub-section ( 1) of section  3, such  order a s it 
may deem fit either confirming the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same.  
(4) The  order of the Tribunal made under  sub-section ( 3) shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
5. Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute,  as 
and when necessary, a tribunal to be known as the “Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal ” consisting 
of one person, to be appo inted by the Central Government : 
Provide d that no person  shall be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a  High Court.  
(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the presiding 
officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government  shall appoint  another  person in accordance with the 
provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal 
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.  
(3) The Central Government  shall make available to the Trib unal such staff as may be necessary for 
the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal  shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of section  9, the Tribun al shall have power to regulate its own procedure 
in all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place or places at which it will 
hold its sittings.  
(6) The Tribunal  shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908),  while trying a suit, in 
respect o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  8 
 (b) the discovery and production of any document or  other  material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the requisitioning of any p ublic record from any court or office;  
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Cod e (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be deemed 
to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and 1[Chapter  XXVI] of the  2[Code].  
6. Period of operation and cancellation of notification .—(1) Subject to the provisions of               
sub-section ( 2), a notification issued under section 3 shall, if the declaration made therein is confirmed by 
the Tribunal by an order made under section 4, remain in force for a period of  3[five years]  from the date 
on which the notification becomes effective.  
(2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, either on its 
own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, at any time, cancel the notification issued 
under section 3 , whether or not the declaration made therein ha s been confirmed by the Tribunal.  
7. Power to prohibit the use of funds of an unlawful association .—(1) Where an association has 
been declared unlawful by a notification issued under section 3 which has become effective under        
sub-section ( 3) of that  section and the Central Government is satisfied, after such inquiry as it may think 
it, that any person has custody of any moneys, securities or credits which are being used or are intended to 
be used for the purpose of the unlawful association, the Centr al Government may, by order in writing , 
prohibit such person from paying, delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing in any manner whatsoever 
with such moneys, securities or credits or with any other moneys, securities or credits which may come 
into his  custody after the making of the order , save in accordance with the written orders of the Central 
Government and a copy of such order shall be served upon the person so prohibited in the manner 
specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(2) The Central Government may e ndorse a copy of the prohibitory order made under sub -section ( 1) 
for investigation to any gazetted officer of the Government it may select, and such copy shall be a warrant 
whereunder  such officer may enter in or upon any premises of the person to whom the order is directed, 
examine the books of such person, search for moneys, securities or credits, and make inquiries from such 
person or any officer, agent or servant of such person, to uching the origin of any dealings in any moneys, 
securities or credits which the investigating officer may suspect are being used or are intended to be used 
for the purpose of the unlawful association.  
(3) A copy of an order made under this section shall b e served in the manner provided in the  2[Code ], 
for the service of a summons, or where the person to be served is a corporation, company, bank or other 
association, it shall be served on any secretary, director or other officer or person concerned with the  
management thereof , or by leaving it or sending it by post addressed to the corporation, company, bank or 
other association at its registered office, or where there is no registered office, at the place where it carries 
on business.  
(4) Any person aggriev ed by a prohibitory order made under sub -section ( 1) may, within fifteen days 
from the date of the service of such order, make an application to the Court of the District Judge within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction such person voluntarily resides o r carries on business or personally 
works for gain, to establish that the moneys, securities or credits in respect of which the prohibitory order 
has been made are not being used or are not intended to be used for the purpose of the unlawful 
association an d the Court of the District Judge shall decide the question.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2004, s. 5, for “Chapter XXXV” (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898)”  (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 3, for “two years” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  9 
 (5) Except so far as is necessary for the purposes of any proceedings under this section, no 
information obtained in the course of any investigation made under sub -section ( 2) shall be divulged by 
any gazetted officer of the Government, without the consent of the Central Government.  
(6) In this section, “security ” includes a document whereby any person acknowledges that he is under 
a legal liability to pay money, or whereunder  any person obtains a legal right to the payment of money.  
8. Power to notify places used for the purpose of an unlawful association .—(1) Where an 
association has been declared unlawful by a notification issued under section 3 which has become 
effective under sub -section ( 3) of that section, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, notify any place which in its opinion is used for the purpose of such unlawful association.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “place” includes a house or building , or part 
thereof, or a tent or vessel.  
(2) On the issue of  a notification under sub -section ( 1), the District Magistrate within the local limits 
of whose jurisdiction such notified place is situate or any officer authorised  by him in writing in this 
behalf shall make a list of all movable properties (other than wearing -apparel, cooking vessels, beds and 
beddings, tools of artisans, implements of husbandry, cattle, grain and food -stuffs and such other articles 
as he considers  to be  of a trivial nature) found in the notified place in the presence of two respectable 
witnesses.  
(3) If, in the opinion of the District Magistrate, any articles specified in the list are or may be used for 
the purpose of the unlawful association, he may make an order prohibiting any person from using the 
articles save in accordance with the written orders of the District Magistrate.  
(4) The District Magistrate may thereupon make an order that no person who at the date of the 
notification was not a res ident in the notified place shall, without the permission of the District 
Magistrate, enter, or be on or in, the notified place : 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any near relative of any person who was a 
resident in the notified pla ce at the date of the notification.  
(5) Where in pursuance of sub -section ( 4), any person is granted permission to enter, or to be on or in, 
the notified place, that person shall, while acting under such permission, comply with such orders for 
regulating h is conduct as may be given by the District Magistrate.  
(6) Any police officer, not below the rank of a sub -inspector, or any other person authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government may search any person entering, or seeking to enter, or being on o r in, 
the notified place and may detain any such person for the purpose of sea rching him:  
Provided that no female shall be searched in pursuance of this sub -section except by a female.  
(7) If any person is in the notified place in contravention of an order  made under sub -section ( 4), then, 
without prejudice to any other proceedings which may be taken against him, he may be removed 
therefrom by any officer or by any other person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.  
(8) Any person aggrieved by  a notification issued in respect of a place under sub -section ( 1) or by an 
order made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) may, within thirty days from the date of the 
notification or order, as the case may be, make an application to the Court of the District Judge within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction such notified place is situate — 
(a) for declaration that the place has not been used for the purpose of the unlawful association; or  
(b) for setting aside the order made under sub -section ( 3) or sub-section ( 4), 
and on receipt of the application the Court of the District Judge shall, after giving the parties an 
opportunity of being heard, decide the question.  
9. Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act .—Subject to any rules 
that may be made under this Act, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any inquiry 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing of any application under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 7 or sub -section ( 8) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, be the procedure laid 10 
 down in the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the investigation of claims and the decision of 
the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall be  final.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
1[10. Penalty  for being member of an unlawful association , etc.—Where an association is declared 
unlawful by a notification issued under section 3 which has become effective under s ub-section ( 3) of that 
section, — 
(a) a person, who — 
(i) is and continues to be a member of such association; or  
(ii) takes part in meetings of such association; or  
(iii) contributes to, or receives or solicits any contribution for the purpose of, such 
association; or  
(iv) in any way assists the operations of such association,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable 
to fine; and  
(b) a person, who is or continues to be a member of such association, or voluntarily does an act 
aiding or promoting in any manner the objects of such association and in either case is in possession 
of any unlicensed firearms, ammunition, explosive or other instrument or substance capable of 
causing mass destruction and commits any act res ulting in loss of human life or grievous injury to any 
person or causes sign ificant damage to any property, — 
(i) and  if such act has resulted in the death of any person, shall be punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;  
(ii) in any other case, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than five year s but which may extend to imprisonment for life , and shall also be liable to 
fine.]  
11. Penalty for dealing with funds of an unlawful association .—If any person on whom a 
prohibitory order has been served under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 in respect of any moneys, securities 
or credits pays, delivers, transfers or otherwise deals in any manner whatsoever with the same in 
contravention of the prohibitory order, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fi ne, or with both, and notwithstanding anything contained in the  2[Code ], 
the court trying such contravention may also impose on the person convicted an additional fine to recover 
from him the amount of the moneys or credits or the market value of the secur ities in respect of which the 
prohibitory order has been contravened or such part thereof as the court may deem fit.  
12. Penalty for contravention of an order made in respect of a notified place .—(1) Whoever  uses 
any article in contravention of a prohibitory order in respect thereof made under sub -section ( 3) of     
section 8 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, and shall also 
be liable to fine.  
(2) Whoever knowingly and wilfully is in, or effects or attempts to effect entry into, a notified place 
in contravention of an order made under sub -section ( 4) of section 8 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, and shall also be liable t o fine.  
13. Punishment for unlawful activities .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) takes part in or commits, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2004, s. 6, for section 10 (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  11 
 (b) advocates, abets, advises or incites the commission of, any unlawful activity, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
(2) Whoever, in any way, assists any unlawful activity of any association , declared unlawful under 
section 3, after the notification by which it has been so declared has become effective under                  
sub-section ( 3) of that section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any treaty, agreement or convention entered into between the 
Government  of India and the Government of any other country or to any negotiations therefor carried on 
by any person authorised in this behalf by the Government of India.  
14. Offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the  1[Code] , an offence 
punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.  
2[CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENT FOR TERRORIST A CTIVITIES  
3[15. Terrorist act .—4[(1)] Whoever does any act with intent to threaten or likely to threaten the 
unity, integrity, security  5[, economic security,] or sovereignty of India or with intent to strike terror or 
likely to strike terror in the people  or any section of the people in India or in any foreign country, — 
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable substances or 
firearms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other 
substances (whether biological radioactive, nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any 
other means of whatever nature to cause or likely to cause — 
(i) death of, or injuries to, any person or persons; or  
(ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of , property; or  
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community in India or in 
any foreign country; or  
5[(iiia) damage to, the monetary stability of India by way of production or smuggling or 
circulation of high quality c ounterfeit Indian paper currency, coin or of any other material; or]  
(iv) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign country used or intended to 
be used for the defence of India or in connection with any other purposes of the Government  of 
India, any State Government or any of their agencies; or  
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force or attempts to do so or 
causes death of any public functionary or attempts to cause death of any public functionary; or  
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatens to kill or injure such person or does any 
other act in order to compel the Government of India, any State Government or the Government of a 
foreign country or  6[an international or inter -governmental org anisation or any other person to do or 
abstain from doing any act; or]  
commits a terrorist act.  
7[Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub -section, — 
(a) “public functionary ” means the constitutional authorities or any other functionary notified in 
the Official Gazette by the Central Government as public functionary;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2004,  s. 3, for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898)”  (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for Chapter IV (w.e.f. 21 -9-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 4, for section 15 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
4. Section 15 r enumbered  as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 3 of 2013 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013 ). 
5. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
6. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “any other person to do or abstain from doing any act,” ( w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
7. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for the  Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  12 
 (b) “high quality counterfeit Indian currency ” means the counterfeit currency as may be declared 
after examinat ion by an authorised or notified forensic authority that such currency imitates or 
compromises with the key security features as specified in the Third Schedule.]  
1[(2) The terrorist act includes an act which constitutes an offence within the scope of , and as defined 
in any of the treaties specified in the Second Schedule.]  
16. Punishment for terrorist act.—(1) Whoever commits a terrorist act shall, — 
(a) if such act has resulted in the death of any person, be punishable with death or imprisonment 
for life, and shall also be liable to fine;  
(b) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.  
16A. [Punishment for making demands of radioactive substances, nuclear devices, etc .] Omitted by    
the Unlawful Activities  (Prevention) Amendment (Repealing and Amending ) Act 2013  (3 of 2013 ),           
s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-2-2013 ). 
2[17. Punishment for raising funds for terrorist act.—Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, 
directly or indirectly, raises or provides funds or collects funds, whether from a legitimate or illegitimate 
source, from any person or persons or attempts to provide to, or raises or collects funds for any perso n or 
persons, knowing that such funds are likely to be used, in full or in part by such person or persons or by a 
terrorist organisation or by a terrorist gang or by an individual terrorist to commit a terrorist act , 
notwithstanding whether such funds were  actually used or not for commission of such act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this  section, — 
(a) participating, organising or directing in any of the acts stated therein shall constitute an 
offence;  
(b) raising  funds shall include raising or collecting or providing funds through production or 
smuggling or circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian currency; and  
(c) raising or collecting or providing funds, in any manner for the benefit of, or, to an individu al 
terrorist, terrorist gang or terrorist organisation for the purpose not specifically covered under       
section 15 shall also be construed as an offence.]  
18. Punishment for conspiracy, etc. —Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, 
abets,  advises or  3[incites , directly or knowingly facilitates] the commission of, a terrorist act or any act 
preparatory to the commission of a terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than five years but which may  extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
4[18A. Punishment for organi sing of terrorist camps .—Whoever organises or causes to be 
organised any camp or camps for imparting training in terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment  
for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall 
also be liable to fine.  
18B. Punishment for recruiting of any person or persons for terrorist act .—Whoever  recruits or 
causes to be recruited any person or persons for commission of a terrorist act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment 
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.]  
19. Punishment for harbouring, etc. —Whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals, or attempts to 
harbour or conceal any person knowing that such person is a terrorist shall be punishable with 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3  of 2013, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for section 17 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 7, for “incites or knowingly facilitates” (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  13 
 imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three ye ars but which may extend to imprisonment 
for life, and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that this section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by the 
spouse of the offender.  
20. Punishment for being member of terrorist gang or organisation .—Any person who is a 
member of a terrorist gang or a terrorist organisation, which is involved in terrorist act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be 
liable to fin e. 
21. Punishment for holding proceeds of terrorism .—Whoever  knowingly holds any property 
derived or obtained from commission of any terrorist act or acquired through the terrorist fund shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be 
liable to fine.  
22. Punishment for threatening witness .—Whoever threatens any person who is a witness or any 
other person in whom such witness may be interested, with violence, or wrongfully restrains or confines 
the witness, or any other person in whom the witness may be int erested, or does any other unlawful act 
with intent to cause any of the said acts, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
1[22A. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person (including promoters of the company) who, at the time the offence was 
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, sha ll be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person (including 
promoters) liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he had exercised reasonable care to prevent the commission of such 
offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the pa rt of, any promoter, director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such promoter, dire ctor, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of     
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
22B. Offences by societies or trusts .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
society or trust, every person (including the promoter of society or settlor of the trust) who at the time the 
offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the society or trust for the conduct of the 
business of the society or the trust, as well as  the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in t his Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised reasonable care to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any promoter, director, manager, secretar y, 
trustee or other officer of the society or trust, such promoter, director, manager, secretary, trustee or other 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013 , s. 7 (w.e.f . 1-2-2013 ). 14 
 officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section, — 
(a) “society ” means any body corporate registered under the Societies Registration                   
Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) or any other State Act governing the registration of societies;  
(b) “trust” means any body  registered under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882  (2 of 1882) or any other 
State Act governing the registration of trusts;  
(c) “director ”, in relation to a society or trust, means a member of its governing board other than 
an ex officio  member representing the  interests of the Central or State Government or the appropriate 
statutory authority.]  
22C. Punishment for offences by companies, societies or trusts .—Where any offence under the 
Act has been committed by a company or a society or a trust, as the case may be, every person (including 
promoter of company or trust or settlor of the trust) who at the time of the offence was either in charge or 
responsible fo r the conduct of the business shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable with 
fine which shall not be less than five crore rupees and whic h may extend to ten crore rupees.]  
23. Enhanced penalties .—(1) 1[If any person with intent to aid any terrorist or terrorist organisation 
or a terrorist gang contravenes] any provision of, or any rule made under the Explosives                          
Act, 1884  (4 of 1884) or the Explosive Substances Act, 1908  (6 of 1908) or the Inflammable Substances 
Act, 1952  (20 of 1952) or the Arms Act, 1959  (54 of 1959), or is in unauthorised possession of any bomb, 
dynamite or hazardous explosive substance or other le thal weapon or substance capable of mass 
destruction or biological or  2[chemical substance of warfare or high quality counterfeit Indian currency, 
he shall], notwithstanding anything contained in any of the aforesaid Acts or the rules made thereunder, 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend 
to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) 3[Any person who with the intent to aid any terrorist , or a terrorist o rganisation or a terr orist 
gang ], attempts to contravene or abets, or does any act preparatory to contravention of any provision of 
any law or rule specified in sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to have contravened that provision under                
sub-section ( 1) and the pro visions of that sub -section in relation to such person, have effect subject to the 
modification that the reference to “imprisonment for life ” therein shall be construed as a reference to 
“imprisonment for ten years ”. 
CHAPTER V  
FORFEITURE OF PROCEEDS OF TERRORISM  4[OR ANY PROPERTY INTENDED TO BE USED  
FOR TERRORISM ] 
5[24. Reference to proceeds of terrorism to include any property intended to be used for 
terrorism .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, all references to “proceeds of 
terrorism ” shall include any property int ended to be used for terrorism.  
24A. Forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism .—(1) No person shall hold or be in possession of any 
proceeds of terrorism.  
(2) Proceeds of terrorism, whether held by a terrorist organisatio n or terrorist gang or by any other 
person and whether or not such terrorist or other person is prosecuted or convicted for any offence under 
Chapter IV or Chapter VI , shall be liable to be forfeited to the Central Government or the State 
Government, as th e case may be, in the manner provided under this Chapter.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 9, for “If any person with intent to aid any terrorist contravenes” (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 8, for “chemical substance of warfare, he shall” (w.e.f.  1-2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 9, for “Any person who, with the intent to aid any terrorist” (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 9 (w.e.f.  1-2-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for section 24 (w.e.f.  1-2-2013).  15 
 (3) Where proceedings have been commenced under this section, the court may pass an order 
directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be, of property equivalent to, or, the value of the 
proceeds of terrorism involved in the offence.]  
25. Powers of investigating officer and Designated Authority and appeal against order of 
Designated Authority .—(1) If an officer investigating an offence committed under Chapter IV or 
Chapter VI, has reason to believe that any property in relation to which an investigation is being 
conducted, represents proceeds of terrorism, he shall, with the prior approval in writing of the Director 
General of the Police of the State in which such property is situated, make a n order seizing such property 
and where it is not practicable to seize such property, make an order of attachment directing that such 
property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with except with the prior permission of the officer 
making such orde r, or of the Designated Authority before whom the property seized or attached is 
produced and a copy of such order shall be served on the person concerned.  
(2) The investigating officer shall duly inform the Designated Authority within forty -eight hours of  
the seizure or attachment of such property.  
(3) The Designated Authority before whom the seized or attached property is produced shall either 
confirm or revoke the order of seizure or attachment so issued within a period of sixty days from the date 
of suc h production:  
Provided that an opportunity of making a representation by the person whose property is being seized 
or attached shall be given.  
(4) In the case of immovable property attached by the investigating officer, it shall be deemed to have 
been produced before the Designated Authority, when the investigating officer notifies his report and 
places it at the disposal of the Designated Authority.  
(5) The investigating officer may seize and detain any cash to which this Chapter applies if he has 
reasonable grounds for suspecting that — 
(a) it is intended to be used for the purposes of terrorism; or  
(b) it forms the whole or part of the resource s of a terrorist organisation:  
Provided that the cash seized under this sub -section by the investigating offic er shall be released 
within a period of forty -eight hours beginning with the time when it is seized unless the matter involving 
the cash is before the Designated Authority and such Authority passes an order allowing its retention 
beyond forty -eight hours.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “cash” means — 
(a) coins or notes in any currency;  
(b) postal orders;  
(c) traveller ’s cheques;  
1[(ca) credit or debit cards or cards that serve a similar purpose;]  
(d) banker ’s drafts; and  
(e) such  other monetary instruments as the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State 
Government may specify by an order made in writing.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Designated Authority may prefer an appeal to the 
court within a per iod of thirty days from the date of receipt of the order, and the court may either confirm 
the order of attachment of property or seizure so made or revoke such order and release the property.  
26. Court to order forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism .—Where a ny property is seized or attached 
on the ground that it constitutes proceeds of terrorism and the court confirms the order in this regard 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 25, it may order forfeiture of such property, whether or not the person 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 11 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  16 
 from whose po ssession it is seized or attached, is prosecuted in a court for an offence under Chapter IV or 
Chapter VI.  
27. Issue of show cause notice before forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism .—(1) No order forfeiting 
any proceeds of terrorism shall be made under section 26 unless the person holding or in possession of 
such proceeds is given a notice in writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to forfeit 
the proceeds of terrorism and such person is given an opportunity of making a representation  in writing 
within such reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the grounds of forfeiture and is also 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(2) No order of forfeiture shall be made under sub -section ( 1), if such per son establishes that he is a 
bona fide  transferee of such proceeds for value without knowing that they represent proceeds of terrorism.  
(3) It shall be competent for the court to make an order in respect of property seized or attached, — 
(a) directing  it to be sold if it is a perishable property and the provisions of section 459 of the 
Code shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale;  
(b) nominating any officer of the Central Government or the State Government, in the  case of any 
other property, to perform the function of the Administrator of such property subject to such 
conditions as may be specified by the court.  
28. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of forfeiture under section 26 may, within one 
month from the date of the receipt of such order, appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction, the 
court, which passed the order appealed against, is situated.  
(2) Where an order under section 26 is modified or annulled by the High Court or where in a 
prosecution instituted for any offence under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, the person against whom an order 
of forfeiture has been made under section 26 is acquitted, such property shall be returned to him and in 
either case if it is not possible for any reason t o return the forfeited property, such person shall be paid the 
price therefor as if the property had been sold to the Central Government with reasonable interest 
calculated from the day of seizure of the property and such price shall be determined in the m anner 
prescribed.  
29. Order of forfeiture not to Interfere with other punishments .—The order of forfeiture made 
under this Chapter by the court, shall not prevent the infliction of any other punishment to which the 
person affected thereby is liable under C hapter IV or Chapter VI.  
30. Claims by third party.—(1) Where any claim is preferred or any objection is made to the seizure 
or attachment of any property under section 25 on the ground that such proper ty is not liable to seizure or 
attachment, the Designated Authority before whom such property is produced, shall proceed to 
investigate the claim or objection:  
Provided that no such investigation shall be made where the Designated Authority considers that the 
claim or objection is designed to cause unn ecessary delay.  
(2) Where an appeal has been preferred under sub -section (6) of section 25 and any claimant or 
objector establishes that the property specified in the notice issued under section 27 is not liable to be 
forfeited under this Chapter, the said  notice shall be withdrawn or modified accordingly.  
31. Powers of Designated Authority .—The Designated Authority, acting under the provisions of 
this Chapter, shall have all the powers of a civil court required for making a full and fair inquiry into the 
matter before it.  
32. Certain transfers to be null and void.—Where, after the issue of an order under section 25 or 
issue of a notice under section 27, any property referred to in the said order or notice is transferred by any 
mode whatsoever, such transfer  shall, for the purpose of the proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored 
and if such property is subsequently forfeited, the transfer of such property shall be deemed to be null and 
void.  
  17 
 33. Forfeiture of property of certain persons .—(1) Where any person is accused of an offence 
under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, it shall be open to the court to pass an order that all or any of the 
properties, movable or immovable or both, belonging to him, shall, during the period of such trial, be 
attache d, if not already attached under this Chapter.  
(2) Where a person has been convicted of any offence punishable under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, 
the court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, by order in writing, declare that any property, 
movable or  immovable or both, belonging to the accused and specified in the order, shall stand forfeited 
to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, free from all encumbrances.  
1[(3) Where any person is accused of an offence concerning hig h quality counterfeit Indian currency, 
the court may pass an order directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be, of property equivalent 
to the value of such high quality counterfeit Indian currency involved in the offence including the face 
value  of such currency which are not defined to be of high quality, but are part of the common seizure 
along with the high quality counterfeit Indian currency.  
(4) Where a person is accused of an offence punishable under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, the court 
may pass an order directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be, of property equivalent to or the 
value of the proceeds of terrorism involved in the offence.  
(5) Where any person is accused of an offence under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, it shall be open to the 
court to pass an order that all or any of the property, movable or immovable or both, belonging to him 
shall, where the trial under the Act cannot be concluded on account of the death of the accused or being 
declared a proclaimed offender or fo r any other reason, be confiscated on the basis of material evidence 
produced before the court.]  
34. Company to transfer shares to Government .—Where any share in a company stand forfeited to 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, under this Chapter, then, the 
company shall, on receipt of the order of the court, notwithstanding anything contai ned in the Companies 
Act, 1956 ( 1 of 1956), or the articles of association of the company, forthwith register the Central 
Government or th e State Government, as the case may be, as the transferee of such share.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS  
35. Amendment of Schedule, etc. —(1) The Central Government may, by  2[notification], in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) add an organisation to the  3[First Schedule];  
(b) add also an organisation to the  3[First Schedule], which is identified as a terrorist organisation 
in a resolution adopted by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United 
Nations, to combat international terrori sm; 
(c) remove an organisation from the  3[First Schedule];  
(d) amend the  3[First Schedule] in some other way.  
(2) The Central Government shall exercise its power under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) in respect of 
an organisation only if it believes that it is involved in terrorism.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), an organisation shall be deemed to be involved in terrorism      
if it— 
(a) commits or participates in acts of terrorism, or  
(b) prepares for terrorism, or  
(c) promotes  or encourages terrorism, or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 11 (w.e.f . 1-2-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for “order” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for “Schedule” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  18 
 (d) is otherwise involved in terrorism.  
1[(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or remove or amend 
the Second Schedule or Third Schedule and thereupon the Second Schedule or the Third S chedule, as the 
case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 4) shall, as soon as may be after it 
is issued, be laid before Parliament.]  
36. Denotification of a terrorist organisation .—(1) An application may be made to the Central 
Government for the exercise of its power under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 35 to remove an 
organisation from the Schedule.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) may be made by — 
(a) the organisation, or  
(b) any person affected by inclusion of the organisation in the Schedule as a terrorist organisation.  
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for admission and disposal of an 
application made under this sect ion. 
(4) Where an application under sub -section ( 1) has been rejected, the applicant may apply for a 
review to the Review Committee constituted by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of      
section 37  within one month from the date of receipt of the order of such refusal by the applicant.  
(5) The Review Committee may allow an applicati on for review against rejection  to remove an 
organisation from the Schedule, if it considers that the decision to rejec t was flawed when considered in 
the light of the principles applicable on an application for judicial review.  
(6) Where the Review Committee allows review under sub -section ( 5) by or in respect of an 
organisation, it may make an order to such effect.  
(7) Where an order is made under sub -section ( 6), the Central Government shall, as soon as the 
certified copy of the order is received by it, make an order removing the organisation from the Schedule.  
37. Review Committees .—(1) The Central Government shall cons titute one or more Review 
Committees for the purposes of section 36.  
(2) Every such Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members not exceeding three 
and possessing such qualifications as may be prescribed.  
(3) A Chairperson of the Committee shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court, 
who shall be appointed by the Central Government and in the case of appointment of a sitting Judge, the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court shall be obtained . 
38. Offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation .—(1) A person, who associates 
himself, or professes to be associated, with a terrorist organisation with intention to further its activities, 
commits an offence relating to membership of a te rrorist organisation:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply where the person charged is able to prove — 
(a) that the organisation was not declared as a terrorist organisation  at the time when he became a 
member or began to profess to be a member; and  
(b) that he has not taken part in the activities of the organisation at any time during its inclusion in 
the Schedule as a terrorist organisation.  
(2) A person, who commits the of fence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation under             
sub-section ( 1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or with fine, or 
with both.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013).  19 
 39. Offence relating to support given to a terrorist organisation .—(1) A person commits the 
offence relating to support given to a terrorist  organisation, — 
(a) who, with intention to  further the activity of a terrorist organisation, — 
(i) invites  support for the terrorist organization;  and 
(ii) the  support is not or is not restricted to provide money or  other property within the  
meaning of  section 40;  or 
(b) who, with  intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, arranges, manages  or 
assists in arranging or managing a meeting  which he knows is — 
(i) to support  the terrorist organization;  or 
(ii) to further the activity of the terrorist organization;  or 
(iii) to be  addressed by a person who associates or professes to be associated with the  terrorist 
organisation; or  
(c) who, with  intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, addresses a  meeting 
for the purpose of encouraging support for the terrorist  organisation or to further its activity.  
(2) A person, who commits the offence  relating to support given to a terrorist organisation under           
sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years,  or with fine, or 
with both.  
40. Offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation .—(1) A person commits the offence of 
raising fund for a terrorist organisation, who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist 
organisation, — 
(a) invites another person to provide money or other property, and intends that it should be used, 
or has  reasonable cause to suspect that it might be used, for the purposes of terrorism; or  
(b) receives money or other property, and intends that it should be used, or has reasonable cause 
to suspect that it might be used, for the purposes of terrorism; or  
(c) provides money or other property, and knows, or has reasonable cause to suspect, that it 
would or might be used for the purposes of terrorism.  
1[Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, a reference to provide money or other property 
includes — 
(a) of its being given, lent or otherwise made available, whether or not for consideration; or  
(b) raising, collecting or providing funds through production or smuggling or circulation of high 
quality counterfeit Indian currency.]  
(2) A person, who commits t he offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation under                    
sub-section ( 1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years, or with 
fine, or with both.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Continuance of association .—An association shall not be deemed to have ceased to exist by 
reason only of any formal act of its dissolution or change of name but shall be deemed to continue so long 
as any actual combination for the purposes of such association continues be tween any members thereof.  
42. Power to delegate .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that all or any of the powers which may be exercised by it under section 7, or section 8, or both, shall, in 
such circumstances an d under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 13, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013 ). 20 
 also by any State Government and the State Government may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by order in writing, direct that any power which has bee n directed to be exercised by it 
shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be 
exercised by any person subordinate to the State Government as may be specified therein.  
43. Officers competent to investigate offence s under Chapters IV and VI .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code, no  police officer, — 
(a) in the  case of the Delhi Special Police Establishment , constituted under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946  (25 of 1946), below the rank of a  
Deputy Superintendent of Police or a police officer of equivalent rank;  
(b) in the  metropolitan areas of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Ahmedabad and any  other 
metropolitan area notified as such under  sub-section ( 1) of section 8 of the  Code, below the rank of an 
Assistant Commissioner of Police;  
(c) in any  case not relatable to clause ( a) or clause ( b), below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent 
of Police or a police  officer of an equivalent rank,  
shall investigate any offence punishable under Chapter IV or VI.  
1[43A. Power to arrest, search, etc .—Any officer of the Designated Authority empowered in this 
behalf, by general or special order of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may 
be, knowing of a design to commit any offence under this Act or has reason to believe from pers onal 
knowledge or information given by any person and taken in writing that any person has committed an 
offence punishable under this Act or from any document, article or any other thing which may furnish 
evidence of the commission of such offence or from any illegally acquired property or any document or 
other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is liable for 
seizure or freezing or forfeiture under this Chapter is kept or concealed in any building, conveyance  or 
place, may authorise any officer subordinate to him to arrest such a person or search such building, 
conveyance or place whether by day or by night or himself arrest such a person or search a such building, 
conveyance or place.  
43B. Procedure of arrest , seizure , etc.—(1) Any officer arresting a person under section 43A shall, 
as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest.  
(2) Every person arrested and article seized under section 43A shall be forwarded without 
unnecessary delay to the off icer-in-charge of the nearest police station.  
(3) The authority or officer to whom any person or article is forwarded under sub -section ( 2) shall, 
with all convenient dispatch, take such measures as may be necessary in accordance with the provisions 
of the  Code.  
43C. Application of provisions of Code .—The provisions of the Code shall apply, insofar as they 
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, to all arrests, searches and seizures made under this 
Act. 
43D. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code or any other law, every offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a 
cognizable offence within the meaning of clause ( c) of section 2 of the Code, and “cognizable case ” as 
defined in that clause shall be construed accordingly.  
(2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving an offence punishable under 
this Act subject to the modification that in sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) the references to “fifteen day s”, “ninety days ” and “sixty days ”, wherever they occur, shall be 
construed as references to “thirty days ”, “ninety days ” and “ninety days ” respectively; and  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 12 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  21 
 (b) after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely: — 
“Provided further that  if it is not possible to complete the investigation within the said period 
of ninety days, the Court may if it is satisfied with the report of the Public Prosecutor indicating 
the progress of the investigation and the specific reasons for the detention of  the accused beyond 
the said period of ninety days, extend the said period up to one hundred and eighty days:  
Provided also that if the police officer making the investigation under this Act, requests, for 
the purposes of investigation, for police custody from judicial custody of any person in judicial 
custody, he shall file an affidavit stating the reasons for doing so and shall also explain the delay, 
if any, for requesting such police custody.  
(3) Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case  involving an offence punishable under 
this Act subject to the modification that — 
(a) the reference in sub -section ( 1) thereof — 
(i) to “the State Government ” shall be construed as a reference to “the Central Government or 
the State Government. ”; 
(ii) to “order of the State Government ” shall be construed as a reference to “order of the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be ”; and  
(b) the reference in sub -section ( 2) thereof, to “the State Government ” shall be construed as a 
reference  to “the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be ”. 
(4) Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving the arrest of any 
person accused of having committed an offence punishable under this Act.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an offence punishable 
under Chapters IV and VI of this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless 
the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity of being  heard on the application for such release:  
Provided that such accused person shall not be released on bail or on his own bond if the Court, on a 
perusal of the case diary or the report made under section 173 of the Code is of the opinion that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that the accusation against such person is prima facie  true. 
(6) The restrictions on granting of bail specified in sub -section ( 5) is in addition to the restrictions 
under the Code or any other law for the time being in force  on granting of bail.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6), no bail shall be granted to a 
person accused of an offence punishable under this Act, if he is not an Indian citizen and has entered the 
country unauthorisedly or ill egally except in very exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing.  
43E. Presumption as to offence under section 15. —In a prosecution for an offence under         
section 15, if it is proved — 
(a) that the arms or explosives or any other substances specified in the said section were 
recovered from the possession of the accused and there is reason to believe that such arms or 
explosives or other substances of a similar nature were used in the commis sion of such offence; or  
(b) that by the evidence of the expert the finger -prints of the accused or any other definitive 
evidence suggesting the involvement of the accused in the offence were found at the site of the 
offence or on anything including arms a nd vehicles used in connection with the commission of such 
offence,  
the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is shown, that the accused has committed such offence.  
43F. Obligation to furnish information .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, 
the officer investigating any offence under this Act, with the prior approval in writing of an officer not 
below the rank of a Superintendent of Police, may require any officer or authority of the Cent ral 
Government or a State Government or a local authority or a bank, or a company, or a firm or any other 
institution, establishment, organisation or any individual to furnish information in his or its possession in 22 
 relation to such offence, on points or m atters, where the investigating officer has reason to believe that 
such information will be useful for, or relevant to, the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The failure to furnish the information called for under sub -section ( 1), or deliberately furnishing 
false information shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine or with both.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an offence under sub -section ( 2) shall be tried as 
a summary case and the procedure prescribed in Chapter XXI of the said Code [except sub -section ( 2) of 
section 262] shall be applicable thereto.]  
44. Protection of witnesses .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the proceedings 
under this Act may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, be held in camera  if the court so desires.  
(2) A court, if on an application made by a witness in any proceeding before it or by th e Public 
Prosecutor in relation to such witness or on its own motion, is satisfied that the life of such witness is in 
danger, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, take such measures as it deems fit for keeping the 
identity and address of such wi tness secret.  
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
measures which a court may take under that sub -section may include — 
(a) the holding of the proceedings at a place to be decided by the court;  
(b) the avoiding of the mention of the name and address of the witness in its orders or judgments 
or in any records of the case accessible to public;  
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and address of the witness are not 
discl osed;  
(d) a decision that it is in the public interest to order that all or any of the proceedings pending 
before such a court shall not be published in any manner.  
(4) Any person who contravenes any decision or direction issued under sub -section ( 3), shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
45. Cognizance of offences .—1[(1)] No court shall take cognizance of any offence — 
(i) under  Chapter III without the previous sanction of the Central Government or any officer 
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf;  
(ii) under Chapter IV and VI without the previous sanction of the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the State Government, and where such offence is committed against the Government of 
a foreign country without the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
2[(2) Sanction for prosecution under sub -section ( 1) shall be given within such time as may be 
prescribed o nly after considering the report of such authority appointed by the Central Government or, as 
the case may be, the State Government which shall make an independent review of the evidence gathered 
in the course of investigation and make a recommendation, wi thin such time as may be prescribed, to the 
Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government.]  
46. Admissibility of evidence collected through the interception of                    
communications .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) or 
any other law for the time being in force, the evidence collected through the interception of wire, 
electronic or oral communication under the provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  (13 of 1885) or 
the Informa tion Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000) or any other law for the time being in force, shall be 
admissible as evidence against the accused in the court during the trial of a case:  
Provided that the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication inter cepted or evidence 
derived therefrom shall not be received in evidence or otherwise disclosed in any trial, hearing or other 
                                                           
1. Section 45 r enumbered  as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 35 of 2008 , s. 13 (w.e.f. 31-12-2008 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 31-12-2008).  23 
 proceeding in any court unless each accused has been furnished with a copy of the order of the competent 
authority under the afores aid law, under which the interception was directed, not less than ten days before 
trial, hearing or proceeding:  
Provided further that the period of ten days may be waived by the judge trying the matter, if he comes 
to the conclusion that it was not possible to furnish the accused with such order ten days before the trial, 
hearing or proceeding and that the accused shall not be prejudiced by the delay in receiving such order.  
47. Bar of jurisdiction .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Ac t, no proceeding taken 
under this Act by the Central Government or the District Magistrate or any officer authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government or the District Magistrate, shall be called in question in any civil court 
in any suit or applicat ion or by way of appeal or revision, and no injunction shall be granted by any civil 
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred 
by or under this Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), no civil court or other authority shall have, 
or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in 
section 36.  
48. Effect of Act and rules, etc ., inconsistent with other enactments .—The provisions of this Act 
or any rule or order made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any enactment other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment 
other than this Act.  
49. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against — 
(a) the Central Government or a State Government or any officer or authority of the Central 
Government or State Government or District Magistrate or any officer authorised in this behalf by the 
Government or the District Magistrate or any other authority on whom powers have been conferred 
under this Act, for anything which is in good faith done or purported to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder; and  
(b) any serving or retired member of the armed forces or para -military force s in respect of any 
action taken or purported to be taken by him in good faith, in the course of any operation directed 
towards combating terrorism.  
50. Saving .—Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercisable by, or the procedure 
applicable to, any court or other authority under any law relating to the navy, army or air force or other 
armed forces of the Union.  
51. Impounding of passport and arms licence of person charge sheeted under the                 
Act.—Notwithstanding anything containe d in any other law for the time being in force, the passport and 
the arms licence of a person, who is charge -sheeted for having committed any offence under this Act, 
shall be deemed to have been impounded for such period as the court may deem fit.  
1[51A. Certain powers of t he Central Government .—For the prevention of, and for coping with 
terrorist activities, the Central Government shall have power to — 
(a) freeze, seize or attach funds and other financial assets or economic resources held by, on 
behalf of or at the direction of the individuals or entities listed in the Schedule to the Order, or any 
other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;  
(b) prohibit any individual or entity from making any funds, financial assets or economic 
resour ces or related services available for the benefit of the individuals or entities listed in the 
Schedule to the Order or any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;  
(c) prevent  the entry into or the transit through India of individuals listed in the Schedule to the 
Order or any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 14 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  24 
 52. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Officia l Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the service of notices or orders issued or made under this Act and the manner in which such 
notices or orders may be served, where the person to be served is a corporation, company, bank or 
other association;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal or a District Judge in h olding any inquiry or 
disposing of any application under this Act;  
(c) determination of the price of the forfeited property under sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
(d) the procedure for admission and disposal of an application under sub -section ( 3) of section  36; 
(e) the qualifications of the members of the Review Committee under sub -section ( 2) of        
section 37; and  
1[(ee) the time within which sanction for prosecution and recommendation to the Central 
Government shall be given under sub -section ( 2) of section 45, and]  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
53. Orders and rules to be laid before both Houses of Parliament .—2[(1)] Every order and every 
rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately followi ng the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the order or rule or both Houses agree that the order or rule should not be made, the order 
or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form  or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that order or rule.  
3[(2) The Order referred to in entry 33 of the Schedule and every  amendment made to that Order shall 
be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of 30 days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions.]  
  
  
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 15 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  
2. Section 53 r enumbered  as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 31-12-2008 ). 
3. Ins. by s. 16 , ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  25 
  
1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE ] 
[See sections 2( 1)(m) and 35]  
TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS  
 
1. BABBAR KHALSA INTERNATIONAL.  
2. KHALISTAN COMMANDO FORCE.  
3. KHALISTAN ZINDABAD FORCE.  
4. INTERNATIONAL SIKH YOUTH FEDERATION.  
5. LASHKAR -E-TAIBA/PASBAN -E-AHLE HADIS.  
6. JAISH -E-MOHAM MED/TAHRIK -E-FURQAN.  
7. HARKAT -UL-MUJAHIDEEN/HARKAT -UL-ANSAR/HARKAT -UL-JEHAD -E-ISLAMI.  
8. HIZB -UL-MUJAHIDEEN/HIZB -UL-MUJAHIDEEN PIR PANJAL REGIMENT.  
9. AL -UMAR -MUJAHIDEEN.  
10. JAMMU AND KASHMIR ISLAMIC FRONT.  
11. UNITED LIBERATION FRONT OF ASSAM (ULFA).  
12. NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC FRONT OF BODOLAND (NDFB).  
13. PEOPLE ’S LIBERATION ARMY (PLA).  
14. UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLF).  
15. PEOPLE ’S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK).  
16. KANGLEIPAK COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP).  
17. KANGLEI YAOL KANBA LUP (KYKL).  
18. MANIPUR PEOPLE ’S LIBERATION FRONT (MPLF).  
19. ALL TRIPURA TIGER FORCE.  
20. NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT OF TRIPURA.  
21. LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (LTTE).  
22. STUDENTS ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF INDIA.  
23. DEENDAR ANJUMAN.  
24. COMMUNIST PARTY OF IN DIA (M ARXIST -LENINIST) —PEOPLE ’S  
WAR, ALL  ITS FORMATIONS AND FRONT ORGANISATIONS.  
25. MAOIST COMMUNIST CENTRE (MCC), ALL ITS FORMATIONS AND FRONT 
ORGANISATIONS.  
26. AL BADR.  
27. JAMIAT -UL-MUJAHIDDEN.  
28. AL -QAIDA.  
29. DUKHTARAN -E-MILLAT (DEM).  
                                                           
1. The Schedule renumbered as the First Schedule thereof by Act 3 of 2013 , s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2013 ). 26 
 30. TAMIL NA DU LIBERATION ARMY (TNLA).  
31. TAMIL NATIONAL RETRIEVAL TROOPS (TNRT).  
32. AKHIL BHARAT NEPALI EKTA SAMAJ (ABNES).  
1[33. Organisations listed in the Schedule to the U.N. Prevention and Suppression of Terrorism 
(Implementation of Security Council Resolution s) Order, 2007 made under section 2 of the 
United Nations (Security Council) Act, 1947  (43 of 1947) and amended from time to time.]  
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2008, s. 17 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2008).  27 
 1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 15( 2)] 
(i) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft (1970);  
(ii) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation ( 1971);  
(iii) Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected 
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents (1973);  
(iv) International Conv ention against the Taking of Hostages (1979);  
(v) Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (1980);  
(vi) Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil 
Aviation, supplementary to the Conven tion for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of 
Civil Aviation (1988);  
(vii) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the safety of Maritime            
Navigation (1988);  
(viii) Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts a gainst the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on 
the Continental Shelf (1988); and  
(ix) International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings (1997).  
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2013, s. 14 (w.e.f . 1-2-2013 ). 28 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See clause ( b) of Explanation  to section 15( 1)] 
Security features to define high quality counterfeit Indian currency notes  
(a) watermark;  
(b) latent image; and  
(c) see through registration in the currency notes.]  
 
