--------------------------The Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE ANDHRA PRADESH AND MYSORE (TRANSFER OF TERRITORY) ACT, 1968  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Transfer of territory from Mysore to Andhra Pradesh . 
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution . 
5. Extent of parliamentary and assembly Constituencies . 
6. Provision as to sitting members of Parliament and Legislative Assemblies . 
7. Extent of Council Constituencies . 
8. Sitting Members of Legislative Councils . 
9. Extension of jurisdiction of Andhra Pradesh High Court . 
10. Appro priation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territory under existing Appropriation 
Acts. 
11. Assets and liabilities.  
12. State Financial Corporations and State Electricity Boards.  
13. Extension of laws.  
14. Power to construe laws.  
15. Legal proceedings.  
16. Transfer of pend ing proceedings.  
17. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws.  
18. Power to remove difficulties.  
19. Power to make rules.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  2 
 THE ANDHRA PRADESH AND MYSORE (TRANSFER OF TERRITORY) ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 36 OF 1968  
[22nd August , 1968.]  
An Act to provide for the transfer of certain territory from the State of Mysore to the State of 
Andhra Pradesh and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) 
Act, 1968.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of October, 1968;  
(b) “assembly constituency ”, “council cons tituency” and “parliamentary constituency ” have 
the same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);  
(c) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, 
means a person who, immediat ely before the appointed day, is a member of that House;  
(d) “transferred territory ” means the territory specified in the Schedule and transferred from 
the State of Mysore to the State of Andhra Pradesh by section 3.  
3. Transfer of territor y from  Mysore to Andhra Pradesh. —(1) As from the appointed day, 
there shall be added to the State of Andhra Pradesh the territory specified in the Schedule which shall 
thereupon cease to form part of the State of Mysore.  
(2) The transferred territory shall be i ncluded in, and form part of the Hindupur  taluk of 
Anantapur district in the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to affect the power of the State Government to 
alter, after the appointed day, the name, extent or boundar ies of any district or taluk in  the State of 
Andhra Pradesh.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution. —As from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, unde r the heading “I. THE STATES ”,— 
(a) for the entry against “I. Andhra  Pradesh”, the following shall be substituted, namely: — 
“The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953, 
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the First Schedule to the 
Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, and the Schedule to the 
Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968, but excluding the territories 
specified in the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of 
Boundaries)  Act, 1959. ”; and  
(b) in the entry against “9. Mysore ”, after the words and figures “States Reorganisation                
Act, 1956 ”, the words, brackets and figures “but excluding the territory specified in the Schedule 
to the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore ( Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968 ” shall be inserted.  
5. Extent  of parliamentary and assembly C onstituencies. —As from the appointed day, the 
transferred territory shall cease to be part of Madhugiri parliamentary constituency and Bagepalli 
assembly constitu ency in the State of Mysore as delimited in Order No. 11 of the Delimitation 
Commission made under section 10 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 (61 of 1962), and shall 
form part of Hindupur parliamentary constituency and Hindupur assembly constituen cy in the State of 
Andhra Pradesh as delimited in Order No. 3 of the Delimitation Commission made under the said 
section.  3 
 6. Provision as to sitting members of Parliament and Legislative Assemblies. —(1) The sitting 
members of the House of the People repres enting Hindupur parliamentary constituency in the State of 
Andhra Pradesh and Madhugiri parliamentary constituency in the State of Mysore shall, 
notwithstanding the alteration in the extent of those constituencies by virtue of the provisions of this 
Act, c ontinue to be members of the House of the People.  
(2) The sitting members of the Legislative Assemblies of Andhra Pradesh and Mysore 
representing Hindupur assembly constituency and Bagepalli assembly constituency respectively shall, 
notwithstanding the al teration in the extent of those constituencies by virtue of the provisions of this 
Act, continue to be member s of the said Assemblies.  
7. Ex tent of Council C onstituencies. —(1) Any reference in the Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (Andhra Pradesh) Order, 1957, to Anantapur district shall be construed as including 
the territory transferred to that district from the State of Mysore.  
(2) Any reference in the Delimitation of  Council Constituencies (Mysore) Order, 1951, to Kolar 
district shall be construed as excluding the territory transferred from that district to the State of 
Andhra Pradesh.  
8. Sitting M embers of Legislative Councils. —Every sitting member of the Legislative  Council 
of Andhra Pradesh or of Mysore representing a council constituency the extent of which is altered by 
virtue of section 7 shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to the said 
Council by that constituency as so altered.  
9. Ex tension of jurisdiction of Andhra Pradesh High Court. —(1) As from the                       
appointed day, — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall extend to the transferred 
territory ; and  
(b) the High Court of Mysore shall have no jurisdiction in respect of the said territory.  
(2) If, immediately before the appointed day, there is any proceeding relatable to the transferred 
territory pending in the High Court of Mysore, then, notwithstanding anyt hing contained in                      
sub-section ( 1), such proceeding shall be heard and disposed of by that High Court.  
(3) Any order made by the High Court of Mysore in any proceeding with respect to which that 
High Court exercises jurisdiction by vir tue of sub -section ( 2) shall, for all purposes, have effect, not 
only as an order of the High Court of Mysore but also as an order made by th e High Court of               
Andhra Pradesh.  
(4) For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High Court of Mysore until that Court 
has disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of 
the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals, applicatio ns for leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs;  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or 
division co urt thereof, and references  to an ord er made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as 
including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that court or Judge.  
10. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territory under existing 
Appropriation Acts. —As fro m the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legislature of Andhra 
Pradesh before that day for the appropriation of any money out of the Consolidated Fund of the State 
to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year 1968 -69 shall have ef fect also in 
relation to the transferred territory, and it shall be lawful for the State Government to spend any 
amount for that territory out of the amount authorised by such Act to be expended for any services in 
that State.  4 
 11. Assets and liabilities. —(1) All land and all stores, articles and other goods in the transferred 
territory belonging to the State of Mysore shall, as from the appointed day, pass to the State of       
Andhra Pradesh.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section, the expression “land” include s immovable property of every 
kind and any rights in or over such property and the expression “goods” does not include coins, bank 
notes and currency notes.  
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out of a contract or otherwise, of th e 
State of Mysore in relation to the transferred territory shall, as from the appointed day, be the rights, 
liabilities and obligations, respectively, of the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
12. State Financial Corporations and State Electricity Boards. —As from the appointed day, — 
(a) the Financial Corporations constituted under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 
(63 of 1951), for the States of Mysore and Andhra Pradesh , and  
(b) the  State Electricity Boards constituted under the Electricity (Supply )                                     
Act, 1948 (54 of 1948) , for the said States.  
shall be deemed to have been constituted for those States with their areas as altered by the provisions 
of section 3.  
13. Extension of laws. —All laws which, immediately bef ore the appointed day, extend to, or are 
in force in, the Hindupur  taluk of Anantapur district in the State of Andhra Pradesh but do not extend 
to, or are not in force in, the transferred territory, shall, as from that day, extend to, or as the case may 
be, come into force in, the transferred te rritory; and all laws which, immediately before the appointed 
day, are in force in the transferred territory but not in the Hindupur  taluk of Anantapur  district in the 
State of Andhra Pradesh shall, on that day, cease to be in force in the transferred territory, except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before that day.  
Explanation. —In this section, “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, re gulation, order,                  
bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any 
part of the State of Andhra Pradesh or Mysore.  
14. Power to construe laws. —Any court, tribunal or authority required or  empowered to enforce 
any law extended to the transferred territory by section 13 may, for the purpose of facilitating its 
application in relation to the transferred territory, construe the law in such manner, without affecting 
the substance, as may be nec essary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or 
authority.  
15. Legal proceedings. —Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Mysore is a 
party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities transferred to the State 
of Andhra Pradesh under this Act, the State of Andhra Pradesh shall be deemed to be substituted for 
the State of Mysore as a party to those proceedings, or added as a party thereto, as the case may be, 
and the proceedin gs may continue accordingly.  
16. Transfer of pending proceedings. —(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before any court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area 
which on that day falls within the St ate of Mysore shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to 
any part of the transferred territory, stand transferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or 
officer in the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether  any proceeding should stand transferred under                          
sub-section ( 1), it shall be referred to the High Court of Mysore and the decision of that High Court 
shall be final.  
(3) In this section, — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal ; and  5 
 (b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in the State of                                     
Andhra Pradesh means — 
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the proceed ing 
would have lain if the proceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State as may be 
determined after the appointed day by the Government of Andhra Pradesh, or befo re the 
appointed day by the Government of Mysore, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, 
authority or officer.  
17. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws. —The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent there with contained in any other law.  
18. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act (including any difficulty in relation to the transition under section 13 from one law to another 
law), the President may by order do anything not inconsistent with any such provision which appears 
to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
19. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or 1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses a gree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previo usly done under that rule.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s . 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  6 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2 (d) and 3]  
TERRITORY TRANSFERRED FROM THE STATE OF MYSORE TO THE STATE OF ANDHRA  PRADESH  
Area comprised in survey number 19 of “Abakavaripalli ” village of Bagepallit aluk in                      
Kolar  district. 
--------------------------The Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE BIHAR AND UTTAR PRADESH (ALTERATION OF  
BOUNDARIES) ACT, 1968                                                                                                                                         
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES  
3. Transfer of territories.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
5. Construction of Delimitation Orders.  
6. Provision as to sitting members.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURTS  
7. Extension of jurisdiction of , and transfer of proceedings to , High Court at Patna.  
8. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer o f proceedings to, High Court at Allahabad.  
9. Right to appear in any proceedings transferred under section 7 or section 8.  
10. Interpretation.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE  
11. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing appropriation 
Acts.  
12. Reports relating to accounts of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
13. Land and goods.  
14. Arrears of taxes.  
15. Right to recover loans and advances.  
16. Refund of taxes collected in excess.  
17. Deposits.  
18. Contracts.  
19. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Liability as guarantor of co -operative societies.  
21. Ite ms in suspense.  
22. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.  
23. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
24. Expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund.  
PART VII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
25. State Financial Corporations and State Electricity Boards.  
26. Territorial extent of laws.  
27. Power to adapt laws.  
28. Power to construe laws.  
29. Legal proceedings.  
30. Transfer of pending proceedings.  
31. Right of pleaders to practise in certain co urts. 
32. Construction of boundary pillars, etc.  
33. Validity of demarcation done before commencement of Act.  
34. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws.  
35. Power to remove difficulties.  
36. Power to make rules.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE BIHAR AND UTTAR PRADESH (ALTERATION OF  
BOUNDARIES) ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1968  
[22nd May, 1968.]  
An Act to provide for the alteration of boundaries of the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and 
for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries)      
Act, 1968.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day1” means the day which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(b) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) ; 
(c) “deep stream ”, in relation to the river Ganga or the river Ghaghra, means the deep stream 
thereof as verified and agreed upon by the State Governments of Bihar and U ttar Pradesh after the 
30th day of September of the year preceding the year in which the appointed day falls and before the 
1st day of January of the year in which the appointed day falls and in default of agreement       
between the State Governments, as determined by such authority as may be specified by the                     
Central Government;  
(d) “fixed boundary ” means the boundary line demarcated under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 3 in relation to the river Ganga or the river Ghaghra , as the case may be;  
(e) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of the State of 
Bihar or Uttar Pradesh;  
(f) “notified order ” means an order published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, 
means a person who immediately before the appointed day is a member of that House;  
(i) “transferred territories ” means,— 
(i) in relation to the State of Bihar, the territories transferred by this Act from that State to the 
State of Uttar Pradesh, and  
(ii) in relation to the State of Uttar Pradesh, the territories transferred by this Act from that 
State to the State of Bihar ; 
(j) any reference to a district of a State shall be construed as a reference to the area physically 
comprised within that district immed iately before the appointed day.  
  
                                                           
1. 10th June, 1970, vide notification No. G.S.R. 901, dated 9th June,  1970, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(i). 4 
 PART II  
TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES  
3. Transfer of territories .—(1) As from the appointed day ,— 
(a) there shall be added to the State of Bihar — 
(i) all the territories of Ballia  district of the State of Uttar Pradesh lying between the fixed 
boundary and the deep stream of the river Ghaghra, and  
(ii) all the territories of that district lying between the fixed boundary and the deep stream of 
the river Ganga,  
and the said territori es shall thereupon cease to form part of the State of Uttar Pradesh; and  
(b) there shall be added to the State of Uttar Pradesh — 
(i) all the territories of Saran district of the State of Bihar lying between the fixed boundary 
and the deep stream of the river Ghaghra, and  
(ii) all the territories of Shahabad district of the State of Bihar lying between the fixed 
boundary and the deep stream  of the river Ganga,  
and the said territories shall thereupon cease to form part of the State of Bihar.  
(2) The fixed boundary in relation to each of the rivers Ganga and Ghaghra shall be demarcated by an 
authority appointed in this behalf by the Central G overnment so as to be generally in conformity with the 
boundary line described in the Schedule in relation to that river : 
Provided that in the process of such demarcation, the said authority shall have power to rationalise to 
the extent considered necessar y by him, the boundary alignment between the high banks of the river 
Ganga or the river Ghaghra, as the case may be, and in particular shall try — 
(a) to ensure, as far as possible , the stability of the boundary pillars and the recognition of the 
boundary a lignment both during the dry and flood seasons; and  
(b) to avoid, as far as possible, the splitting up of the existing abadis.  
(3) For the purposes of such demarcation, — 
(a) the decision of the said authority on any matter relating to the interpretation of  any part of the 
description of the boundary given in the Schedule (including the determination of the relevant record 
referred to in the Explanatory Note to the Schedule) shall be final;  
(b) the said authority shall have power to determine the location of  the points at which the 
boundary pillars shall be constructed and to specify the State Government which shall be responsible 
for the construction and maintenance of the boundary pillars at such points according to such 
specifications as that authority may  indicate (the pillars of the same specifications being apportioned , 
as far as practicable equally between the two State Governments), the decision of the said authority in 
regard to these matters being final;  
(c) it shall be lawful for the said authority and for any person specified by such authority to enter 
upon and survey any area in the vicinity of the boundary line and to do all other acts as may be 
necessary.  
(4) The authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) sha ll also prepare a map of the transferred territories 
showing— 
(a) the deep stream of the river Ghaghra or the river Ganga, as the case may be, and the fixed 
boundary in relation to that river;  
(b) the names and boundaries of the villages in the transferred  territories, as indicated by the      
State Government having jurisdiction over the territories before their transfer, with reference to the 
revenue records of that Government in force immediately before the preparation of such map,  5 
 and forward such map t o the Central Government who shal l cause it to be published in the transferred 
territories in such manner as it thinks fit.  
(5) As from the appointed day, the State Government of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh shall, by order in the 
Official Gazette, provide for t he administration of the territories transferred to that State under              
sub-section ( 1) by including them or any part of them in such district, sub -division, police -station or other 
administrative unit as may be specified in the order.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “I. THE STATES ”— 
(a) for the entry against “3. Bihar”, the following shall be substituted , namely:— 
“The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either 
comprised in the Province of Bihar or were being administered as if they formed part of that 
Province and the territories specified in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Bihar and 
Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, but excluding the territories specified in    
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956, and 
the territories specified in clause ( b) of su b-section ( 1) of section 3 of the first mentioned Act. ”; 
(b) for the entry against “13. Uttar Pradesh ”, the following shall be substituted, namely: — 
“The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either 
comprised in the Province known as the United Provinces or were being administered as if they 
formed part of that Province and the territories specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of   
section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968,  but excluding the 
territories specified in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of that Act. ” 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
5. Construction of Delimitation Orders .—As from the appointed day, any reference in any order 
relating to delimitation of parliamentary constituencies, assembly constituencies or council 
constituencies — 
(a) (i) to the State of Bihar, shall be construed as including the territories transferred to that State 
from the State of Uttar Pradesh under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section  3, but excluding the 
territories transferred from the State of Bihar to the State of Uttar Pradesh under  clause ( b) of that 
sub-section ; 
(ii) to any district, sub -division, police -station or other administrative unit in the State of Bihar, 
shall be construed as including that part of the territories, if any, transferred to that State, which is 
included in that district, sub -division, police -station or other administrat ive unit by order made under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 3;  
(b) (i) to the State of Uttar Pradesh, shall be construed as including the territories transferred to 
that State from the State of Bihar under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3, but exclud ing the 
territories transferred from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Bihar under clause ( a) of that 
sub-section;  
(ii) to any  district, sub -division, police -station or other administrative unit in the State of          
Uttar Pradesh, shall be construed as including that part of the territories, if any, transferred to that 
State, which is included in that  district, sub -division, police -station or other administrative unit by 
order made under sub -section ( 5) of section 3.  
6. Provision as to sitti ng members .—(1) Every sitting member of the House of the People 
representing any parliamentary constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the 
provisions of this Act shall, notwithstanding such alteration , be deemed , as from the appointed day, to 
have been elected to that House by that constituency as so altered.  
  6 
 (2) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh 
representing any assembly constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the provisions of 
this Act shall, notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed as from the appointed day, to have been elected 
to the said Legislative Assembly by that constituency as so altered.  
(3) Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh representing any 
council constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall , 
notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed as from the appointed day, to have been elec ted to the said 
Legislative Council by that constituency as so altered.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURTS  
7. Extension of jurisdiction of , and transfer of proceedings to , High Court at Patna .—(1) Except 
as hereinafter provided — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court at Patna shall, as from the appointed day , extend to the 
territories transferred by this Act from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Bihar ; and 
(b) the  High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in 
respect of the said territories.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad immediately before the 
appointed day as are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of 
accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances , to be proceedings which ought to be heard and 
decided by the High Court at Patna shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be t ransferred to the 
High Court at Patna.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall have, and the High Court at Patna shall not have, 
jurisdiction to e ntertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appea r to the Supreme Court 
applications for review and other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of 
any order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahaba d before the appointed day : 
Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the     
High Court at Patna, he  shall order that they shall be so transferred and such proceedings shall thereupon 
be transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order made by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad — 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court at Patna by virtue 
of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad retains 
jurisdiction by virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall, for all purposes , have effect not only as an order of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, but 
also as an order made by the High Court at Patna.  
(5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court at Patna, any such person who 
immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in th e High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court at Patna having regard 
to the transfer of territories from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Bihar, shall be recognised as an 
advocat e entitled to practise in the High Court at Patna.  
8. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, High Court at                
Allahabad .—(1) Except as hereinafter provided — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall, as from the appointed day, 
extend to the territories transferred by this Act from the State of Bihar to the State of Uttar Pradesh; 
and 7 
 (b) the High Court at Patna shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the said 
territ ories.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Patna immediately before the appointed day as are 
certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of 
action and other circumstances, to be procee dings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the           
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court at Patna shall have, and the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall not have, 
jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
applications for review and other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of 
any order passed by the High Court at Patna before the appointed day : 
Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Patna, it appears 
to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad, he shall order that they shall be so transferred and such proceedings shall thereupon be 
transferred accordin gly. 
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Patna — 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad by virtue of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Patna retains jurisdiction by virtue 
of sub -section ( 3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of the High Court at Patna, but also as an order 
made by the High Court of Judicatur e at Allahabad.  
(5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, any 
such person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the           
High Court at Patna as may be specif ied in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court of Judicature 
at Allahabad having regard to the transfer of territories from the State of Bihar to the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, shall be recognised as an advocate entitled to practise in the High Cou rt of Judicature at 
Allahabad.  
9. Right to appear in any proceedings transferred under section 7 or section 8 .—Any person who 
immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise  in the High Court at Patna or the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and was authorised to appear in any proceedings transferred under 
section 7 or section 8 shall have the right to appear in the High Court to which the proceedings have been 
transferre d, in relation to those proceedings.  
10. Interpretation .—For the purposes of sections 7 and 8, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High Court at Patna or the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad until that Court has disposed of all issue s between the parties, including any 
issue with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals, 
applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision 
and petitions for writ s; 
(b) references to the High Court at Patna or the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall be 
construed as including references to a Judge or division court thereof, and references to an order made 
by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree 
passed or made by that court or Judge.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION  OF EXPENDITURE  
11. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing 
appropriation Acts .—(1) As from the appointed day, an y Act passed by the Legislature of the State of 
Bihar or Uttar Pradesh before that day for the appropriation of any mone ys out of the Consolidated Fund 8 
 of the State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year in which the appointed day 
falls shall have effect also in relation to the territories transferred to that State by the provisions of Part II 
and it shall be lawful for the State Government to spend any amount in those territories out of the amount 
authorised by such Act to be expended for any service in that State.  
(2) The Governor of Bihar or of Uttar Pradesh may, after the appointed day, authorise such 
expenditure , from the Consolidated Fund of the State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service in 
the territories transferred to that State for a period of not more than six months beginning with the 
appointed day pending the sanction  of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State.  
12. Reports relating to accounts of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh .—The reports of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India referred to in clause ( 2) of article 151 of the Constitution relating to the accounts 
of the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be 
submitted to the Governor of each of the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh who shall cause them to be 
laid before the Legislature of the State.  
PAR T VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
13. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles 
and other goods belonging to the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh in the transferred territories shall, as 
from the appointed day, pass to the State to which the territories are transferred.  
(2) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property of every kind and any rights in 
or over such property.  
14. Arrears of taxes .—The right of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh to recover arrears of any tax or duty on 
property situate in the transferred territories, including land revenue, or to recover arrears of any other tax 
or duty in any case where the place of assessment of that tax or duty is in the transferr ed territories shall 
belong to the State to which the territories are transferred.  
15. Right to recover loans and advances .—The right to recover any loans or advances made before 
the appointed day by Bihar or Uttar Pradesh to any local body, society, agric ulturist, or other person in the 
transferred territories shall belong to the State to which the territories are transferred.  
16. Refund of taxes collected in excess .—The liability of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh to refund any tax or 
duty on property situate in t he transferred territories, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be 
the liability of the State to which the territories are transferred and the liability of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh 
to refund any other tax or duty collected in excess in any case  where the place of assessment of the tax or 
duty is in the transferred territories shall also be the liability of the State to which the territories are 
transferred.  
17. Deposits .—The liability of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh in respect of any civil deposit or local fund 
deposit made in the transferred territories shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State to 
which the territories are transferred.  
18. Contracts .—(1) Wher e, before the appointed day, the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh has made 
any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall be 
deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power — 
(a) if such purposes are, as from that day, purposes relatable exclusively to the transferred 
territories, of the State to which the territories are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case, of the State which made the contract,  and all rights and liabilities which 
have accrued, or may accrue, under any such contract shall, to the extent to which they are rights or 
liabilities of the State which made the contract, be rights or liabilities of the State specified in      
clause ( a) or clause ( b) above.  
  9 
 (2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which have 
accrued or may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liab ilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations.  
19. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong, other than 
breach of contract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the transferred territories, be a liability of the State 
to which the territories are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case, continue to be a liabi lity of the State which, immediately before that day, 
was subject to such liability.  
20. Liability as guarantor of co -operative societies .—Where, immediately before the appointed 
day, the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered    
co-operative society, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the area of the society ’s operations is limited to the transferred territories, be a liability of 
the State to which the territories are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case , continue to be a liability of the State which, immediately before that day, 
was subject to such liability.  
21. Items in suspense .—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect a n asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
22. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement .—Where the States of Bihar and            
Uttar Pradesh agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned 
between them in a manner other than that provided for i n the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be 
apportioned in the manner agreed upon.  
23. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in  certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, either of the States of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh becomes 
entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the                
Central Government, on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed day by either 
of the States, is of opinion that it is just and equitable that that property or those benefits should be 
transferred to, or shared with, the other State or that a contribu tion towards that liability should be made 
by the other State, the said property o r benefits shall be allocated i n such manner between the two States, 
or the other State shall make to the State subject to the liability such contribution in respect thereof,  as the 
Central Government may, after consultation with the two State Governments, by order determine.  
24. Expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund .—All sums payable by either Bihar or 
Uttar Pradesh to the other State by virtue of the provisions of this Part shall be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of the State by which such sums are payable.  
PART VII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
25. State Financial Corporations and State Electricity Boards .—As from the appointed day — 
(a) the  Financial Corporations constituted under the State Financial Corporations                      
Act, 1951  (63 of 1951) , for the States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, and  10 
 (b) the State Electricity Boards constituted under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) , 
for the said States,  
shall be deemed to have been constituted for those States with their areas as altered by the provisions of 
section 3.  
26. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of section 3 shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh shall, until 
otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or oth er competent authority, be construed as meaning the 
territories within that State immediately before the appointed day.  
27. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in relation to the 
State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year from 
the appointed day, by order make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of 
repeal or amendment as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shal l have effect 
subject to the adaptations or modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government, and as respects any other law, 
the State Government.  
28. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made  for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority, required 
or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in relation to the 
State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh, construe the la w in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may 
be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.  
29. Legal proceedings .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Bihar or         
Uttar Pradesh is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities 
transferred to the other State under this Act, the other State shall be deemed to be substituted for the State 
from which such property rights or liabilities ar e transferred as a party to those proceedings, or added as a 
party thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may continue accordingly.  
30. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a co urt (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on 
that day falls within the State of Bihar or Uttar Pradesh shall, if it is a proceeding relatable exclusively to 
any part of the territories which as from that day are the te rritories of the other State, stand transferred to 
the corresponding court, tribunal authority or officer in the other State.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Court having jurisdiction in respect of the area in which the court, tribunal, 
authority or officer before which, or before whom, such proceeding is pending on the appointed day , is 
functioning , and the decision of that Hi gh Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section ,— 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in a State means — 
(i) the  court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the proceeding would 
have lain if the proceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State as may be 
determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State, or before the appointed day 
by the Government of the other State, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
31. Right of pleaders to practise in certain courts .—Any person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate courts in the transferred 
territories shall, for a period of six months from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those 11 
 court s, notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those courts 
has been transferred to another State.  
32. Construction of boundary pillars, etc .—(1) It shall be lawful for the State Government which is 
responsible for the construction of any boundary pillar under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 to cause such 
pillar to be constructed and maintained and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding  shall lie against 
the State Government or any of its officers for anythi ng in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this section.  
(2) The boundary pillars shall be inspected jointly by the officers of the State Governments of Bihar 
and Uttar Pradesh in accordance with such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf.  
(3) Whoever wilfully removes or injures any boundary pillar shall be punishable with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , an 
offence under sub -section ( 3) may be inquired into and tried by a court in either of the States of Bihar and 
Uttar Pradesh.  
33. Validity of demarcation done before commencement of Act .—All things done, and all steps  
taken, before the commencement of this Act in connection with the demarcation of the fixed boundary in 
relation to the river Ganga or the river Ghaghra, as the case may be, shall, in so far as they are in 
conformity with the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 3, be deemed to have been done in 
accordance with law.  
34. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding any law, custom or usage which is inconsistent therewith.  
35. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President may, by notified order, do anything, not inconsistent with such provisions which 
appear s to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose o f removing the difficulty.  
36. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or 1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have  effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be , so, however , that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  12 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3 ( 2)] 
EXPLANATORY NOTE  
The village boundaries and names mentioned in this Schedule have reference to boundaries and 
names as shown in the sheets of large scale surveys covering relevant areas of Saran and Shahabad 
districts of the State of Bihar and Ballia distri ct of the State of Uttar Pradesh, conducted by the Survey of 
India during the period 1881 -83, and where such sheets are not available as shown in any other record 
which the State Governments of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh agree to be relevant within one month from the 
commencement of this Act, or in default of such agreement , which the authority referred to in                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 may determine to be the relevant record.  
The Ganga and Ghaghra rivers and their high banks wherever mentione d in this Schedule have 
reference to the geographical river or high bank positions, as the case may be, as shown in the survey 
records mentioned in the foregoing paragraph.  
Ganga Sector  
The boundary in this sector shall commence from a point (approximate L atitude 25° 44' 10 ", 
Longitude 84° 36' 06 ") on the existing fixed boundary between Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, lying between 
Shitab Diara (Bihar), Mahazi Kondarha (Uttar Pradesh) and Khawaspur (till now in Uttar Pradesh) and 
located about half mile roughly so uth-west of the present “abadi” site of Babudera village (near Daljito la). 
Accordingly, the portion of the present alignment of the above -mentioned existing fixed boundary 
between this point and the present Ganga river wil l cease to be the boundary between  the States of Bihar 
and Uttar Pradesh.  
2. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight lines within the high banks of the Ganga, 
connecting successively points (approximate Latitude 25° 44' 12 ", Longitude 84° 33' 44 "), and 
(approximate Latitude 25° 44' 06 ", Longitude 84° 33' 46 "), placing villages Mahazi Kondarha and 
Kondarha completely in Uttar Pradesh and village Khawaspur completely in Bihar. From this point, the 
boundary shall run along the common boundaries of vill ages Mohanpur and Mandr auli Kans or 
Tirbhuani, placing them completely in Uttar Pradesh, and Khawaspur, Padumanian, Sohra, Inglis Arazi 
appg. to Balua Nargada, Piparpati and Salempur Diara Mamluk Sarkar villages placing them completely 
in Bihar, till it go es to a point (approximate Latitude 25° 43' 35 ", Longitude 84° 32' 32 ") on the high bank 
of the Ganga. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight lines within the high banks of the              
Ganga, connecting points (approximate Latitude 25° 43 ' 26 ", Longitude 84° 32' 12 "),             
(approximate Latitude 25° 40' 56 ", Longitude 84° 31' 52 ") and (approximate Latitude 25° 40' 30 ",                     
Longitude 84° 31' 20 "), so as to place villages Raghunathpur, Dewakar Dehari, Kewatia, Narainpur , 
Singhai, D harampur, Dokti and Mahazi Dokti completely in Uttar Pradesh and villages Salempur Diara 
Mamluk Sarkar, Salempur Parsa and Tek Semar completely in Bihar.  
3. The boundary will then follow the common boundaries of villages Mahazi Dokti, Arazi Zab ti, 
Mahazi Naubarar No. 49, Naubarar Bandobasti No. 48, Tika Semaria and Nipanian , keeping these 
villages completely in Uttar Pradesh and villages Zamin Fazil, Suremanpur Harnarain and Bara Singha 
Buzurg , keeping these villages completely in Bihar, till th e boundary reaches point (approximate     
Latitude 25° 41' 17 ", Longitude 84° 28' 21 ") at the north -west corner of village Bara Singha Buzurg and 
located within the high banks of Ganga river. From this point, the boundary shall run in a straight line to 
another point (approximate  Latitude 25° 41' 35 ", Longitude 84° 28'  05") on the high bank of the Ganga, 
placing village Nardara in Uttar Pradesh and villages Parsotimpur Babhnauli and Bahoranpur Chakki 
completely in Bihar. Thence the boundary shall follow the  common boundaries of villages Nardara , 
Nipanian , Patkhauli, Uchitpur , Bahuara, Udhopur , Nauranga and Bhagwanpur keeping these villages 
completely in Uttar Pradesh , and villages Pipra Ganesh Damodarpur and Jewainian keeping these     
villages completely in  Bihar, till the boundary reaches point (approximate Latitude 25° 41' 34 ",                 
Longitude 84° 25' 45 ") within the high banks of the Ganga. From this point, the boundary shall proceed 
along the common boundary of village Bhagwanpur and village Ba horanpur, keeping the latter         
village completely in Bihar , till the boundary reaches point (approximate Latitude 25° 41' 54 ",                 
Longitude 84° 25' 02 ") at the north -west corner of village Bahoranpur.  13 
 4. Thence the boundary shall run in straight lines within the high banks of the Ganga connecting 
successively points (approximate Latitude 25°  41' 55", Longitude 84° 24' 33 ") and (approximate     
Latitude 25°42' 33 ", Longitude 84°  24' 11 ") so as to place village Nauranga completely in Uttar P radesh 
and village Nauranga Chakki and Son barsa  on the other hand completely in Bihar. From this point , the 
boundary shall follow the common boundaries of villages Nauranga, Bhual Chhapra, Pandepur, Rampur 
and Udai Chhapra keeping these villages completely  in Uttar Pradesh and villages Nauranga Chak, 
Shiupur and Bariarpur , keeping these villages completely in Bihar , till the boundary reaches point 
(approximate Latitude 25° 43' 55 ", Longitude 84° 23' 11 "), within the high banks of the Ganga. From this 
point the boundary shall follow the western boundary of Udai Chhapra up to the high bank of the Ganga 
and then follow the common boundaries of villages Udai Chhapra , Tola Bari  Babu , Kaulapat Chhapra Urf 
Dubey Chhapra 1st Portion, Pachrukhia , Tulapur Arazi Mafi Khedan Kuanr and Durjanpur , keeping these 
villages completely in Uttar Pradesh and villages Tulapur and Sughar Chhapra, keeping these villages    
and village Durjanpur Chak completely in Bihar, till the boundary reaches a point (approximate            
Latitude 25° 44' 12 ", Longitude 84° 22'  41") on the high bank of Ganga river. The boundary shall         
then run in straight lines connecting successively points (approximate Latitude 25° 44'  05",                 
Longitude 84° 22' 38 ") and (approximate Latitu de 25° 44' 29 ", Longitude 84° 22' 04 ") and shall then 
continue along the common boundary of villages Durjanpur and Dangrabad , placing them in               
Uttar Pradesh, and village Shukulpura or Ghinahu Chhapra , placing this village in Bihar, till the bo undary 
reaches point (approximate Latitude 25° 44' 33 ”, Longitude 84° 22' 00 "), south of the north -west corner 
of village Shukulpura and located on the high bank of the river.  
5. Thence the boundary shall run straight to point (approximate Latitude 25° 44'  35",             
Longitude 84° 20' 58 ") at the south -east corner of Gaighat village and located within the high banks of 
Ganga river so as to place villages Dangrabad and Bighai completely in Uttar Pradesh and village Naini 
Jor completely in Bihar and then run in a straight line till point (approximate Latitude 25° 44' 37 ", 
Longitude 84° 24' 50 ") at the south -west corner of village Gaighat, placing the village in Uttar Pradesh. 
From this point, the boundary shall run in straight  lines within the high banks of the Ganga, connecting 
successively points (approximate Latitude 25° 44' 37 ", Longitude 84° 20' 18 "), (approximate         
Latitude 25° 43' 52 ", Longitude 84° 19' 49 ”), (approximate Latitude 25° 42' 29 ", Longitude 84° 19' 54 "), 
(approximate Latitude 25° 40' 14 ", Longitude 84° 19' 35 "), and (approximate Latitude 25° 40' 04 ", 
Longitude 84° 19' 17 "), so as to place villages Baghaunch , Pokhra, Babubel, Haldi, Rikni Chhapra, 
Hansnagar and Jauhi completely in Uttar Pradesh and villa ges Naini Jor, Mahuar and Bahaduri Patti 
completely in Bihar. Thence the boundary shall follow the common village boundaries of village Jauhi 
placing this village in Uttar Pradesh and villages Bisupur and Jagdishpur on the other hand placing  these 
two vill ages in Bihar, till the boundary reaches point (approximate Latitude 25° 39' 54 ",              
Longitude 84° 18' 21 "). From this point, the boundary shall run straight within the high banks of the 
Ganga to a point (approximate Latitude 25° 39' 39 ", Longitu de 84° 17' 43 ") near the north -east corner of 
village Sapahi and located at the sharp bend of the high bank of the Ganga so as to place village Jauhi in 
Uttar Pradesh and villages Pandepur and Hirdahi in Bihar. The boundary shall then follow the northern 
boundary of village Sap ahi up to a point (approximate Latitude 25° 39' 35 ", Longitude 84° 16' 38 ") at the 
north -west corner of this village , placing this village completely in Bihar.  
6. The boundary shall then run in straight lines within the high banks of the Ganga, connecting 
successively points (approximate Latitude 25° 39' 4 9". Longitude 84° 16' 35 "), (approximate          
Latitude 25° 39' 43 ", Longitude 84° 13' 30 "), (approximate Latitude 25° 40'  08”. Longitude 84° 12'  28"), 
(approximate Latitude 25° 42 ' 06", Longitude 84° 12'  01") and (approximate Latitude 25° 43' 03 ", 
Longitude 84° 10' 35 "), placing villages Jauhi, Shiupur Diar Gangbarar and Shiupur Diar completely in 
Uttar Pradesh and villages Mannipur, Shiupur Diar Chakki, Paranpur, Pharhada, Kharha Tanr Estate      
No. 1 Taufir, Gangauli Estate No. 1 Taufir, Dubha Estate No. 1 Taufir, Rajapur and Diar a Partappur 
completely in Bihar.  
7. Then the alignment of the boundary from this point to point (approximate Latitude 25° 43'  24", 
Longitude 84° 07' 52 ") will be such as to place villages Shiupur Diar, Shiurampur, Dhamauli, Kashimpur, 
Wazirapur, Bhikhampura, Turk Ballia, Shahpur Dikhwara, Sobhapur and Bijaipur in Uttar Pradesh and 
villages Diara Partappur, Bhirgu Ashram, Diara Jagdish pur and Parsanpah in Bihar.  
  14 
 8. The boundary shall then run in straight lines within the high banks of the Ganga joining points 
(approximate Latitude 25° 43' 16 ", Longitude 84° 06' 25 "), (approximate Latitude 25° 42' 48 ",    
Longtitude 84° 05' 28 "), (approximate Latitude 25° 41' 40 ", Longitude 84° 04' 37 ”), (approximate 
Latitude 25° 39' 06 ", Longitude 84° 05' 14 "), (approximate Latitude 25° 38' 10 ”, Longitude 84° 04' 59 "), 
(approximate Latitude 25° 37' 33 ", Longitude 84° 02' 47 ") and (approximate Latitude 25° 36'  52", 
Longitud e 84° 01' 10 ") consecutively, placing villages Maldepur, Parsi Patti or Chakia, Haibatpur or 
Begpur, Taranpur , Bansthana , Pandepur appg. to Ismaila, Hasanpur appg. to Takarsand, Anjorpur, Kot , 
Arazi Diara (appg. to Kot), Naubarar of Shahapur of 1873, Nauba rar of Shahpur of 1880, N aubara r of 
Kulharia 1880, Naubarar of Palia 1881, Naubarar of Sarwanpur 1881, Naubarar of Rai Kishun Patti 1881, 
Naubarar of Belsipah 1881, Gangbarar of Sheopur and Gangbarar of Sital Patti completely in Uttar 
Pradesh and villages Parsanpah, Sultanhi , Dilia Estate No. 1 Taufir, Parnahi Kalan, Parnahi Khurd, 
Umarpur Diara, Sura tanr or Barkagaon, Nagpura, Padampur, Desar Buzurg, Misraulia, Umarpur Diara, 
Majharia and Arjunpur completely in Bihar.  
9. Thence the boundary will run in st raight lines within the high banks of the Ganga, joining 
successively points (approximate Latitude 25° 34'  09", Longitude 83° 57' 29 ") and (approximate     
Latitude 25° 33' 36 ", Longitude 83° 55' 51 "). The last point is the trijunction  of the boundaries of districts 
Ballia and Ghazipur of Uttar Pradesh and district Shahabad of Bihar.  
10. The boundary described above , shall be a continuous line.  
Ghaghra Sector  
The boundary in this sector shall commence from a point (approximate Latitude 25° 46' 21", 
Longitude 84° 37' 15 ") on the existing fixed boundary between Shitab Diara in Bihar and Jazira No. 36 in 
Uttar Pradesh, located at a distance of about 1 mile north -east of the present village Naukatola.  
2. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight lines within the high banks of Ghaghra river, 
connecting successively points (approximate Latitude 25° 46' 18 ”, Longitude 84° 37' 31 "), (approximate 
Latitude 25° 47' 27 ", Longitude 84° 37' 36 "), (appro ximate Latitude 25° 49' 29 ”, Longitude 84° 35' 04 "), 
(approximate Latitude 25° 49' 55 ", Longitude 84° 34' 19 ") and (approximate Latitude 25° 50'  21", 
Longitude 84° 33'  06") so as to place villages Shitab Diara, Diara Naubarar Godnan, Simaria Bhadpa 
Buzurg , Manjhanpura, Kaunru, Dhaunru, Manjhi Khas, Diara Manjihi and Mahazi Dumari completely in 
Bihar and villages Jazira No. 36 and Chand Diara completely in Uttar Pradesh. Thence the boundary shall 
follow the common boundary between village Mahazi Chand Diara  or Dumaria, keeping this village 
completely in Bihar, and villages Chand Diara and Mahazi Adhsijhua , keeping these villages    
completely in Uttar Pradesh , till the boundary reaches poi nt (approximate Latitude 25° 51 ' 31",                      
Longitude 8 4° 32'  32") on the high bank of the Ghaghra.  
3. Thence the boundary shall run in straight lines within the high banks of the Ghaghra , connecting 
successively points (approximate Latitude 25° 51' 53 ", Longitude 84° 32' 39 ") (approximate           
Latitude 2 5° 52' 33 ", Longitude 84° 32' 04 ") (approximate Latitude 25° 52' 16 ", Longitude 84° 30'  47") 
and (approximate Latitude 2 5° 53'  08", Longitude 84° 29' 34 ") so as to place villages Jazira Half Be  
(East), Dumri, B abhanauli or Babhuli,  Jazira Hari Be (West), a nd Domaigarh completely in Bihar and 
villages Mahazi Adhsijhua and Gopalnagar completely in Uttar Pradesh. The boundary shall then follow 
the common boundaries between villages Matiar Diara, Mahazi Naubarar Bashishtnagar, Naubarar 
Ramnagar , Gopalpur and Ra mnagar Shumali, keeping these villages completely in Bihar, and villages 
Gopalnagar, Bashishtnagar, Ramnagar Janubi, Asmanpur, Chattur Bhojpur, Gobindpur, Alagdiari, Zamin 
Gangbarari Patti Mashrik and Jazira Diara Rampur, keeping these villages completely in Uttar Pradesh, 
till the boundary reaches point (approximate Latitude 25° 55' 49 ", Longitude 84° 24' 46 ") on the high 
bank of Ghaghra river.  
4. From this point, the boundary shall run in straight lines within the high banks of Ghaghra river , 
connecting successively points (approximate Latitude 25° 56' 05 ", Longitude 84° 23' 16 ") (approximate 
Latitude 25° 57' 27 ", Longitude 84° 21'  21") (approximate Latitude 25° 56' 36 ", Longitude 84° 18'  50") 
(approximate Latitude 25° 56'  39", Longitude 84° 1 7' 55 ") (approximate Latitude 25° 57' 28 ",      
Longitude 84° 17' 02 ") (approximate Latitude 25° 58' 30 ", Longitude 84° 14' 49 ") and (approximate 
Latitude 25° 58' 38 ", Longitude 84° 14' 46 "), so as to place villages Siswan , Gangapur, Bhagar Nizamat, 15 
 Kachna r and Sisai Diara, Gabhirar, Diara Ghabhirar Mamluk Sarkar, Kaunsar Patti Jujhar, Diara Kaunsar 
Patti Purab, Diara Kaunsar Patti Jujhar, Diara Kaunsar Patti Pachhim, Diara Narhan Mamluk Sarkar  and 
Narhan Badlu Kokhan  Patti Kakuliat completely in Bihar and villages Jazir a Diara Rampur, Diara 
Bhagar, Diara Naubarar Lakhmi Rai Mad ho Rai, Diara Lakhmi Rai Madho Rai, Chhap Dhanantar, 
Marwatia Naubarar and Chakki Diara Sultanpur completely in Uttar Pradesh.  
5. Then the boundary shall follow the common boundaries between villages Narhan Badlu Mohkam 
Patti Kakuliat, Diara Bhao Singhpur, Diara Kakuliat or Patti Kakuliat, Adhampur, Patar and Diara 
Naubarar Bandobasti Patar, keeping these villages completely in Bihar and village Adampur Chakki , 
keeping this village com pletely in Uttar Pradesh, till the boundary, reaches point (approximate       
Latitude 25° 59'  24", Longitude 84° 12' 12 ") on the high bank of Ghaghra river. From this point the 
boundary shall run in straight lines within the high banks of Ghaghra  river, connecting successively 
points (approximate Latitude 25° 59' 15 ", Longitude 84° 11' 53 ") and (approximate Latitude 25° 59' 35 ",                    
Longitude 84° 11' 16 ") so as to place village Diara Naubarar Bandobasti Patar completely in Bihar and  
villages Kakarghatta, Gondauli and Sangapur completely in Uttar Pradesh. Thence the boundary shall run 
straight to point (approximate Latitude 25° 59' 38 ", Longitude 84° 11' 08 ") approximately following the 
northern boundary of village Bikrampur, placing the village in Uttar Pradesh.  
6. From this point, the boundary shall run straight within the high banks of Ghaghra river to point 
(approximate Latitude 25° 59' 39 ", Longitude 84° 10' 46 ") so as to place village Diara Naubarar 
Bandobasti Patar completely in  Bihar and village Ailasgarh completely in Uttar Pradesh. The alignment 
thence to point (approximate Latitude 26° 01' 27 ", Longitude 84° 10' 11 ") will be such that village Diara 
Maniar Tukra I shall be placed in Bihar and village Mahazi Maniar Tukra II sha ll be placed in                
Uttar Pradesh.  
7. From thereon, the boundary shall run in straight lines within the high banks of Ghaghra river , 
connecting successively points (approximate Latitude 26° 03' 07 ”, Longitude 84° 08' 21 "), (approximate 
Latitude 26° 04' 29 ", Longitude 84° 07' 26 "), (approximate Latitude 26 ” 05' 34 ", Longitude 84° 06' 22 "), 
(approximate Latitude 26° 06' 00 ", Longitude 84° 05' 27 "), and (approximate Latitude 26° 06' 00 ", 
Longitude 84° 03' 27 ") so as to place villages Kasalia Pachbimia, Diara Kashidat, Diara Harna Tand, 
Darauli, Doba Karwan, Karamha, Amarpur, Keontallia and Dumarbar Khurd completely in Bihar and 
villages Dewarah Mahazi Kashidat, Demarah Harnatar, Dewarah Darauli, Dewarah Karmaha , Dewarah 
Amarpur, Sisotar and Li lkar completely in Uttar Pradesh. The last point is the trijunction of the 
boundaries of districts Saran of Bihar and Ballia a nd Deoria of Uttar Pradesh.  
8. The boundary described above  shall be a continuous line.  
 
--------------------------The Border Security Force Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE ACT, 1968  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTE R I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Persons subject to this Act . 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE FORCE  
4. Constitution of the Force.  
5. Control, direction.  
6. Enrolment . 
7. Liability for service outside India.  
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the pos t. 
9. Tenure of service under the Act.  
10. Termination of service by C entral Government.  
11. Dismissal, remov al or reduction by the Director -General and by other officers.  
12. Certificate of termination of service.  
13. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
14. Offences in relation to  the enemy and punishable with death.  
15. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death.  
16. Offences punishable more severly on active duty than at other times.  
17. Mutiny.  
18. Desertion and aiding desertion.  
19.  Absence without leave.  
20. Striking or threatening superior officers.  
21. Disobedience to superior officer.  
22.  Insubordination and obstruction.  
23. False answers on enrolment.  
24. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct.  
25. Ill-treating a subordinate . 
26. Intoxication.  
27. Permitting escape of person in custody . 
28. Irregular ity in connection with arrest or confinement . 
29. Escape from custody.  
30. Offences in respect of property  
31. Extortion and corruption.  
32. Making away with equipment.  2 
 SECTIONS  
33. Injury to property . 
34. False accusations.  
35. Falsify ing official documents and false declarations.  
36. Signing in blank and failure to report.  
37. Offences relating to Security Force Court.  
38. False evidence.  
39. Unlawful detention of pay.  
40. Violation of good order and discipline.  
41. Miscellaneous offences.  
42. Attempt.  
43. Abetment of offences that have been committed.  
44. Abetment o f offences punishable with death and not committed.  
45. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed.  
46. Civil offences . 
47. Civil offences not triable by a Security Force Court.  
CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENTS  
48. Punishments awardable by Security Force Co urts.  
49. Alternative punishments awardable by Security Force Courts.  
50. Combination of punishments.  
51. Retention in the Force of a person convicted on active duty.  
52. Punishments otherwise than by Security Force Courts.  
53. Minor punishments.  
54. Limit of punishments under se ction 53.  
55. Punishment of persons of and below the rank of subordinate officers by Deputy                     
Inspectors -General and others.  
56. Collective fines.  
CHAPTER V  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
57. Custody of offenders.  
58. Duty of Commandant in regard to detention.  
59. Interval between committal and trial.  
60. Arrest by civil authorities.  
61. Capture of deserters . 
62. Inquiry into absence without leave . 
63. Force police officers . 
CHAPTER VI  
SECURITY FORCE  COURTS  
64. Kinds of Security Force Courts.  
65. Power to conven e a General Secur ity Force Court.  
66. Power to convene a Petty Security Force Court.  
67. Contents of warrants issued under sections 65 and 66.  
68. Composition of General Security Force Court.  3 
 SECTIONS  
69. Composition of a Petty Security Force Court.  
70. Summary Security Force Court . 
71. Dissolution of a Security Force Court.  
72. Power s of a General Security Force Court.  
73. Powers of a Petty Security Force Court.  
74. Power s of a Summary Security Force Court.  
75. Prohibition of second trial.  
76. Period of limitation for trial for an offence of desertion in certain cases.  
77. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act.  
78. Application of Act during term of sentence.  
79. Place of trial.  
80. Choice between criminal court and Security Force Court.  
81. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender . 
CHAPT ER VII  
PROCEDURE OF SECURITY FORCE  COURTS  
82. Presiding Officer.  
83. Law Officers.  
84. Challenges.  
85. Oaths of member, Law Officer and witness.  
86. Voting by members.  
87. General rule as to evidence.  
88. Judicial notice.  
89. Summoning witnesses.  
90. Documents exempted from production.  
91. Commi ssions for examination of witnesses.  
92. Examination of a witness on commission.  
93. Conviction of offence not charged.  
94. Presumption as to signatures.  
95. Enrolment paper.  
96. Presumption as to certain documents.  
97. Reference by accused to Government Officer.  
98. Evidence of previous convictions and general character . 
99. Lunacy of accused.  
100. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial.  
101. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 100.  
102. Release of lunatic accused.  
103. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives.  
104. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial.  
105. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed.  
106. Powers of Security Force Court in relation to proceedings under this Act. 
CHAPTER VIII  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
107. Finding and sentence not v alid, unless confirmed.  
108. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Security Force Court.  4 
 SECTIONS  
109. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Security Force Court . 
110. Limitation of powers of confirming authority.  
111. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences.  
112. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship.  
113. Revision of finding of sentence.  
114. Finding and sentence of a Summary Security Force Court.  
115. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Security Force Courts.  
116. Alteration of  finding or sentence in certain cases.  
117. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of Security Force Court s. 
118. Annulment of proceedings . 
CHAPTER IX  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCE, PARDONS, REMISSIONS, ETC.  
119. Form of sentence of death.  
120. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment.  
121. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.  
121A. Period of custody undergone by a person to be set -off against the imprisonment.  
122. Temporary custody of offender.  
123. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases.  
124. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place.  
125. Communication of certain orders to prison officers.  
126. Execution of sentence of fine.  
127. Informality or error in the order or warrant.  
128. Pardon and remission.  
129. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole or remission.  
130. Suspension of sentenc e of imprisonment.  
131. Orders pending suspension.  
132. Release on suspension.  
133. Computation of period of suspension.  
134. Order after suspension.  
135. Reconsideration of case after suspension.  
136. Fresh sentence after suspension.  
137. Scope of power of suspension.  
138. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
139. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force.  
140. Protection for acts of members of the Force.  
141. Power to make rules.  
142. Provisions as to existing Border Security Force.  
  
  5 
 THE BORDER SECUR ITY FORCE ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 47 OF 1968  
[2nd September, 1968.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an Armed Force of the Union for 
ensuring the security of the borders of India and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ni neteenth Year of the Republic of  India as follows: — 
CHAPTE R I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Border Security Force Act,  
1968.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “active duty ”, in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any duty as a member of the 
Force during the period in wh ich such person is attached to , or forms part of, a unit  of the Force — 
(i) Which is engaged in operations against an enemy, or 
(ii) which  is operating at a picket or engaged on patrol or other guard duty along the borders 
of India,  
and includes duty by such person during any period declared by the Central Government by notification 
in the Official Gazette as a period of active duty with re ference to any area in which any person or class 
of persons subj ect to this Act may be serv ing; 
(b) “battalion ” means a unit of the Force constituted as a battalion by the Cent ral Government;  
(c) “Chief Law Officer ” and “Law Officer ” mean, respectively, the Chief Law officer and a Law 
Officer of the Force appoi nted by the Central Government;  
(d) “civil offence ” means an offence which is triable by a criminal court;  
(e) “civil prison ” means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prisoner under th e 
Prisons Act, 1894 (9 of 1894)  or under any other l aw for the time being in force;  
(f) “Commandant ”, when used in any provision of this Act with reference to any unit of the 
Force, means the officer whose duty it is under the  rules to discharge with respect to that unit, the 
functions of a Commandant in regard to matters of the description  referred to in that provision;  
(g)”criminal court ” means a court of ordinary crimina l justice in any part of India;  
(h) “Deputy Inspector -General ” means a Deputy Inspector General of the F orce appointed under 
section 5;  
(i) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of the F orce appointed under section 5;  
(j) “enemy ” includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates and an y person in 
arms against whom it is the duty of any person subj ect to this Act to take action;  
(k) “enrolled person ” means an under -officer or other person enrolled under t his Act;  
(l) “Force ” means the Border Security Force;  
(m) “Force custody ” means the ar rest or confinement of  a member  of the Force according to 
rules;  
                                                           
1. 1st March, 1969, vide notification No. S.O. 732(E), dated 20 th February, 1969, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,             
sec. 3( ii). 6 
 (n) “Inspector -General ” means the Inspector -General of the F orce appointed under section 5;  
(o) “member of the Force ” means an officer, a subordinate officer, an under -officer or  other 
enrolled person ; 
(p) “notification ” means a notification publish ed in the Official Gazette;  
(q) “offence ” means any act or omission punishable under this Act and includes  a civil offence;  
(r) “officer ” means a person appointed or in pay as an officer of the Force, but does not include a 
subordin ate officer or an under -officer;  
(s) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(t) “rule” means a rule made und er this Act;  
(u) “Security Force  Court ” means a court referred to in section 64;  
(v) “subordinate officer ” means a person a ppointed or in pay as a Subedar -Major, a Subedar o r a 
Sub-Inspector of the Force;  
(w) “superior officer ”, when used in relation to a person subject to this Act, mean s— 
(i) any member of the Force to whose command such person is for the time being subjec t in 
accordance with the rules;  
(ii) any officer of higher rank or class  or of a higher grade in the same class ;  
and includes when such person is not an officer, a subordinate officer or an under -officer of higher rank, 
class or grade:  
(x) “under -officer ” means a Head Constable, Na ik and Lance Naik of the Force;  
(y) all words and expressions used and not defined in thi s Act but defined in the  Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860)  shall have the meanings  assigned to them in that Code.  
(2) In this Act, references to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be 
construed as references to the corresponding law i n force in that State.  
3. Persons subject to this Act .—(1) The following persons shall be subject to this Ac t, wherever they 
may be, namely: — 
(a) officer s and subordinate officers; and  
(b) under -officers and other perso ns enrolled under this Act.  
(2) Every  person subject to this Ac t shall remain so subject until  retired, discharged, released, 
removed or dismissed from the Force in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE FORCE  
4. Constitution of the Force. —(1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the Border 
Security Force for ensuring the se curity of the borders of India.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force shall be constituted in such manner as may be 
prescribed and the conditions of service of the members of the Force shall be such as may be prescribed.  
5. Control, direction .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Force sha ll vest 
in and be exercised by  the Central  Government and subject thereto  and to the provisions of this Act and 
the rules, the command and supervision of the Force shall vest in an officer to be appointed by the Central 
Government as the  Director -General of the Force.  
(2) The Director -General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted by such 
number of Inspectors -General, Deputy Inspectors -General, Commandants and other officers as may be 
prescribed  by the Central Government.  7 
 6. Enrolment .—(1) The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the mode of enrolment, and the 
procedure for enrolment shall be such as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the rules, every person who has, for a 
continuous period of t hree months, been in receipt of pay as a person enrolled under this Act and borne on 
the rolls of the Force shall be deemed to have been duly enrolled.  
7. Liability for service outside India. —Every  member of the Force shall be liable to serve in any 
part of India as well as outside India.  
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the post. —No member of the Force shall be at liberty,— 
(a) to resign his appointment during  the term of his engagement; or  
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment,  
except with the previous permission in writi ng of the prescribed authority.  
9. Tenure of service under the Act. —Every person subject to this Act shall hold office durin g the 
pleasure of the President.  
10. Termination of service by Central Government .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules, the Central Government may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act.  
11. Dismissal, removal of reduction by  the D irector -General and by other officers. —(1) The 
Director -General or any Inspector -General may dismiss or remove from the service or reduce to a lower 
grade or rank or the ranks any person subject to this Act other than an officer.  
(2) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector -General or any prescribed officer may dismiss 
or remove from the service any per son under his command other than an officer or a subordinate officer 
of such rank  or ranks is may be prescribed.  
(3) Any such officer as is mention ed in sub -section ( 2) may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the 
ranks any person under his command except an of ficer or a subordinate officer.  
(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules.  
12. Certificate of termination of service. —A subordinate officer, or an under -officer or other 
enrolled person who is retired, discharged, released, removed or dismissed from the service shall be 
furnished by the officer, to whose command he is subject, wit h a certificate in the language which is the 
mother tongue of such person and also in Hindi or E nglish language setting forth — 
(a) the authority terminating his servic e; 
(b) the cause for such termination; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the Forc e. 
13. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc .—(1) No person 
subject to this Act shall, without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or  of the 
prescribed authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, political 
association or with any class  of trade unions, labour union s or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, insti tution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely social, recre ational or 
religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document except where such communication or publication is in the bona fide  discharge of his duties 
or is of a purely literary artistic or scientific characte r or is of a prescribed nature.  8 
 Explanation .—If any question arises as to whether any society, institution, associ ation or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section, the decision o f 
the Central Gov ernment thereon shall be final.  
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any 
demonstration organised by any body of persons for any political purposes or for such othe r purposes as 
may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
14. Offences i n relation to the enemy and punishable with death .—Any person subject to this Act 
who commits any of the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post, place or guard, committed to his charge or 
which it i s his duty t o defend ; or 
(b) intentionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to this Act or to military, 
naval or air force law to abstain from acting against the enemy or to discourage such person fr om 
acting against the enemy; or  
(c) in the prese nce of the enemy shamefully casts away his arms, ammunition, tools or equipment 
or misbehaves in such m anner  as to show cowardice; or  
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy or any 
person in arms against the Union; or 
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy with money, arms, ammunition, stores or supplies or  in 
any other manner whatsoever; or  
(f) in time of active operation against the enemy, intentionally occasions a fase  alarm in action, 
camp, quarters, or  spreads or causes  to be spread reports calculated to create alarm or despondency; 
or 
(g) in time of action leaves his Commandant or other superior officer or his post, guard, picket, 
patrol or party without being regula rly relieved or without leave; or  
(h) having been captured by the enemy or made a prisoner of war, voluntarily ser ves with or  aids 
the enemy; or  
(i) knowingly harbours or protects an  enemy not being a prisoner; or  
(j) being a sentry in time of active opera tion against the enemy or alarm, sleeps upon  his post or is 
intoxicated; or  
(k) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the Force or the military, naval or 
air forces of India or any forces co -operating therew ith or any part of such for ces, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court , be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
15. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death. —Any person subject to this 
Act who commits any of the f ollowing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is taken prisoner or captured by the enemy, by want of due precaution or through 
disobedience of orders, or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner or so captured fails to 
rejoin his  service when able to do so; or  
(b) without due authority holds correspond ence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy 
or any person in league with the enemy or having come by the k nowledge of any such 
corresponde nce or communication, wilfully  omits to discover it immediately to his Comman dant or 
other superior officer,  9 
 shall, on conviction by a Security force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentione d. 
16. Offences punishable more severly on active duty th an at other times. —Any person subject to 
this Act who commits any of the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses  criminal force to a sentry; or  
(b) breaks into any house or other  place in search of plunder; or  
(c) being a sentry sleeps upon his post, or is intoxicated; or  
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his gu ard, picket, patrol or post; or  
(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a fals e alarm in camp or quarters, or spreads or 
causes to be spread reports calculated to create unnecess ary alarm or de spondency; or  
(f) makes known the parole, watchword or countersign to any person not entitled to receive it; or 
knowingly gives a parole, watchword or countersign d ifferent from what he received,  
shall, on convic tion by a Security Force Court, — 
(A) if he commits any such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less p unishment a s is in this Act mentioned; 
and 
(B) if he commits any such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
17. Mutiny. —Any person s ubject to this Act who commits any of the following offence s, that is  to 
say,— 
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any mutiny in the Force or 
in the military, naval or air forces of India or any for ces co -operating there with;  or 
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or  
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavours to suppress the same ; or  
(d) Knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or of any intention 
to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information thereof to his 
Commandan t or other superior officer; or  
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Force or in the military, naval or air fo rces of India or 
any forces co -operating therewith fr om his d uty or allegiance to the Union,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
18. Desertion and aiding desertion. —(1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or att empts to 
desert the service shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, — 
(a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or when under orders for active duty, be liable 
to suffer death or such less punishment a s is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if h e commits the offence under any other circumstances, be liable to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years  or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harbours  any such deserter shall, on conviction by 
a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or 
such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of a ny desertion or attempt at desertion of a 
person subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some other superior officer, or take 
any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by a Security Force 10 
 Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punishment 
as is in this Act mentioned.  
19. Absence without leave. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follo wing 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) absents himself without leave; or  
(b) without sufficient cause ove rstays leave granted to him; or  
(c) being on leave of absence and having received information from the appropriate authority that 
any battalion or part thereof or any other unit of the Forc e, to which he belongs, has been ordered on 
active duty, fails, without sufficient cau se, to rejoin without delay; or  
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place app ointed for 
exercise or duty; or  
(e) when on parad e, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause without leave from his 
superior officer, quits the parade or line of march; or  
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place prohibited, by 
any general, local or other order, without a pass or written leav e from his superior officer; or  
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without  due cause, absents himself from any school 
when duly ordered to attend there,  
shall, on conviction by  a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
20. Striking or threatening superior officers. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) uses criminal force to or as saults his superior officer; or  
(b) uses threatening language to such offic er; or  
(c) uses insubord inate language to such officer;  
shall, on convic tion by a Security Force Court, — 
(A) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, if the offence is committed 
on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may ext end to fourteen years or 
such le ss punishm ent as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(B) in other cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years 
or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of any offence specified in clause ( c), the imprisonment shall not exceed five 
years.  
21. Disobedience to superior officer .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority any lawful command given personally by his superior 
officer in the execution of his office whether the same is given  orally, or in writing or by signal or 
otherwise, shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishme nt as in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to thi s Act who disobeys any lawful command given by his superior officer 
shall, on convict ion by a Security Force Court, — 
(a) if he commits such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment a s is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if he commits such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  11 
 22. Insubordination and  obstruction .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though of 
inferior rank, who orders him into arrest, or uses crimi nal force to o r assaults any such officer; or  
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Act or not, in whose 
custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is not his superior officer; or  
(c) resists  an escort whose duty it is to apprehend h im or to have him in charge; or  
(d) breaks out of  barracks, camp or quarters; or  
(e) neglects to obey any ge neral, local or other order; or  
(f) impedes the Force Police referred to in section 63 or any person lawfu lly acting on his behalf, 
or when called upon, refuses to assist in the execution of his duty a Force Police or any person  
lawfully acting on his behalf,  
shall on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend, in the case of the offences specified in clauses ( d) and ( e), to two years, and in the case of the 
offences specified in the other clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
23. False answers on enrolm ent.—Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered 
to have made at the time of enrolment a wilfully false answer to any question set forth in the prescribed 
form of enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling officer before whom h e appears for the 
purpose of being enrolled, shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
24. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel,  indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) malingers, or feigns, or produces disease or infirmity in himself or  intentionally delays his 
cure or aggravat es his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to 
himself or that person,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
25. Ill-treating a subordinate .—Any officer, subordinate officer or under -officer, who uses criminal 
force to or otherwise ill -treats any  person subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or position, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
26. Intoxication. —Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state of intoxication, whether on 
duty or not, shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or such less punishment as  is in this Act mentioned.  
27. Permitting escape of person in custody. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that i s to say,— 
(a) when in command of a guard, picket, patrol or post, releases without proper authority, 
whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his charge, or refuses to 
receive any pri soner or person so committed; o r 
 (b) wilfully  or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is committed to his 
charge,or whom it is his duty to keep or guard,  
 shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishm ent as is in this Act mentioned:  and if he 12 
 has not acted  wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
28. Irregularity in connecti on with arrest or confinement. —Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the foll owing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) unnecessarily  detains a person in arrest or confinement without bringing him to trial, or fails 
to bring his case before the proper authority for investigation; or  
(b) having committed a person to Force custody fails without reasonable cause to deliver at the 
time of s uch committal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case within forty -eight hours thereafter, 
to the officer or other person into whose custody the person arrested is committed, an account in 
writing signed by himself of the offence with which the person so committed is charged,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
29. Escape from custody. —Any person subject to this Act w ho, being in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
30. Offences in res pect of property. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any Force mess, band or 
institution, or to any  person subject to this Act; or  
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to hi s own use any such property; or  
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in r espect of any such property; or  
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in respect of which any of the offence s under 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having reason to believe the commission of 
such offence; or  
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Government entrusted to him; or  
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
31. Extorti on and corruption. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to s ay,— 
(a) commits extortion; or  
(b) without proper authority exacts from any person money, provisions or service,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
32. Making away with equipment .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
follo wing offences, that is to  say,— 
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with, any arms, ammunition, equipment, 
instruments, tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the Government issued to him for 
his use or entrusted to him; or  
(b) loses by neglect an ything mentioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any meda l or decoration granted to him,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court , be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend , in the case of the offences speci fied in clause ( a), to ten years,  and in the case of the offences 13 
 specified in the other clauses, to five years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
33. Injury to property. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the followi ng offences , 
that is to say, — 
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause ( a) of section 32, or any property 
belonging to any Force mess, band or institution , or to any person subject t o this Act; or  
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, any propert y of the Government 
by fire; or  
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill -treats or lose s any, animal entrusted to him,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully  to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he 
has acted without reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fi ve years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
34. False accusations. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following of fences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act,  knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false; or  
(b) in making a complaint against any person subject to this Act makes any statement affecting 
the character of such person, knowing or having reason to believe such statement to be false,  or 
knowingly and wilfully  suppresses any material facts,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
35. Falsify ing offici al documents and false declarations. —Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the foll owing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other document made or signed by him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly makes, or is privy to the making 
of, any fa lse or fraudulent statement; or  
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause ( a) knowingly makes, or is privy to 
the making of, any omiss ion, with intent  to defraud; or  
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document which it is his duty to preserve or 
produce; or  
(d) where it is his official duty to m ake a declaration respecting any matter , knowingl y makes a 
false declaration; or  
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension, allowance or other advantage or 
privilege by a statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes t o be false or does not 
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book or record, or by making any 
document containing a false statement, or by omitting to make a true entry or docume nt containing a 
true statement,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
36. Signing in blank and failure to report .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing, supplies 
or stores, or any property of the Government fraudulently leaves in blank any material part for which  
his signature is a vouche r; or 14 
 (b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which it is his duty to 
make or send,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less  punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
37. Offences relating to Security Force Court. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any 
of the following offences, tha t is to say, — 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before a Security Force Court, wilfully 
or without reasonable excuse,  makes default in attending; or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a Security Forc e Court to be  
taken or made; or  
(c) refuses to produce or deliver any document in his power or control legally required by a 
Security Force Court to be p roduced or delivered by him; or  
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question which he is by l aw bound to answer; or  
(e) is guilty of contempt of the Security Force Court by using insulting or threatening language, 
or by causing any interruption or disturbance in  the proceedings of such court,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer  imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
38. False evidence. —Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affirmed before 
any Security Force Court or other court competen t under this Act to administer an oath or affirmation, 
makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe 
to be true, shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment fo r a term 
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
39. Unlawful detention of pay .—Any officer, subordinate officer or an under -officer who, having 
received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully detains or refuses to pay the same when due, 
shall, on conviction by  a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
40. Violatio n of good order and dis cipline.—Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act 
or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the 
Force shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
41. Miscellaneous offences. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the foll owing 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being in command at any post or on th e march, and receiving a complaint that any one under 
his command has beaten or otherwise maltreated or oppressed any person, or has disturbed any fair or 
market, or committed any riot or trespass, fails to have due reparation made to the injured person or  to 
report the c ase to the proper authority; or  
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise, intentionally insults the religion, or wounds the 
religi ous feelings of, any person; or  
(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt does any act tow ards the  commission of such 
offence; or  
(d) being below the rank of subordinate officer, when off duty, appears without proper authority, 
in or about camp, or in or about, or when going to, or returning from, any town or bazaar, carrying a 
rifle, swor d or other offensive weapon; or  
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain, for himself 
or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for procuring the enrolment of any 
person, or leave of absenc e, promotion or any other advantage or   indulgence fo r any person in the 
service; or  15 
 (f) commits any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the 
country in which he is serving,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Force C ourt, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
42. Attempt. —Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences specified 
in sections 14 to 41 (bo th inclusive) and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the 
offence shall, on conviction by a  Security Force Court, where no express provision is made by this Act 
for the punishme nt of such attempt, be liable, — 
(a) if the offence attempte d to be committed is punishable with death, to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment, to suff er 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence 
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
43. Abetment of offences that have been committed .—Any person subject to this Act who abets the 
commission of any of the offences specified in sections 14 to 41 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction by a 
Security Force Court, if the Act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express 
provision is made by this Act for the punishment  of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment 
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
44. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not committed. —Any person subject to this 
Act who abets the commission of any of the offences punishable with death under sections 14, 17 and 
sub-section ( 1) of section 18 shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, if that offence be not 
committed on  consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this A ct for the 
punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
45. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed. —Any person 
subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 14 to 41 (both 
inclusive) and punishable with imprisonment shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, if that 
offence be not committed in consequence of the abet ment, and no express provision is made by this Act 
for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one-half of the longest term provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mention ed. 
46. Civil offences. —Subject to the provisions of section 47, any person subject to this Act who at any 
place in, or beyond, India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against 
this Act and, if charged therewith under this  section shall be liable to be tried by a Security Force Court 
and, on conviction, be punisha ble as follows, that is to say, — 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India with death, he 
shall be liable to suffer any p unishment, assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less 
punishment a s is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence by the 
law in force in India, or imprisonment f or a term which may extend to seven years, or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
47. Civil offences not triable by a Security Force Court. —A person subject to this Act who 
commits an offence of murder or of culpable homicide not amounting to  murder against, or of rape in 
relation to, a person not subject to this Act shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this Act 
and shall not be tried by a Security Force Court, unless he co mmits any of the said offences, — 
(a) while on active duty; or  
(b) at any place outside India; or  
  16 
 (c) at any place specified by the Central Government by notification in this behalf.  
CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENTS  
48. Punishments awardable by Security Force Courts .—(1) Punishments may be inflicted in 
respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by Security Force Courts 
according to the scale following, that is to say,— 
(a) death;  
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any ot her lesser term but excluding 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding  three months in Force custody;  
(c) dismissal from the service;  
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three m onths in Force custody;  
(e) reduction  to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their rank in  the case of 
an under -officer;  
(f) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of the service for the purpose of 
prom otion;  
(g) forfeiture of service for t he purpose of increased pay, pension o r any other prescribed purpose;  
(h) fine , in respect of civil offences;  
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons belo w the rank of an                   
under -officer;  
(j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an of fence 
committed on active duty;  
(k) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay 
and allowances and other public money due to him  at the time of s uch dismissal;  
(l) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence for 
whic h he is convicted is made good.  
(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to 
every p unishment preceding it in the above scale.  
49. Alternative punishments awardable by Security Force Courts .—Subject to the provisions of 
this Act, a Security Force Court may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences 
specified in sec tions 14 to 45 (both inclusive) award either the particular punishment with which the 
offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable or, in lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower 
in the scale set out in section 48 regard being had to the n ature and degree of the offence.  
50. Combination of punishments. —A sentence of a Security Force Court may award in addition to, 
or without any one other punishment, the punishment specified in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
48, and any one or mor e of the punishments specified in clauses ( e) to ( l) (both inclusive) of that          
sub-section.  
51. Retention in the Force of a person convicted on active duty. —When on active duty any 
enrolled person has been sentenced by a Security Force Court to dis missal or to imprisonment whether 
combined with dismissal or not, the prescribed officer may direct that  such person may be retained to  
serve in the ranks, and such service shall be reckoned as part of his term of imprisonment if any.  
52. Punishments otherwise than by Security Force Courts. —Punishments may also be inflicted in 
respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of a Security Force 
Court in the manner stated in sections 53 and 55.  
53. Minor punishments. —Subject to the provisions of section 54, a Commandant or such other 
officer as is, with the consent of Central Government, specified by the Director -General may, in the  17 
 prescribed manner, proceed against a person subject to this Act, otherwise than as an officer or a               
sub-ordinate officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act and award such person, to the extent 
prescribed, one or more of the followi ng punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) imprisonment in Force c ustody up to twenty -eight days;  
(b) deten tion up -to twenty -eight days;  
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty -eight days;  
(d) extra guards or duties;  
(e) deprivation of any special position or special emoluments or any acting rank or red uction to a 
lower grade of pay;  
(f) forfei ture of goo d service and good conduct pay;  
(g) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(h) fine up to fourteen days  pay in any one month;  
(i) deductions  from his pay of any sum required to make good such compensation for any 
expense, loss, damage or destruction caused by him to the Central Government, or to any building or 
property as may be awarded by his Commandant.  
54. Limit of punishments under section 53 .—(1) In the case of an award of two or more of the 
punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 53, the punishments specified in clause ( c) 
or clause ( d) shall take effect only at the end of the punishment specified in claus e (a) or clause ( b). 
(2) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) are awarded to 
a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said punishments, the whole extent of 
the punishments shall not ex ceed i n the aggregate forty -two days.  
(3) The punishments specified in the said clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) shall not be awarded to any person 
who is of the rank of an under -officer or was, at the time of committing the offence for whic h he is 
punished, of su ch rank.  
(4) The punishment specified in clause ( g) of section 53 shall not be awarded to any person below the 
rank of an under -officer.  
55. Punishment of persons of and below the rank of subordinate officers by Deputy            
Inspectors -General and oth ers.—(1) An officer not below the rank of the Deputy Inspector -General or 
such other officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director -Genera l 
may, in the prescribed manner , proceed against a person of or below the rank of a subordinate officer who 
is charged with an offence under this Act and award one or more of the followin g punishments, that is to 
say,— 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose prom otion depends upon the length 
of service forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding twelve 
months, but subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be t ried by a Security 
Force Court;  
(b) severe r eprimand or reprimand;  
(c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
(2) In every case in which punishment has been awarded under sub -section ( 1), certified true copies 
of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the officer awarding the punishment 
to the prescribed superior authority who may, if the punishment awarded appears to him to be illegal, 
unjust or excessive, cancel, vary or remit the puni shment and make such other direction as may be 
appropriate in the circumstances of the case.  
56. Collective fines. —(1) Whenever any weapon or part of a weapon, or ammunition, forming part of 
the equipment of a unit of the Force, is lost or stolen, an officer not below the rank of the Commandant of 18 
 a battalion may, after making such enquiry as he thinks fit and subject to  the rules, impose a collective 
fine upon the subordinate officers, under -officers and men of such unit, or upon so many of them as, in 
his judgment, should be held resp onsible for such loss or theft.  
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage on the pay of the individuals on whom it falls.  
CHAPTER V  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
57. Custody of offenders .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may 
be taken into Force custody, under the  order of any superior officer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), an officer may order into Force custody 
any other officer, though such other officer may be of a higher rank, engaged in a quarrel, affray or 
disorder.  
58. Duty of Commandant in regard to detention. —(1) It shall be the duty of every Commandant to 
take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not detained in custody for 
more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is reported to him, without the  
charge being investigated, unless investigation within that period seems to him to be impracticable havin g 
regard to the public service.  
(2) The case of every person being detained in custody beyond a period of forty -eight hours, and the 
reasons therefore , shall be reported by the Commandant to the Deputy Inspector -General under whom he 
is serving or such other officer to whom an application may be made to convene a Security Force Court 
for the trial of the person charged.  
(3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub -section ( 1), Sundays and other pub lic 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of the Act, Central Government may make rules providing for the 
manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken into and detained 
in Force custody, pending the trial  by any competent authority for any offence committed by him.  
59. Interval between committal and trial .—In every case where any such person as is mentioned in 
section 57 and as i s not on active duty, remains in such custody for a longer period then eight days 
without a Security force Court for his trial being convened, a special report giving reasons for the delay 
shall be made by his Commandant in the manner prescribed, and a sim ilar report shall be forwarded at 
intervals of every eight days until a Security Force Court is convened or such person is released from 
custody.  
60. Arrest by civil authorities. —Whenever any person subject to this Act, who is accused of an 
offence under t his Act, is within the jurisdiction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Force custody of such person upon receipt of a 
written application to that effect signed by his Command ant or an officer  authorised  by the Commandant 
in that behalf.  
61. Capture of d eserters. —(1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the Commandant of 
the unit to which he belongs, shall give information of the desertion to such civil authorities as, in his 
opinion, may be able to  the afford assistance towards the capture of the deserter; a nd such authorities shall 
there upon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in like manner as if he were a person for 
whose apprehension a warrant h ad been issued by a magistrate, and shall deliver the deserter, when 
apprehended, into Force custody.  
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be subject to this 
Act, and to be a deserter or to be travelling witho ut authority, and shall bring him without delay before the 
nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to law.  
62. Inqu iry into absence without leave. —(1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent 
from duty without due authority for a period o f thirty days, a court of inquiry shall, as soon as practicable, 
be appointed by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed; and such court shall, on oath or 19 
 affirmation administered in the prescribed manner, inquire respecting the absence of t he person, and the 
deficiency, if any, in the property of the Government entrusted to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, 
equipment, instruments, clothing or necessaries; and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due 
authority or other suffici ent cause, the court shall declare such absence and the period thereof and the said 
deficiency, if any, and the Commandant of the unit to which the person belongs shall make a record 
thereof in the prescribed manner.  
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he shall for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a deserter.  
63. Force police officers. —(1) The Director -General or any prescribed officer may appoint persons 
(in this Act referred to as Force police) for discharging the functions specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3).  
(2) The duties of a person appointed under sub -section ( 1), are to take charge of persons confined for 
any offence, to preserve good order and discipline and to prevent breaches of the s ame by persons serving  
in, or attached to, the Force.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 57, a person appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, 
at any time, arrest and detain for trial any person subject to this Act who commits, or is charged wit h, an 
offence, and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in pursuance of a sentence awarded 
by a Security Force Court or by an officer exercising authority under section 53 but shall not inflict any 
punishment on his own authority:  
Prov ided that no officer shall be so arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of another officer.  
CHAPTER VI  
SECURITY  FORCE  COURTS  
64. Kinds of Security Force Courts. —For the purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds of 
Security  Force Courts, tha t is to say, — 
(a) General Security Force Courts;  
(b) Petty Security Force Courts;  and 
(c) Summary Security Force Courts.  
65. Power to convence a General Security Force Court. —A General Security Force Court may be 
convened by the Central Government or the Director -General or by any officer empowered in this behalf 
by warrant of the Director -General.  
66. Power to convence a Petty Security Force Court .—A Petty Security Force Court may be 
convened by an officer having power to convene a General Security Force Court or by an officer 
empowered in this behalf b y warrant or any such officer.  
67. Contents of warrants issued under sections 65 and 66. —A warrant, issued under section 65 or 
section 66 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the off icer issuing it may think fit.  
68. Composition of General Security Force Court .—A General Security Force Court shall consist 
of not less than five officers, each of whom has held the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police for not 
less than three whole yea rs and of whom not less than four are of a rank not below that of a confirmed 
Deputy Superintendent of Police.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section and section 69 “Deputy Superintendent of Police ” 
includes any post of a higher rank and any post declared by Central Government by notification to be an 
equivalent post as also any post higher in rank than the post so declared.  
69. Composition of a Petty Security Force Court .—A Petty Security Force Court shall consist of 
not less than three officers each of whom has held the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police for not less 
than two whole years.  
70. Summary Security Force Court. —(1) A Summary Security Force Court may be held by the 
Cornandant of a ny unit of the Force and he al one shall constitute the Court.  20 
 (2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers or 
subordinate officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed.  
71. Dissolu tion of a Security Force Court .—(1) If a Security Force Court after the commencement 
of a trial is reduced below the minimum number of officers required by t his Act, it shall be dissolved.  
(2) If, on account of the illness of the Law Officer or of the accu sed before the finding, it is 
impossible to continue the trial, a Security Force Court shall be dissolved.  
(3) The officer who convened a Security Force Court may dissolve the same if it app ears to  him that 
the exigencies of the service or necessities of discipline render it impossible or inexpedient to continue  the 
said Security Force Court.  
(4) Where a Security Force Court is dissolved under this section, the accused may be tried again.  
72. Power s of a General Security Force Court. —A General Security Force Court shall have the 
power to try any person subject to this Act for any offence punishable thereunder and to pass any sentence 
authorised thereby.  
73. Powers of a Petty Security Force Court .—A Petty Security Force Court shall have power to try 
any person subject to this Act other than an officer or subordinate officer for any offence made punishable 
thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death, or 
impr isonment for a term exceeding two years.  
74. Power s of a Summary Security Force Court .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), 
a Summary Security Force Court may try any off ence punishable under this Act.  
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and reference can without detriment to 
discipline be made to the officer empowered to convene a Petty Security Force Court for the trial of the 
alleged offender, an officer holding a Summary Security Force Court shall not try without such reference 
any offence punishable under any of the sections 14, 17 and 46 of this Act , or any offence against  the 
officer holding the court.  
(3) A Summary Security Force Court may try any person subject to this Act and under the command 
of the officer holdi ng the court, except an officer, or a subordinate officer.  
(4) A Summary Security Force Court may pass any sentence whi ch may be passed under this Act  
except the sentence of death or of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in                          
sub-section ( 5).  
(5) The limit referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall be,— 
(a) one year, if the officer holding the Security Force Court has held either the post of 
Superintendent of Police or a post declared by the Central Government by notific ation to be 
equivalent thereto, for a period of not less than three years or holds a post of higher rank than  either of 
the said post; and  
(b) three months, in any other case.  
75. Prohibition of second trial. —(1) When any person subject to this Act has be en acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a Security Force Court or by a criminal court or has been dealt with under 
section 53 or under section 55, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same offence by a Security 
Force Court or deal t with unde r the said sections.  
(2) When any person, subject to this Act, has been acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Security 
Force Court or has been dealt with under section 53 or section 55, he shall not be liable to be tried again 
by a criminal court for t he same offence or on the same facts.  
76. Period of limitation for trial for an offence of desertion in certain cases .—No trial for an 
offence of desertion, other than desertion on active duty, shall be commenced if the person in question, 
not being an officer, has subsequently to the commission of the offence, served continuously in an 
exemplary manner for not less than  three  years with any unit of the Force.  21 
 77. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act .—(1) Where an offence under t his 
Act had been committed by any person while subject to this Act, and he has ceased to be so subject, he 
may be taken into and kept in Force custody and tried and punished for such offence as if  he continued to 
be so subject.  
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unless his trial commences within six months after he 
had ceased to be this Act:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to the trial of any such person for an 
offence of des ertion or for any of the offences me ntioned in section 17 or shall affect the jurisdiction of a 
criminal court to try any offence triable by such court as well as by a Security Force Court.  
78. Application of Act during term of sentence. —(1) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced 
by a Security Force Court to imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, 
though he is dismissed from the Force, or has otherwise ceased to be subject to this Act, and he may be 
kept, removed, imprisoned and punished as if he con tinued to be subject to this Act.  
(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a Security Force Court to death, this Act shall 
apply to him till the sentence is carried out.  
79. Place of trial .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any offen ce against it may be tried 
and punished for such offence in any place whatever.  
80. Choice between criminal court and Security Force Court. —When a criminal court and a 
Security Force Court have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the 
Director -General, or the Inspector -General or the Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the 
accused person is serving or such other officer as may be prescribed, to decide before which court the 
proceedings shall be instituted, a nd, if that officer decides that they shall be instituted before a Security 
Force Court, to direct that the accused person shall be detained in Force custody.  
81. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender. —(1) When a criminal court having 
jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in  respect of any alleged offence  
it may, by written notice, require the officer referred to in section 80 at his option, either to deliver over 
the offender to the nearest magistra te to be proceeded against according to law, or to postpone 
proceedings, pending a refer ence to the Central Government.  
(2) In every such case the said officer shall either deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requisition, or shall forthwith re fer the question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted, for the determination of the Central Government whose order upon such reference shall be 
final.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROCEDURE OF SECURITY  FORCE COURTS  
82. Presiding Officer .—At eve ry General Security Force Court or Petty Security Force Court, the 
senior member shall be the presiding officer.  
83. Law Officers .—Every General Security Force Court shall, and every Petty Security Force Court 
may, be attended by a Law Officer, or if no such officer is available, an officer ap proved by the Chief 
Law Officer  or a Law Officer.  
84. Challenges .—(1) At all trials by a General Security Force Court or by a Petty Security Force 
Court, as soon as the court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members shall be read 
over to the accused, who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by any of ficer sitting 
on the court. 
(2) If the accused objects to such officer, his  objec tion and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the court shall in the absence of the 
challenged o fficer decide on the objection.  22 
 (3) If the objection is allowed by one -half or more of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the 
objection shall be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be filled in the 
prescribed manner, by another officer subject to the same right of the accused to object.  
(4) When no challenge is made, or when a challenge has been m ade and disallowed, or the place of 
every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to whom no objection is made or 
allowed, the court shall proceed with the trial.  
85. Oaths of member, Law Officer and witness .—(1) An oath or affir mation in the prescribed 
manner shall be administered to every member of every Security Force Court and to the Law Officer or as 
the case may be the officer approved under section 83, before  the commencement of the trial.  
(2) Every person giving evidence b efore a Security Force Court shall be examined after being duly 
sworn or a ffirmed in the prescribed form.  
(3) The provisions of s ub-section ( 2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under twelve years 
of age and the Security Force Court is of opinion that though the witness understands the duty of speaking 
the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation.  
86. Voting by members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision of 
a Security Force Co urt shall be passed by an absolute majority of votes; and where there is an equality of 
votes on either the finding or the sentence, the decision sha ll be in favour of the accused.  
(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a General Security Force Court without the concurrence 
of at least two -thirds of the members of the co urt. 
(3) In matters, other than a challenge or the finding or sentence, the presiding office r shall have a 
casting vote.  
87. General rule as to evidence .—The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 ( 1 of 1872), shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a Security Force Court.  
88. Judicial notice .—A Security Force Court may take judicial notice of any matter within the 
general knowledge of the members as officers of the Force.  
89. Summoning witnesses .—(1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of a Security Force 
Court, the Law Officer or, as the case may be, the officer approved under section 83 or the Commandant 
of the accused person may, by summons under his hand, require the attendance, at a time and place to be 
mentioned in the summons, of any person either to give evidence or to produce any document or other 
thing.  
(2) In the case of a witness who is subject to this Act, the summons shall be sent to his Commandant 
and such officer shall  serve it upon him accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness; the summons shall be sent to the magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction he may be, or resides, and such magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if t he witness 
were required in the court of such a magistrate.  
(4) When a witness is required to produce any particular document of other thing in his possession or 
power, the summons shall describe it with reasonable precision.  
90. Documents exempted from pr oduction. —(1) Nothing in section 89 shall be deemed to affect the 
operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian  Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872)  or to apply to any letter, 
postcard, telegram or other document in the custody of the p ostal or telegraph autho rities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any District  Magistrate, Chief Presidency 
Magistrate, High Court or Court of Sessions, wanted for the purpose of any Security Force Court, such 
magistrate, or Court may require the postal or  telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to deliver such 
document to such person as such m agistrate, or Court may direct.  
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other magistrate or of any Commissioner of Police 
or District Superintendent of Police , wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be made for, and to detain such document pending 23 
 the orders of any such District Magistrate, Chief Presidency Magistrate or  High Court or Court of 
Sessions.  
91. Commissions for examination of witnesses. —(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a 
Security Force Court, it appears to the court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of 
justice, and that the a ttendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense 
or inconvenience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such court may address 
the Chief Law Officer in order that a commission to take the evidence  of such witness may be issued.  
(2) The Chief Law Officer may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a Commission to any District 
Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such witness 
resides, to tak e the eviden ce of such witness.  
(3) The Magistrate or officer to whom the commission is issued, or, if he is the District Magistrate, he 
or such Magistrate of the first class as he appoints in this behalf, shall proceed to the place where the 
witness is, or shall summon the witness before him and shall take down his evidence in the same manner, 
and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in the trials of warrant -cases under the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).  
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place outside India, the commission may be 
issued in the manner specified in Chapter XL of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898.).  
92. Examinat ion of a witness on commission. —(1) The prosecutor and the accused person in a ny 
case in which a commission is issued under section 91 may respectively forward any interrogatories in 
writing which the court may think relevant to the issue, and the Magistrate or officer executing the 
commission shall examine the wit ness upon such int errogatories.  
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such Magistrate or officer by counsel 
or, except in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross -examine and    
re-examine, as the  case may be, the sai d witness.  
(3) After a commission issued under section 91 has been duly executed, it shall be returned, together 
with the deposition of the witness examined there under to the Chief Law Officer.  
(4) On receipt of a Commission, and deposition returned under sub-section ( 3), the Chief Law Officer 
shall forward the same to the court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if such court has 
been dissolved, to any other court convened for the trial of the accused person ; and  the commission, the 
return th ereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the accused person, and 
may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the prosecutor or the accused, 
and shall form part o f the proceedings of the c ourt. 
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 91, the trial may be adjourned for 
specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commission.  
93. Conviction of offence not charged .—(1) A person charged before a Security Force Court with 
desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or  of being absent without leave.  
(2) A person charged before a Security Force Court with attempting to desert may be found guilty  of 
being absent with out leave.  
(3) A person charged before a Security Force Court with using criminal force ma y be found guilty of 
assault.  
(4) A person charged before a Security Force Court with using threatening language may be found 
guilty o f using insubordinate language.  
(5) A person charged before a Security Force Court with any one of the offences specified in             
clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 30 may be found guilty of any other of these offences with wh ich he 
might have been charged.  
(6) A person charg ed before a Security Force Court with an offence punishable under section 46 may 
be found guilty of any other offence of which he might have been found guilty, if the provisions of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898 ), were applicable.  24 
 (7) A pe rson charged before a Security Force Court with any offence under this Act may, on failure of 
proof of an offence having been committed in circumstances involving a more severe punishment, be 
found guilty of the same offence as having been committed in cir cumstances involving a less severe 
punishment.  
(8) A person charged before Security Force Court with any offence under this Act may be found 
guilty of having attempted or abetted the commission of that offence, although the attempt or abetment is 
not sepa rately charged.  
94. Presumption as to signatures .—In any proceeding under this Act , any application, certificate , 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to h ave been duly signed by the person by whom and in the character in 
which it purports to have been sig ned, until the contrary is shown.  
95. Enrolment paper .—(1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an enrolling officer 
shall, in proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person enrolled having given the answers to 
questions which he is there in represented as having given.  
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of his 
enrolment paper purporting  to be certified to be a true copy by the officer having the custody of the 
enrolment paper.  
96. Presumption as to certain documents .—(1) A letter, return or other document respecting the 
service of any person in, or the dismissal or discharge of any perso n from, any unit of the Force, or 
respecting the circumstances of any person not having served in, or belonged to, any unit of the Force, if 
purporting to be signed by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Director -General, or by any 
prescribed off icer, shall be evidence of the facts stated in such le tter, return or other document.  
(2) A Border Security Force List or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be evidence 
of the status and rank of the officers, subordinate officers therein  mentioned, and of any appointment held 
by them and of the battalion, unit, or branch of the For ce to which they belong.  
(3) Where a record is made in any battalion book in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder or otherwise in the discharge  of official duties, and purports to be signed by the Commandant 
or by the officer whose duty it is to make such record, such record shall be eviden ce of the facts therein 
stated.  
(4) A copy of any record in any battalion book purporting to be certified to  be a true copy by the 
officer having custody of such book sh all be evidence of such record.  
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the cust ody of any officer or other person subject to 
this Act, or any unit of the Force, or has been apprehended by such officer or person, a certificate 
purporting to be signed by such officer, or by the Commandan t of the unit to which such pers on belongs, 
as th e case may be, and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension, and the mann er 
in which he was dressed, shall  be evi dence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or o f absence without 
leave and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of, or has been apprehended by, a police 
officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police station , a certificate purporting to be signed 
by such police officer and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension and the 
manner in which he was dressed shall be evi dence of the matters so stated.  
(7) Any document purporting to be a repo rt under the hand of any Chemical Examiner or Assistant 
Chemical Examiner to Government upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or 
analysis and report, may be used as evidence in any proceeding under this Act.  
97. Reference by accuse d to Government Officer .—(1) If at any trial for desertion or absence 
without leave, overstaying leave or not rejoining when warned for service, the accused person states in his 
defence any sufficient or reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof to 
any officer in the service of the Government, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to prove or 25 
 disprove the said statement in the defence, the court shall address such officer and adjourn the 
proceedin gs until his r eply is received.  
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if signed by him, be received in evidence and 
have the same effect as if made o n oath before the court.  
(3) If the court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply, or if the c ourt omits to comply with the 
provisions of this section, the convening officer may, at his discretion, annul the proceedings and order a 
fresh trial.  
98. Evidence of previous con victions and general character. —(1) When any person subject to this 
Act has b een convicted by a Security Force Court of any offence, such Security Force Court may inquire 
into, and receive, and record evidence of any previous convictions of such person, either by a Security 
Force Court or by a criminal court, or any previous award of punishment under section 53 or 55, and may 
further inquire into and record the general character of such person and such other matters as may be 
prescrib ed. 
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or c ertified 
extracts from, books of Security Force Courts or other official records; and it shall not be necessary to 
give notice before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his previous convictions  or character will be 
received.  
(3) At a Summary Security Force Court, the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, record any 
previous convictions against the offender, his general character, and such other matters as may be 
prescribed, as of his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to be pr oved under the foregoing 
provisions of this section.  
99. Lunacy of accused. —(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Security Force Court, it appears 
to the court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his defenc e, 
or that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of knowing the 
nature of the act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary to law, the court shal l record a finding 
accordingly.  
(2) The presidi ng officer of the cour t, or, in  the case of a Summary Security Force Court, the officer 
holding the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the confirming officer, or to the authority empowered 
to deal with its finding under s ection 115, as the case may be.  
(3) The confirming  officer to whom the case is reported under sub -section ( 2) may, if he does not 
confirm the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by the same or another Security Force 
Court for the off ence with which he was charged.  
(4) The authority to who m the finding of a Summary Security Force Court is reported under                 
sub-section ( 2), and a confirming officer confirming the finding in any case so reported to him shall order 
the accused person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall report the case for the or ders 
of the Central Government.  
(5) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 4), the Central Government may order the accused 
person to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.  
100. Subse quent fitness of lunatic accused for trial .—Where any accused person, having been 
found by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody or under 
detention under section 99, any officer prescribed in this behalf, may — 
(a) if such person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 99, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is ca pable of making his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub -section ( 5) of section 99, on a certificate of the 
Inspe ctor General of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a lunatic asylum under the said                      
sub-section,  on a certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum and if he is detained in 
any other place under that sub -section,  on a certificate of the prescribed authority, that he is capable 
of making his defence, take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Security Force 26 
 Court for the offence with which he was originally charged or, if the offence is a civil off ence, by a 
criminal court.  
101. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 100. —A copy of every            
order  made by an officer under section 100 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the 
Central Government.  
102. Relea se of lunatic accused. —Where any person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 
99 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section, — 
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section ( 4), on the report of a medical officer, 
or  
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub -section ( 5), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause ( b) of section 100 that in the judgment of such officer or authority 
such person may be released without danger of his doing injur y to himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody, or transferred to a 
public lunatic asylum if he has not already been sent to such an asylum.  
103. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives .—Where any relative or friend of any person who is in 
custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 99 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section desires 
that he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may, up on application by 
such relative or friend and, on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government that the person 
delivered shall be properly taken care of, and, prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other 
person, and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the Central 
Government may direct, order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend.  
104. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial. —When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to have been committed, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission of any offence, is produced before a Security Force Court during a trial, the court may make 
such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such pro perty pending the conclusion of the trial, and 
if the property is subject to speedy or, natural decay may , after recording such evidence as it t hinks 
necessary, order it to be sold or otherwise disposed  of. 
105. Order for disposal of property regarding whi ch offence is committed .—(1) After the 
conclusion of a trial before any Security Force Court, the court or the officer confirming the finding or 
sentence of such Security Force Court, or any authority superior to such officer, or, in the case of a 
Summary Security Force Court whose finding or sentence does not require confirmation, an officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial was held, may make such 
order as it or he thinks fit for the disposal by destruction, con fiscation, delivery to any person claiming to 
be entitled to possession thereof, or otherwise, of any property or document produced before the court or 
in its custody, or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed or which has been used for  
the commission of any offence.  
(2) Where any order has been made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such or der signed and certified by the  authority 
making the same may, whethe r the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situated, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause the 
order to be carried into effect as if it were an order passed by him und er the provisions of the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).  
(3) In this section, the term “property ” includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to have been committed,  not only such property as has been originally in th e possession or under 
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have been converted or 
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.  
106. Powers of Security Force Cou rt in relation to proceedings under this Act. —Any trial by a 
Security Force Court under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)  and the Security  Force Court 27 
 shall be deemed to be a court within the meaning of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).  
CHAPTER VIII  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
107. Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed .—No finding or sentence of a General 
Security Force Court or a Petty Security Fo rce Court shall be valid except  so far as it may be confir med as 
provided by this Act.  
108. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Security Force Court .—The findings and 
sentences of Genera l Security Force Courts may be confirmed by the Central Government or by any 
officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Central Government.  
109. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Security Force Court .—The findings and 
sentences of Pett y Security Force Courts may be confirmed by an officer having power to convene a 
General Security Force Court or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of such officer.  
110. Limitation of powers of confirming authority .—A warrant issued under s ection 108 or section 
109 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it may think fit.  
111. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences. —Subject to such 
restrictions, reservations or conditi ons, as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 108 or 
section 109, a confirming authority may, when confirming the sentence of a Security Force Court, 
mitigate or remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that punishment for any punish ment or 
punishments lower in the scale laid down in section 48.  
112. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship. —When any person subject to this Act 
is tried and sentenced by a Security Force Court while on board a ship, the finding and sentence so far as 
not confirmed and executed on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such 
person had been tried at the port of disembarkation.  
113. Revision of finding o r sentenc e.—(1) Any finding or sentence of a Security Force Court  which 
requires confirmation may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the 
court, if so directed by the confirming authority,  may take additional evidence.  
(2) The court, on revision, shall consist of the same officers as were present when the original 
decision was passed, unless any of those o fficers are unavoidably absent.  
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the proceedings, 
and the court shall proceed with the revision,  provided that, if a General Security Force Court, it still 
consists of five officers, or, if a Petty Security Force Court, of three officers.  
114. Finding and sentence of a Summary Security Force Court. —(1) Save as otherwise provided 
in sub -section ( 2), the finding and sentence of a Summary Security Force Court shall not require to be 
confirmed, bu t may be carried out forthwith.  
(2) If the officer holding the trial is of the rank of Superintendent of Police or of a rank declared under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 5) of section 74 as equivalent thereto or of a lower rank and has held such rank 
for less than five years, he shall not, except on active duty, carry into effect any sentence, until it has 
received the approval of an officer not belo w the rank of De puty Inspector -General.  
115. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Security Force Courts .—The proceedings of every 
Summary Security Force Court shall, without delay, be forwarded to the officer not below the rank of 
Deputy Inspector -General within whose c ommand the trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and such 
officer, or the Director -General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf may, for reasons based on 
the merits of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedin gs, or reduce the 
sentence to any other sentence which the court might have passed.  
116. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases .—(1) Where a finding of guilty by a Security 
Force Court, which has been confirmed or which does not require confirm ation, is found for any reason to 
be invalid or cannot be supported by the evidence, the authority which would have had power under 28 
 section 128 to commute the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid may 
substitute a new finding an d pass a sentence for the offence specified or involved in such finding:  
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such finding could have been validly made by 
the Security Force Court on the charge and unless it appears that the Security Fo rce Court must have been 
satisfied of the facts  establishing the said offence.  
(2) Where a sentence passed by a Security Force Court which has been confirmed, or which does not 
require confirmation, not being a sentence passed in pursuance of a new finding  substituted under             
sub-section ( 1), is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority referred to in sub -section  (1) may pass 
a valid sentence.  
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed u nder sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not 
be higher in the scale of punishments than, or in excess of, the punishment awarded by, the sentence for 
which a new sentence is s ubstituted under this section.  
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed, under this section shall, for the purp oses of this 
Act and the rules, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of a Security Force 
Court.  
117. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of Security Force Court. —(1) Any person subject 
to this Act who considers himself  aggrieved by any order passed by any Security Force Court may present 
a petition to the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such Security Force 
Court, and the confirming authority may take such steps as may be considered n ecessary to satisfy itself 
as to the correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceed ing to 
which the order relates.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of  any 
Security Force Court which has been confirmed, may present a petition to the Central Government, the 
Director -General, or any prescribed officer superior in command to the one who confirmed such finding 
or sentence, and the Central Government, the Dir ector -General, or the prescribed o fficer, as the case may 
be, may  pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.  
118. Annulment of proceedings. —The Central Government, the Director -General, or any prescribed 
officer may annul the proceedings of any Securi ty Force Court on the ground that they are illegal or 
unjust.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
EXECUTION OF SEN TENCE, PARDONS, REMISSIONS, ETC . 
119. Form of sentence of death. —In awarding a sentence of death, a Security Force Court shall, in 
its discretion direct that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or 
shall suffer death by being shot to death.  
120. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment .—Whenever any person is sentenced by a 
Security Force Court under this Act to imprisonment , the term of his sentence shall, whether it has been 
revised or not, be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original proceedings were signed by the 
presiding officer, or in the case of a Summary Securit y Force Court, by the court.  
121. Execution of sentence of imprisonment .—(1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is 
passed under this Act by a Security Force Court or whenever any sentence of death is commuted to 
imprisonment, the confirming officer or in case of a Summary Security Force Court the  officer holding 
the court or such other officer as may be prescribed shall, save as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 3) 
and ( 4) direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a civil p rison.  
(2) When a di rection has been made under sub -section ( 1) the Commandant of the person under 
sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form to the 
officer in charge of the prison in which such person is to be confined and shall arrange for his despa tch to 
such prison with the warrant.  29 
 (3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months and passed 
under this Act by a Security Force Court, the appropriate officer under sub -section ( 1) may direct that the 
sentence shall  be carried out by confinement in Force custod y instead of in a civil prison.  
(4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in such place as 
the Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the person sentenced is servin g or any prescribed 
officer, may from time to time appoint.  
1[(121A ) Period of custody undergone by a person to be set off against the                  
imprisonment. —When any person subject to this Act is sentenced by a Security Force Court to a term of 
imprisonment, not being an imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period spend by him in civil 
or Force custody during investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case, and before the date of order  of 
such sentence, shall be set off against the te rm o f imprisonment imposed upon him , and the liability of 
such person to undergo imprisonment on such order of sentence shall be restricted to the remainder, if 
any, of the term of imprisonment imposed upon him. ] 
122. Temporary custody of offender. —Where a  sentence of imprisonment is directed to be 
undergone in a civil prison the offender may be kept in Force custody or in any other fit place, till such 
time as it is possible to send him to a civil prison.  
123. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in speci al cases .—Whenever, in the opinion of an 
officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial is held, any 
sentence or portion of a sentence of imprisonment cannot for special reasons, conveniently be carried out 
in Force c ustody in accordance with the provisions of section 121, such officer may direct that such 
sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil prison or other fit place.  
124. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place .—A person under sentence of imprisonment may 
during his conveyance from place to place, or when on board ship, aircraft  or otherwise, be  subjected to 
such restraint as is necessary  for h is safe conduct and removal.  
125. Communication of certain orders to pr ison officers .—Whenever an order is duly made under 
this Act setting aside or varying any sentence, order or warrant under which any person is confined in a 
civil prison, a warrant in accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or 
his staff officer or such other person as may be prescribed, to the officer in charge of the prison in which 
such person is confined.  
126. Execution of sentence of fine. —When a sentence of fine is imposed by a Security Force Court 
under section 46 , a copy of such sentence signed and certified by the confirming officer, or where no 
confirmation is required, by the officer holding the trial may be sent to any magistrate in India, and such 
magistrate shall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in a ccordance with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), as if it were a sentence of fine imposed by such magistrate.  
127. Informality or error in the order or warrant .—Whenever any person is sentenced to 
imprisonment under this A ct, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in which he might be 
confined under a lawful order or warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement of such person shall 
not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of informality or error in, or  as respects, the order, warrant or 
other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was brought into, or, is 
confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant or document may be amended accordingly.  
128. Pardon and remi ssion .—When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by a Security 
Force Court of any offence, the Central Government or the Director -General or, in the case of a sentence, 
which he could have confirmed or which did not require confirmation, an of ficer not belo w the rank of 
Deputy Inspector -General within whose command such person at the time of conviction was serving, or 
the prescribed officer may, — 
(a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, pardon the person or 
remit the whole or any par t of the punishment awarded; or  
(b) mit igate the punishment awarded; o r 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  30 
 (c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or pun ishments mentioned in this Act;  
(d) either  with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, r elease the person on 
parole.  
129. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole or remission .—(1) If any condition on 
which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a puni shment has been remitted is, in the 
opinion of the authority which gr anted the pardon, release or re mission, not fulfilled, such authority may 
cancel the pardon, release or remission, and thereupon the sentence of the court shall be carried into effect 
as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted.  
(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into effect under the provisions of                  
sub-section (1) shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence.  
130. Suspension  of sentence of imprisonment .—(1) Where a person subject to this Act is sentenced 
by a Security Force Court to imprisonment, the Central Government, the Director -General or any officer 
empowered to convene a General Security Force Court may suspend the sen tence whether or not the 
offender has already been committed  to prison or to Force custody.  
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may, in the case of an offender so sentenced 
direct that until the orders of such authority or officer hav e been obtained, the offender shall not be 
committed  to prison or to Force custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) may be exercised in the case of any such 
sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.  
131. Orders pending suspension .—(1) Where the sentence referred to in section 130 is imposed by a 
Security Force Court other than a Summary Security Force Court, the confirming officer may, when 
confirming the sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or t o Force custody until the 
orders of the authority or officer specified in s ection 130, have been obtained.  
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a Summary Security Force Court, the officer 
holding the trial or the officer authorised to approve  of the sentence under sub -section ( 2) of section 114 
may make the direction referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
132. Release on suspension .—Where a sentence is suspended under section 130, the offender shall 
forthwith be released from custody.  
133. Computatio n of period of suspension .—Any period during which the sentence is under 
suspension shall be reckoned as part o f the term of such sentence.  
134. Order after suspension .—The authority or officer specified in section 130 may, at any time 
while  a sentence is  suspended, order — 
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the unexpi red portion of the sentence; or  
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
135. Reconsideration of case after suspension .—(1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case 
may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than four months, be reconsidered by the authority or 
officer specified in section 130, or by any officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector -General duly 
authorised by the authority or of ficer specified in section 1 30. 
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so authorised it appears to him that the conduct of 
offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of the sentence, he shall refer the 
matter to the authority or officer specified in section 130.  
136. Fresh sentence after suspension .—Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is  sentenc ed for any other offence, the n— 
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentences shall run 
concurrently;  31 
 (b) if the further sentence is for a period of three months or more and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall also be committed to prison or Fo rce custody for the unexpired portion of the 
previous sentence, but both senten ces shall run concurrently; and  
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less than three months and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so committed on that sentence only, and the previous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 134 or section 135 continue to be suspended.  
137. Scope of power of suspension .—The powers conferred by sections 130 and 134 shall be                 
in addition to, and not in derogation of, the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  
138. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal .—(1) Where in addition to any other sentence 
the punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a Security For ce Court, and such other sentence is 
suspended under section 130, then, such dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the authority or 
officer specified in section 130.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 134, the punishment of dismissal shall  also be 
remitted.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
139. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette direct that, subject to such 
conditions and limitations, and within the local limits of such area adjoining the borders of India, as may 
be specified in the orde r, any member of the Force may, — 
(i) for the purpose of prevention of any offence punishable under the Passport (Entry into India) 
Act, 1920 (34 of 1920), the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 (16 of 1939), the Central Excises 
and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), the F oreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946 ), the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1947 (7 of 1947), the Customs Act, 1962 (5 2 of 1962), or the Passports Act, 1967   
(15 of 1967), or of any cognizable offence punishable under any other Central Act; or  
(ii) for the purpose of appre hending any person who has com mitted any offence referred to in 
clause ( i),  
exercise or discharge su ch of the powers or duties under that Act or any other Central Act as may be 
specified in the said order, being the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
an officer of the corresponding or lower rank is by that or such other Ac t empowered to exercise or 
discharge for the said purposes.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, confer 
or impose, with the concurrence of the State Government concerned, any of the powers or duties which 
may be exercised or discharged under a State Act by a p olice officer upon a member of the Force who, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, holds a corresponding or higher rank.  
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while i t is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or 1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses ag ree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulme nt shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
140. Protection for acts of members of the Force. —(1) In any suit or proceeding against any 
member of the Force for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant o r order of a competent authority, 
it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under the auth ority of such warrant or 
order.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words  (w.e.f.  15-5-1986).  32 
 (2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant or order directing the act, and if it 
is so p roved the member of the Force shall thereupon be discharged from liability in respect of the act so 
done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the authority whic h issued such warrant or 
order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in a ny other law for the time being in force, any legal 
proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any member of the Force 
for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or in pursuance of, any provisi on 
of this Act or the rules, shall be commenced within three months after the act complained of was 
committed and not otherwise, and notice in writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall be 
given to the defendant or his superior officer at le ast one month before the commencement of such 
proceeding.  
141. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into eff ect the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to t he generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may 
provide for, — 
(a) the constitution, governance, comma nd and discipline of the Force;  
(b) the enrolment of persons to the Force and the recruitment  of other members of the Force;  
(c) the conditions of ser vice (including deductions from pay and allow ances) of members of the 
Force;  
(d) the rank, precedence, powers of command and authority of the officers, subordinate officers, 
under -officers and oth er persons subject to this Act;  
(e) the removal, retirement release or discharge from the service  of persons subject to this Act ;  
(f) the purposes and other matters required to be prescribed under section 13;  
(g) the convening, constitution, adjournment, dissolution and sittings of Security Force Courts, 
the procedure to be ob served in trials by such courts  the persons by whom an accuse d may be 
defended in such trial  and the appearance of such persons thereat;  
(h) the confirmation, revision and annulment of, and petitions against, the findings and sentences 
of Security Force Courts;  
(i) the 1[forms of orders] to be made under the provisions of this Act relating to Security Force 
Courts and the awards and infliction of dea th, imprisonment and detention;  
(j) the carrying into effect of sentences of Security Force  Courts;  
(k) any matter necessary for the purpose of carrying this Act into execution, as far as it relates to 
the investigation, arrest, custody, trial and punishment of offences triabl e or punishable under this 
Act; 
(l) the ceremonials to be observed and  marks of r espect to be paid in the Force;  
(m) the convening of, the constitution, procedure and practice of, courts of inquiry, the 
summoning of witnesses before them and the administ ration of oaths by such Courts;  
(n) the recruitment and conditions of service of the Chief La w Officer and the Law Officers;  
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed or in respect of which this Act makes no 
provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in the opin ion of the Central Government, 
necessary for the pro per implementation of this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty da ys which may be comprised in one session 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1988, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “forms or orders” (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  33 
 or 1[in two more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyt hing previously done under that rule.  
142. Provisions as to existing Border Security Force .—(1) The Border Security Force in existence 
at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Fo rce constituted under this Act.  
(2) Members of the Border Sec urity Force in existence at the commencement of this Act shall be 
deemed to have been appointed or as the case may be, e nrolled as such under this Act.  
(3) Anything done or any action taken before the commencement of this Act in relation to the 
constitutio n of the Border Security Force referred to in sub -section  (1), in relation to any person appointed 
or enrolled, as the case may be, thereto, shall be as valid and as effective in law as if such thing or action 
was done or taken under this Act:  
Provided tha t nothing in this sub -section shall render any person guilty of any offence in respect of 
anything done or omitted to be done by him before the commencement of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 50 OF 1968  
[2nd December , 1968.]  
1[An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for the 
better protection and security of industrial undertakings owned by the  Central Government, 
certain other industrial undertakings, employees of all such undertakings and to provide 
technical consultancy services to industrial establishments in the private sector and for 
matters connected therewith.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Central Indus trial 
Security Force Act, 1968.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
3[(a) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of the Force appointed under section 4;  
(aa) “enrolled member of the Force ” means any subordinate officer, under office r or any other 
member of the Force of a rank lower  than that of an under officer;  
(ab) “Force ” means the Central In dustrial Security For ce constituted under section 3;  
(ac) “Force custody ” means the arrest or confinement of a member of the Force in accordance 
with ru les made under this Act;]  
(b) “industrial undertaking ” means any undertaking pertaining to a scheduled i ndustry and 
includes an undertaking engaged in any other industry, or in any trade, business or service which may 
be regulated by Parliament by law;  
(c) “industrial undertaking in public sector ” means an industrial undertaking own ed, controlled or 
managed by— 
(i) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956),  
(ii) a corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, which is 
controlle d or managed by the Government;  
4[(ca) “industrial establishment ” means an industrial undertaking or a company as defined under 
section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or a firm registered under section 59 of the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) , which is engaged in any industry, or in any trade, busi ness or 
service ;] 
5[(cb) “joint venture ” means a venture jointly undertaken by the Central Government or State 
Government with private  industrial  undertaking;]  
6*    *    *    *   * 
(e) “Managing Director ”, in relation to an industrial undertaking, means the person (whether 
called a managing agent, general manager, manager, chief executive officer or by any other name) 
who exercises control over the affairs of that undertaking;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 40 of 1999, s. 2, for long title (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
2. 10th March, 1969, vide notification No. S.O. 924 , dated 3rd March, 1969, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
3. Subs. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 3, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
4. Ins. by Act 40 of 1999, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
5. Ins. by Act 22 of 2009, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
6. Clause ( d) omitted by Act 14 of 1983, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  2 
 (f) “member s of the Force ” means a person appointed to the Force under this A ct 1***; 
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
2[„(ga) “private industrial undertaking ” means an industry owned, controlled or managed by a 
person other than the Central or State Government or any industrial undertaking in public sector; ‟] 
(h) “scheduled industry ” means any industry engaged in the manufacture or production of the 
articles me ntioned in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 
(65 of  1951);  
3[„(ha) “subordinate officer ” means a person appointed to the Force as an Inspector, a Sub -
Inspector or an Assistant Sub -Inspector; ‟;] 
(i) “supervisory  officer ” means any of the officers appointed under section 4 and includes any 
other officer appointed by the Central Government as a su pervisory officer of the Force.  
3[„(j) “under officer ” means a person appointed to the Force as a Head Constable, Naik o r Lance 
Naik. ‟] 
4[(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.]  
3. Constitution of the Force .—(1) There shall be constituted and maintai ned by the Central 
Government 5[an armed force of the Union] to be called the Central Industrial Security Force for the 
better protection and security of industrial underta kings owned by that Government  6[, joint venture or 
privat e industrial undertaking ] 7[and to perform such other duties as may be entrusted to it by the  
Central Government] . 
(2) The Force shall be constituted in such manner, sh all consist of such number of 8[supervisory 
officers, subordinate officers, under officers and other enrolled members] of the Force who shall receive 
such pay and other remuneration as may be prescribed.  
4. Appointment and powers of supervisory officers .—9[(1) The Central Government may appoint a 
a person to be the Director -General of the  Force and such other supervisory officers as considered 
necessary.]  
(2) The 10[Director -General] and every other supervisory officer so appointed shall have, and may 
exercise, such powers and authority as is provided by or under this Act.  
5. Appointment of  enrolled members of the Force .—The11[appointment of the enrolled members of 
the Force shall rest with the Director -General] who shall exercise that power in accordance with rules 
made under this Act:  
Provided that the power of appointment under this sectio n may also be exercised by such other 
supervisory officer as the Central Government may by order specify in this behalf.  
6. Certificates of en rolled members of the Force .—12[(1) Every enrolled member of the Force shall 
receive on his appointment a certificate in the form specified in the Schedule, under the seal of the 
Director -General or such other supervisory officer as the Director -General may specify in this behalf, by 
virtue of which the person holding such certificate shall be vested with the powers of an  enrolled member 
of the Force.]  
(2) Such certificate shall cease to have effect whenever the person named in it ceases fo r any reason 
to be 13[an enrolled member] of the Force.  
                                                           
1. The words “, other than a supervisory officer” omitted by  Act 14 of 1983, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 2009, s. 2 (w. e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
3. Ins. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “a Force” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
6. Ins. by Act 22 of 2009, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
7. Ins. by Act 40 of 1999, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
8. Subs. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 4, for “supervisory officers and members” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
9. Subs. by Act 22 of 2009, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
10. Subs. by  Act 14 of 1983, s. 5, for “Inspect or-General” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
11. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
12. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
13. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “a member” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  3 
 7. Superintendence a nd administration of the Force .—1[(1) The superintendence of Force shall 
vest in the Central Government, and subject thereto and to the provisions of this Act and of any rules 
made thereunder, the command, supervision and administration of the Force shall  vest in the Director -
General.]  
(2) Subject  to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the administration of the Force within such local 
limits as may be prescribed shall be carried  on by 2[such other supervisory officers as considered 
necessary ] in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder and every 
supervisory officer placed in charge of the protection and security of an industrial undertaking  3[, joint 
venture or private industrial undertaking]  shall, subject to any direct ions that may be given by the 
4[Central Government or the Director -General] in this behalf, discharge his functions under the general 
supervision, direction and control of the Managing Director of that undertaking.  
8. Dismissal, removal,  etc., of members of the Force .—Subject to the provisions o f article 311 of 
the Constitution and to such rules as the Central Government may make under this Act , any supervisory 
officer may — 
(i) dismiss, 5[remove]  6[, order for compulsory retirement of]  or reduce in rank any 7[enrolled 
member ]  of the Force whom he thinks remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, or unfit for 
the same; or  
(ii) award any one or more of the following punishments to any 7[enrolled member] of the Force 
who discharges his duty in a careless or negligent manner, or who by a ny act of his own renders 
himself unfit for t he discharge thereof, namely: — 
(a) fine to any amount not exceeding seven days ‟ pay or reduction in pay scale;  
(b) drill, extr a guard, fatigue or other duty;  
(c) removal from any office of distinction or depri vation of any special emolument;  
6[(d) withholding of increment of pay with or without cumulative effect;  
(e) withholding of promotion;  
(f) censure.]  
9. Appeal and revision .—(1) Any 7[enrolled member] of the Force aggrieved by an order made 
under section 8 may, within thirty days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer 
an appeal against the order to such authority as may be prescribed, and 8[subject to the provis ions of  
sub-section ( 2A), sub -section ( 2B) and sub -section ( 3)], the decision of the said authorit y thereon shall be 
final:  
Provided that the prescribed authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days, if it is satisf ied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
time. 
(2) In disposing of an appeal, the prescribed authority shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed.  
9[(2A) Any enrolled member of the Force aggrieved by an o rder passed in appeal under  
sub-section ( 1) may, within a period of six months from the date on which the order is communicated to 
him, prefer a revision petition against the order to such authority as may be prescribed and in disposing of 
the revision pe tition, the said authority shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 1983. s. 8,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
2. Subs. by  Act 22 of 2009, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 10-1-2009 ). 
3. Ins. by  s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
4. Subs. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 8, for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of  1989, s. 3, for “suspend” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1989).  
6. Ins. by Act 40 of 1999, s. 5 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
7. Subs. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 13 and the Schedule, for “member” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
8. Subs. by Act 40 of 1999, s. 6, for  “subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3)”(w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
9. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  4 
 (2B) The authority, as may be prescri bed for the purpose of this sub -section, on a revision petition 
preferred by an aggrieved enrolled member of the Force or suo moto , may call for, within a prescribed 
period, the records of any pr oceeding under section 8 or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A) and such 
authority may, after making inquiry in the prescribed manner, and subject to the provisions of this Act, 
pass such order thereon as it thinks fit.]  
(3) The Central Government may call for and examine the record of any proceeding 1[under section 8 ,  
8,  sub-section ( 2), sub -section ( 2A) or sub -section ( 2B)] of this section and may make such inquiry or 
cause such inquiry to be made and subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass such order thereon as it 
thinks fit:  
Provided that no order imposing  an enhanced penalty under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) shall be 
made unless a reasonable opportunity of being heard has been given to the person affected by such order.  
10. Duties of members of the Force .—It shall be the duty of e very 2*** member of the Force — 
(a) promptly  to obey and execute all orders lawfully issued to him by his s uperior authority;  
(b) to protect and safeguard the industrial undertakings owned by the Central Government 
together with such other installations as are specified by that Government to be vital for the carrying 
on of work in those undertakings, situate within the lo cal limits of his jurisdiction:  
Provided that before any installation not owned or controlled by the Central Government is so 
specified, the Central Government shall obtain the c onsent of the Government of the state in which 
such installation is  situate;  
(c) to protect and safeguard 3[any joint venture, private industrial undertaking and] such other 
industrial undertakings and installations for the protection and security of which  he is deputed under 
section 14 ;  
4[(d) to protect and safeguard the employees of the industrial undertakings and installations 
referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c);  
(e) to do any other act conducive to the better protection and security of the industrial 
undertakings and installations referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) and the employees referred to in 
clause ( d).] 
5[(f) to provide technical consultancy services relating to security of any private sector industrial 
establishments under section  14A;  
(g) to protect and safeguard the organisations owned or funded by the Government and the 
employees of such organisations as may be entrusted to  him by the Central Government;  
(h) any other  duty 3[within and outside India] which may be entrusted to  him by the Central 
Government from time to time.]  
11. P ower to arrest without warrant .—6[(1) Any member of the Force may, without any order from 
from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest — 
7[(i) any person who voluntarily causes hurt to, or attempts voluntarily to cause hurt to, or 
wrongfully restrains or attempts wrongfully to restrain or assaults, threatens to assault, or uses, or 
threatens or attempts to use, criminal force to any  employee, referred to in clause ( d) of section 10, or 
to him or any other member of the Force, in discharge of his duty as such employee or in execution of 
his duty as such member, as the case may be, or with intent to prevent or to deter him from 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 1999, s. 6, for “under section 8 or under sub -section ( 2)” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
2. The words “supervisory officer and” omitte d by Act 14 of 1983, s. 13 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2009, s. 6 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
4. Subs. by Act 20 of 1989, s. 4, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 18 -5-1989).  
5. Ins. by Act 40 of 1999, s. 7 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
6. Subs. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 9, for sub-section  (1) (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
7. Subs . by Act 20 of 1989, s. 5, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 18 -5-1989).  5 
 dischar ging his duty as such member, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by 
him in the lawful discharge of  his duty as such member;]  
(ii) any person who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable suspicion exists of his 
having been  concerned in, or who is found taking precautions to conceal his presence under 
circumstances which afford  reason to believe that he is taking such precaut ions with a view to 
committing , a cognizable offence which relates to property belonging to, or in th e premises of, any 
industrial undertaking referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 10, or relates to the other 
installations, or to property in the premises of the other installations , referred to in those clauses;  
(iii) any person who commits or atte mpts to commit a cognizable offence which involves or 
which is likely to involve 1*** danger to the life of any person engaged in carrying on any work 
relating to any undertaking or installations referred to in clau ses (b) and ( c) of section 10.]  
(2) If any person is found trespassing on the premises of any industrial undertaking referred to in 
clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 10, he may, without prejudice to any other proceedings which may be taken 
against him, he removed  from such premises by any 2*** mem ber of the Force.  
12. P ower to search without warrant .—(1) Whenever 3*** any member of the Force, not below the 
the prescribed rank, has reason to believe that any such offence as is referred to in section 11 has been or 
is being committed and that a search warrant cannot be obtained without affording the offender an 
opportunity of escaping or of concealing evidence of the offence, he may detain the offender and search 
his person and belongings forthwith and, if he thinks proper, arrest any person whom he has  reason to 
believe  to have committed the offence.  
(2) The provisions of the 4[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ] relating to searches under 
that Code shall, so far as may be, apply to searches under this section.  
13. Procedu re to be followed after arrest .—Any 5*** member of the Force making an arrest under 
this Act, shall, without unnecessary delay, make over the person so arrested to a police officer, or, in the 
absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be taken to the nearest police station to gether 
with a report of the circumstances occasioning the arrest.  
14. Deputation of the Force to industrial  undertakings in public sector  6[, joint venture or 
private sector] .—(1) Subject to any general directions which may be issued by the Central Governmen t, 
it shall be lawful for the 7[Director -General], on a request r eceived in this behalf from the  
Managing Director concerned of an industrial undertaking in public sector  6[, joint venture or private 
sector] , showing the necessity thereo f, to depu te such number of 8*** members of the Force as the 
7[Director -General] may consider necessary for the protection and security of that industrial undertaking 
and any installation s attached thereto and the 9*** members of the Force so deputed shall be at the  charge 
charge of the Managing Director:  
Provided that in the case of an undertaking, owned, controlled or managed, — 
(i) by a Government company of which the Central Governm ent is not a member;  
(ii) by a corporation established by or under a Provincial or State Act,  
no such request shall be entertained unless it is made with the consent of the Government of the State in 
which the undertaking is situate.  
(2) If the 7[Director -General] is of the opinion that circumstances neces sitating the deputation of the 
9*** members of the Force in relation to an industrial undertaking under sub -section ( 1) have ceased to 
exist, or for any other reason it is necessary so to do, he may, after informing the Managing Dir ector of 
that indust rial undertaking, withdraw the 9*** m embers of the Force so deputed:  
                                                           
1. The word “imminent” omitted by Act 20 of 1989, s. 5 ( w.e.f. 18 -5-1989).  
2.  The words “supervisory officer or” omitted by Act 14 of 1983, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
3. The words “any supervisory officer, or” omitted by s. 13 and The Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
4. Subs. by s. 13 and the Schedule, ibid., for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
5. The words “supervisory officer or” omitted by s. 13 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
6. Ins. by Act 22 of 2009, s. 7  (w.e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
7. Subs. by  Act 14 of 1983, s. 13  and the Schedule, for “Inspector -General” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
8. The words “supervisory officers and” omitted by s. 13 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
9. The words “officers and” omitted by s. 13 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  6 
 Provided that the Managing Director may, on giving 1[three  months ‟ notice] in writing to the 
2[Director -General] require that the 3*** members of the Force so deputed shall be withdrawn, and the 
Managing Director shall be relieved from the charge from the date of expiration of such notice or from 
any earlier date on w hich the Force is so withdrawn.  
(3) Every 4*** member of the Force, while discharging his functions during the period of deputation, 
shall continue to exercise the same powers and be subject to the same responsibilities, discipline and 
penalties as would have been applicable to him under this Act, if he had been discharging those functions 
in relation to  an industrial undertaking owned by the Central Government.  
5[14A. Technical Consultancy Service to industrial establishments .—(1) Subject to any general 
directions which may be issued by the Central Government, it shall be lawful for the Director -General,  on 
a request received from the Managing Director of an industrial establishment in the private sector or any 
other person author ised by hi m in this behalf, to direct the members of the Force to provide technical 
consultancy services relating to security, to such industrial establishments in such manner and on payment 
of such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) The fee received und er sub -section ( 1) shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “Managing Director ”, in relation to an 
industrial establishment, means the person (whether called general manager, manager, chief executive 
officer or a partner of a firm or by any other name) who exercises control over the affairs of the 
establishment.]  
15. Officers and members of the Force to be considered always on duty and liable to  be 
employed anywhere in India .—(1) Every 6*** member of the Force shall, for the purpose of this Act, be 
be considered to be always on duty, and shall, at any time, be liable to be empl oyed at any place within  
7[or outside]  India.  
(2) Save  as provided in section 14, no 8*** member of the force shall engage himself in any 
employment or office other than his duties under this Act.  
9[15A. Restrictions respecting right to form as sociation, etc .—(1) No member of the Force shall, 
without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or  of the prescribed authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour  union, political 
association or with any class of trade unions, labour u nions or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any other society, institution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of  the Force or is not of a purely social, recrea tinonal or 
religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document except where such communication or publication is in the bona fide  discharg e of his duties 
or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific characte r or is of a prescribed nature.  
Explanation .—If any question arises as to whether any society, institution, association or 
organisation is of a purely social, recreational or religi ous nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section 
the decision of the Central Gov ernment thereon shall be final.  
(2) No member of the Force shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any  
demonstration organised by any body o r persons for an y political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be prescribed.]  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 22 of 2009, s. 7, for “one month‟s notice”  (w.e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
2. Subs. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 13 and the Schedule, for “Inspector -General” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
3. The words “officers and” omitted by s. 13 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-6-1983).  
4. The words “officer and” omitted by s. 13 and the Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
5. Ins. by Act 40 of 1999, s. 8 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
6. The words “supervisory officer and” omitted by Act 14 of 1983, s. 13 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15-6-1983).  
7. Ins. by Act 22 of 2009, s. 8 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2009).  
8. The words “supervisory officer or” omitted by  Act 14 of 1983, s. 13 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
9. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  7 
 16. Responsibilities of members of the Force during suspension .—A member of the Force shall 
not by reason of his suspension from office cease to be a member of the Force; and he shall, during that 
period, be subject to the same responsibilities, discipline and penalties to which he would have been 
subject if he were on duty.  
17. Surrender of certificate, arms, etc., by persons ceas ing to be members of the Force .—(1) 
Every person wh o for any reason ceases to be 1[an enrolled member] of the Force, shall forthwith 
surrender to any supervisory officer empowered to receive the same, his certificate of appointment, the 
arms, accoutrements, clothing and other articles which have been furnished to him for  the performance of 
duties as 1[an enrolled member] of the Force.  
(2) Any person who wilfully neglects or refuses to surrender his certificate of appointment or the 
arms, accoutrements, clothing and other articles furnished to him, as required by  sub-section ( 1), shall, on 
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which 
may extend to tw o hundred rupees, or with both.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any article w hich, un der the orders of the 
2[Director -General], has become the property of the person to whom the same was furnished.  
18. Pena lties for neglect of duty, etc .—3[(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 
section 8, every member of the Force who shall be guilty of any violation of duty or wilful breach or 
neglect of any rule or regulation or lawful order made by a supervisory officer, or who shall withdraw 
from the duties of his office without permission, or who, being absent on leave, fa ils, without reasonable 
cause, to report himself for duty on the expiration of the leave, or who engages himself without authority 
in any employment other than his duty as a member of the Force, or who shall be guilty of cowardice, 
may be taken into Force custody and shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a ter m 
which may extend to one year.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an 
offence punishable under this section shall be cognizabl e and non -bailable.  
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
Central Government may invest the Commandant with the powers of a Magistrate of any class for the 
purpose of inquiring into or trying any o ffence committed by an enrolled member of the Force and 
punishable under this Act, or any offence committed by an enrolled member of the Force against the 
person or property of another member of the Force:  
Provided that — 
(i) when the offender is o n leave or absent from duty; or  
(ii) when the offence is not connected with the offender ‟s duties as an enrolled m ember of the 
Force; or  
(iii) when it is a petty offence even if connected with the offender ‟s duties as an e nrolled member 
of the Force; or  
(iv) when , for reasons to be recorded in writing, it is not practicable for the Commandant invested 
with the powers of a Magistrate to inquire into or try an offence,  
the offence may, if the prescribed authority within the limits of whose jurisdiction the offence has been 
committed so requires, be inquired into or tried by an ordinary criminal court having jurisdiction in the 
matter.]  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent any member of the Force from 
being prosecuted under any other la w for any offence made punishable by that law, or for being liable 
under any such la w to any other or higher penalty or punishment than is provided for such offence by this 
section:  
Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 13 and the Schedule, for “a member” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 13 and the Schedule, ibid., for “Inspector -General” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 11,  ibid., for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  8 
 19. Application of Act 22 of 1922 to off icers and members of the Force .—The Police ( Incitement  
to Disaffect ion) Act, 1922, shall apply to 1*** members of the Force as it applies to members of a police 
force.  
20. Certain Acts not to  apply to members of the Force .—Nothing contained in the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936), or the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or the Factories Act, 
1948 (63 of 1948), or any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement o f industrial disputes 
in force in a State shall apply to members of the Force.  
21. Protection of acts of of ficers and members of the Force .—(1) In any suit or proceeding against 
any 2*** member of the Force for any act done by him in the discharge of his duties, it shall be lawful for 
him to plead that such act was done by him under the o rders of a competent authority.  
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the order directing the act, and if i t is so 
proved, the 2*** member of the Force shal l thereupon be discharged from any liability in respect of the 
act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the aut hority which issued such 
order.  
(3) Nothwithstanding  anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any legal 
proceeding, whether civil or criminal, which may lawfully be brought against any 2*** member of the 
Force for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or  in pursuance of, any 
provision of this Act or the rules thereunder shall be commenced within three months after the act 
complained of shall have b een committed and not otherwise ; and notice in writing of such proceeding and 
of the cause thereof shall be given to the person concerned and his supervisory officer at least one month 
before the commencement of such proceeding.  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
make rules for carrying out the purpo ses of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power s, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) regulating the classes, ranks, g rades, pay an y remuneration of 3*** members of the Force and 
their con ditions of service in  the Force;  
(b) regulating the powers and duties of 3*** members of the Force authorised to exercise any 
functions by or under this Act;  
(c) fixing the period of service  for 3*** members of the Force;  
(d) prescribing the description and quantity of arms, a ccoutrements , clothing and other necessary 
articles to be furnish ed to the members of the Force;  
(e) prescribing the places of res idence of members of the Force;  
(f) institution, management and regulation of any fund for any purpose connected with the 
admi nistration of t he Force;  
(g) regulating the punishments and prescribing authorities to whom appeals shall be preferred 
from orders of punishment, or remission of fines or other punishments, and the procedure to be 
followed f or the disposal of such appeals;  
4[(gg) regulating matters with respect to Force custody under this Act including the procedure to 
be followed for ta king persons into such custody;  
(ggg) regulating matters with respect to disposal of cases relating to offences under this Act and 
specifyi ng the places in which persons convicted under this Act may be confined ;] 
5[(gggg ) prescribing authority under  sub-section ( 2A) of section  9 and the procedure to be 
followed by such authority in disposing of the revision petition;  
                                                           
1. The words “supervisory officers and” omitte d by Act 14 of 1983, s. 13 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
2. The words “supervisory officer or” omitted by s. 13 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
3. The words “supervisory officers and” omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
4. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
5. Ins. by Act 40 of 1999, s. 9 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  9 
 (ggggg ) prescribing authority under  sub-section ( 2B) of section  9, the period within which such 
authority may call for the records and the manner in which such authority may make inquiry;]  
(h) the terms and conditions subject to which 1*** members of the Force may be deputed under 
section 14 and the charges therefor; 2*** 
3[(hh) the manner in which and the fee on payment of which the technical consultancy 
services  shall be provided under  sub-section ( 1) of section  14A; and]  
(i) any other matter which has  to be, or may be, prescribed 4[or in respect of which rules are 
required to be made under this Act .] 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total  period of thirty days, which ma y be comprised in one 
session 5[or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive session aforesaid,] both Houses agree in making any modifica tion 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be ; so however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudic e to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 6)  
A.B. has been ap pointed 6[an enrolled member] of the Central Industrial Security Force under the 
Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968, and is vested with the  powers , functions and privileges of 
6[an enrolled member] of the Force.  
                                                           
1. The words “supervisory officers and” omitted by Act 14 of 1983, s. 12 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
2. The word “and” omitted by Act 40 of 1999, s. 9 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999). 
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
4. Ins. by Act 14 of 1983, s. 12 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
5. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
6. Subs. by s. 13 and the Schedule, ibid., for “ a member” (w.e.f. 15 -6-1983).  
--------------------------The Central Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL LAWS (EXTENSION TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR)  
ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1968  
[24th May, 1968 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of certain Central Laws to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Central Laws (Extension to 
Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Extension and amendment of certain laws .—(1) The Acts mentioned in the Schedule and all 
rules, or ders and regulations made there under are hereby extended to, and shall be in force in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  
(2) With ef fect from the commencement of this Act, the Acts mentioned in the Schedule shall be 
amended as specified therein.  
3. Construction of references to laws not in force in Jammu and Kashmir .—Any reference in any 
Act mentioned in the Schedule to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in 
relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.  
4. Construction of references to authorities where new Authorities have been constituted .—Any 
reference by whatever form of words in any law for the time being in force in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir to any authority competent at the date of the passing of that law to exercise any powers or 
discharge any functions in that State shall, where  a corresponding new authority has been constituted by 
or under any law now extended to that State, have effect as if it were a reference to the new authority.  
5. Repeals and savings .—If immediately before the commencement of this Act there is in force in 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir any law corresponding to any Act now extended to that State, that law 
shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, stand repealed on such com mencement : 
Provided that the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything du ly done or suffered thereunder,  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any law so 
repealed,  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respec t of any offence committed against 
any law so repealed, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfei ture or punishment as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal p roceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if this Act had not been passed : 
Provided further that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or any action taken (inc luding 
any appointment or delegation made, notification, instruction or direction issued, form, bye -law or 
scheme framed, certificate obtained, permit or licence granted or registration effected) under any such law 
shall be deemed to have been done or take n under the corresponding provisions of the Act now extended 
to that State, and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done 
or any action taken under the said Act.  
  
                                                           
1. 15th August, 1968, vide notification No . G.S.R. 1482, dated 2nd July, 1968, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,      
sec. 3(i). 2 
 6. Power s to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
any Act now extended to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Central Government may, by order 
notified in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions as appear to it nec essary for 
the removal of the difficulty.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, any such notified 
order may, — 
(a) specify the corresponding authorities within the meaning of section 4,  
(b) provide for transfer o f any matter pending immediately before the commencement of this Act 
before any court, tribunal or other authority, to any corresponding court, tribunal or other authority 
for disposal , 
(c) specify the areas or circumstances in which, or the extent to whic h, or the conditions subject 
to which, anything done or any action taken (including any of the matters specified in the second 
proviso to section 5) under any law repealed by that section shall be recognised or given effect to 
under the corresponding provi sion of the Act now extended.  
___________  
  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
ACTS  
THE OFFICIAL  TRUSTEES  ACT, 1913  
(2 OF 1913)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
THE MOTOR  VEHICLES  ACT, 1939  
(4 OF 1939)  
Section  1.—In sub-section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
Section  2.—Omit clause ( 9A). 
Section  9.—Omit sub -sections ( 2) and ( 4).  
Section  28.—Omit sub -section s (2), (3), (4) and ( 5).  
Section  29.—In sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) in clause ( a) omit “or”;  
(b) Omit clause ( b). 
Section  38.—For sub-section ( 4), substitute — 
“(4) A certificate of fitness issued under this Act shall, while it remains effective, be valid throughout 
India.”.  
Section  42.—In sub -section ( 3), omit clause ( h). 
Section  63.—Omit In sub-section ( 5). 
Section  96.—(a) In sub -section ( 2A), omit “ in the State of Jammu and Kashmir or ” and in the proviso, 
omit “of the State of Jammu and Kashmir or”;  
(b) In sub -section ( 6), omit “ of the State of Jammu and Kashmir  or”. 
The Sixth Schedule. —In the first and second colum ns, after “West Bengal” and the entry relating 
thereto in the second column, insert “Jammu and Kashmir” and “J & K” respectively.  3 
 THE CHARTERED  ACCOUNTANTS  ACT, 1949  
(38 OF 1949)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
THE TRANSFER  OF PRISONERS  ACT, 1950  
(29 OF 1950)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
THE ROAD TRANSPORT  CORPORATIONS  ACT, 1950  
(64 OF 1950)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “the State  of Jammu and Kashmir  and”. 
THE MINES ACT, 1952  
(35 OF 1952)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
THE NOTARIES ACT, 1952  
(53 OF 1952)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
Section  2.—(a) Omit clause ( a); 
(b) In the proviso to clause ( d)— 
(i) for “either under ”, substitute “under ”; 
(ii) omit “or by the Master of Faculties in England ”; 
(iii) for “any part of India ”, substitute — 
“any part of India:  
Provided further that in rela tion to the state of Jammu and Kashmir the said period of two 
years shall be computed from the date on which this Act comes into force in that State;”.  
Section  9.—In sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“Provided that in relation to the state of Jammu and Kashmir the said period of two years shall be 
computed from the date on which this Act comes into force in that State .”. 
THE ESSENTIAL  COMMODITIES  ACT, 1955  
(10 OF 1955)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
THE COMPANIES  ACT, 1956  
(1 OF 1956)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 3),— 
(a) omit first proviso;  
(b) in the second proviso, omit “further”.  
Section  3.—In sub -clause ( f) (2) of clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), insert at the end “in so far as 
banking, insurance and financial corporations are concerned, and before the commencement of the 
Central Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968 in so far as other corporations are 
concerned”.  
  4 
 After section 620 B, insert — 
“Special provision  as to companies in Jammu and Kashmir .” 
620C. Special provision as to companies in Jammu and Kashmir. —The Central Government may 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that with effect from the commencement of the Central Laws 
(Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968  or any subsequent date, any of the provisions of this Act 
specified in the notification shall not apply, or shall apply only with such exceptions and modifications or 
adaptations as may be specified in the notification, to — 
(a) any  existing company in the State of Jammu and Kashmir;  
(b) any company registered in that State under this Act after the commencement of the Central 
Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1968.”.  
THE COST AND WORKS  ACCOUNTANTS  ACT, 1959  
(23 OF 1959)  
Section 1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
THE APPRENTICES  ACT, 1961  
(52 OF 1961)  
Section  1.—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
THE ADMINISTRATORS -GENERAL  ACT, 1963  
(45 OF 1963) 
Section  1.—In sub-section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
Section  20.—(a) In sub -section ( 1), for “the territories to which this Act extends” substitute “India”;  
(b) after sub -section ( 2), insert — 
“(3) Any probate or letters of administration granted by the High Court for the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir before the commencement of the Central Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir)      
Act, 1968 shall, after such commencement, be as effective as if such p robate or letters of 
administration has been granted under this section.”.  
Omit section 21.  
Section  37.—(a) In clause ( a), for “to which this Act extends”, substitute “in India”;  
(b) Omit “or in the State of Jammu and Kashmir”.  
Section  56.—For “the territories to which this Act extends” and for “the said territories”, substitute 
“India”.  
--------------------------The Civil Defence Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE CIVIL DEFENCE ACT, 1968  
  ______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
POWER OF CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT TO MAKE RULES FOR CIVIL DEFENCE  
3. Power to make rules for civil defence . 
CHAPTER III  
CIVIL DEFENCE  CORPS  
4. Constitution of Civil Defence Corps . 
5. Appointment of members and officers .  
6. Dismissal of members of Civil Defence Corps . 
7. Appeal . 
8. Functions of members of Civil Defence Corps . 
9. Power to make regulations . 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
10. Provisions of the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act to apply to injuries sustained by 
the members of the Corps . 
11. Penalties . 
12. Effect of Act and rules, etc., inconsistent with other enactments . 
13. Ordinary avocations of life to be interfer ed with as little as possible . 
14. Savings as to orders . 
15. Act not to apply to measures taken for the protection of the Armed Forces . 
16. Limitation of prosecutions . 
16A. Power of the Central Government to delegate . 
16B. Effect of order made by the Central Governmen t, etc . 
17. Power to delegate . 
18. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
19. Authorised persons and members of the Corps to be public servants . 
20. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
 
  2 
 THE CIVIL DEFENCE ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1968  
[24th May , 1968.]  
An Act to make provision for civil defence and for matters conne cted therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Civil Defence Act, 1968.  
(2) It extends1 to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State or part thereof on such date2, not being a date earlier than the 
date of the expiry of the Defence of India Act, 1962 (51 o f 1962), as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States or different parts thereof.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “civil defence ” includes any measures, not amounting to actual combat, for affording 
protection to any person, property, place or thing in India or any part of the territory thereof against 
any hostile attack, whether from air, land, sea or other places, or, for deprivin g any such attack  
of the whole or part of its effect, whether such measures are taken before, during, at or after the time 
of such atta ck3[or any measure taken for the purpose of disaster management, before, during, at, or 
after any disaster] ; 
(b) “Civil D efence Corps ” means the Corps formed wholly or mainly to meet the needs of civil 
defence and includes an organisation deemed to be a Corps under the proviso t o sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(c) “hostile attack ” means any attack by any person or body of persons, whether during any war, 
external aggression, internal disturbance or otherwise which endangers the security of any life, 
property, place or thing in India or any  part of the territory thereof;  
(d) “notifi cation ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “personal service injury ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Personal Injuries (Emergency 
Prov isions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962);  
(f) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, m eans the Admini strator of the Union 
territory;  
1[(g) “disaster ” means a disaster as defined in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Disaster Management 
Act, 2005(53 of 2005);  
(h) “disaster management ” means the disaster management as defined in clause ( e) of section 2 of 
the Disaster Management Act, 2005(53 of 2005).]  
CHAPTER II  
POWER OF CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT TO MAKE RULES FOR CIVIL DEFENCE  
3. Power t o make rules for civil defence .—(1) The Central Government may, for securing civil 
defence, by notification, make rules providing for all or any of the following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) preventing the prosecution of any work lik ely to prejudice civil defence;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 1975, vide notification  No. S.O.478(E), dated 8th September, 1975, extended and brought into force in the State of 
Sikkim.  
2. 10th July, 1968, vide notification No. S.O.2435 (E), dated 5th July, 1968, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , Part II,  
sec. 3 ( ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 2010,  s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -1-2010).  3 
 (b) instruction of members of the public regarding civil defence and their equipment fo r the 
purposes of such de fence;  
(c) provision, storage and maintenance of commodities and thi ngs required for civil defence;  
(d) prohibiting or regulating traffic, and the use of vessels, buoys, lights and signals in ports and 
territ orial, tidal and inland waters;  
(e) control of l ights and sounds;  
(f) protection of life and property by taking fire  prevention and other measures;  
(g) securing of any buildings, premises or other structures from being readily recognisable in  the 
event of a hostile attack;  
(h) for the prevention of danger to life or property, the demolition, destruction or rendering 
useless, of any building, premises or other st ructures or any other property;  
(i) prohibiting or regulating the possession, use or disposal of — 
(i) explosives, inflammable substances, cor rosive and other dangerous substances or articles, 
arms  and ammunition;  
(ii) vessels;  
(iii) wireless telegraphic apparatus;  
(iv) aircraft; and  
(v) photographic and signalling apparatus and any me ans of recording information;  
(j) evacuation  of areas and the removal of  property or animals therefrom;  
(k) accommodation in any area of persons evacuated from another area and the regulation of the 
conduct of evacuated per sons accommodated in such area;  
(l) billeting of evacuated person or persons authorised to pe rform functions under this Act;  
(m) salvage of damaged buildings, structures and pro perty and disposal of the dead;  
(n) seizure and custody or destruction of injured, unclaimed or dangerous anima ls; 
(o) ensuring the safety of — 
(i) ports, do ckyards, lighthouses, lightships, aerodromes and facilities associated  with aerial 
navigation;  
(ii) railways, tramways, roads, bridges, canals and all other means  of transport by land or 
water;  
(iii) telegraphs, post offices, signalling apparatus and al l other means of communication;  
(iv) sources and systems of water supply, works for the supply of water, gas or electricity and 
all other works for public purposes;  
(v) vessels, aircraft, transport vehicles as defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939  
(4 of 19 39), and rolling s tocks of railways and tramways;  
(vi) warehouses and all other places used or intended t o be used for storage purposes;  
(vii) mines, oilfields, factories or industrial or commercial undertakings generally, or any 
mine, oilfield, factory or  industrial or commer cial undertaking in particular;  
(viii) laboratories and institutions where scientific or technological research or tra ining is 
conducted or imparted;  
(ix) all works and structures being part of, or connected with, anything earlie r mentioned in 
this clause; and  4 
 (x) any other place or thing used or intended to be used for the purposes of Government or a 
local authority or a semi -Government or autonomous organisation, the protection of which is 
considered necessary or expedien t for sec uring civil defence;  
(p) control of any road or pathway, waterway, ferry or bridge, river, canal o r other source of 
water supply;  
(q) precautionary measures, which the Government or any department thereof or any local 
authority, members of police force, f ire brigade and members of any other service or authority 
employed primarily for purposes other than civil defence purposes should be required to take within 
their respective jurisdictions or with respect to any personnel employed by them;  
(r) preventing o r controlling any use of uniforms, whether official or otherwise, or flags or 
official decorations like medals, badges or other insignia or anything similar thereto, the wearing of 
which is calculated to deceive  or to prejudice civil defence;  
(s) precautio ns to be taken or action to be taken by persons or authorities with a view to 
protecting or acquainting the general public or any members thereof against the dangers involved in 
any apprehended hostile attack;  
(t) requiring the owner or occupier of any bui lding, structure or premises to make or carry out 
such arrangements as may be necessary for the purposes of de tection and prevention of fire;  
(u) taking of specified measures for dealing with outbreaks of fire;  
(v) directing that, subject to any specified exemption, no person present in any specified area 
shall, between such hours as may be specified, be out of doors except under the authority of a written 
permit granted by a  specified authority or person;  
(w) (i) prohibiting the printing and publication of  any newspaper, news -sheet, book or other 
document containing matters prej udicial to civil defence;  
(ii) demanding security from any press used for the purpose of printing or publishing, and 
forfeiting the copies of, any newspaper, news -sheet, book or other document containing any of the 
matters  referred to in sub -clause ( i); 
(x) regulating the conduct of persons in respect of areas the control of which is considered 
necessary or expedient, and remo val of persons from such areas;  
(y) requiring any perso n or class of persons to comply wi th any scheme of civil defence;  
(z) any other provision which may be necessary for t he purposes of civil defence.  
(2) Any rule made under sub -section ( 1) may provide that orders with regard to the matters specified 
therein  may b e made by the State Government.  
1(3) Any rule made under sub -section ( 1) may provide that a contravention thereof or any order made  
thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and where the 
contravention is a con tinuing one, with a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day, after 
the first, during which such contravention continues.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 42 of 1971, s. 6 (during emergency and six months thereafter)  (w.e.f.3 -12-1971).  
“(3) Any rule made under sub -section ( 1) may provide that a contravention thereof or any order made  or direction 
given  thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three yea rs, or with fine, or 
with both. ”. 
 5 
 CHAPTER III  
CIVIL DEFENCE  CORPS  
4. Const itution of Civil Defence Corps .—(1) The State Government may constitute, for any area 
within the State, a body of persons to be called the Civil Defence Corps (hereinafter referred to as the 
“Corps ”) and may appoint a person, not being, in its opinion, below the rank of a District Magistra te (to 
be known as the “Controller ”) to command such Corps:  
Provided that if there is in existence in any area in a State, immediately before the commencement of 
this Act in that area, an organisation which, in the opinion of the State Government, may be e ntrusted 
with the functions of the Corps, the State Government may, instead of constituting a separate Corps for 
such area, call upon that organisation to take over or discharge the functions of the Corps in that area, and 
thereupon such organisation shall  be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to be the Corps for that area.  
(2) The State Government may, for the purpose of co -ordinating the activities of the Controllers 
within the State, appoint a Director of Civil Defence  and every Controller shall comply with the 
directions given by such Director.  
5. Appoi ntment of members and officers .—(1) The State Government may appoint as members of 
the Corps persons who are fit and willing to serve as such and the Controller may appo int any member so 
appointed to such office or command in the Corps, as such member is, in the opinion of the Controller, fit 
to hold.  
(2) Every person appointed to be a member of the Corps shall be given a certificate of membership in 
such form as may be p rescribed.  
6. Dismissal of members of Civil Defence Corps .—(1) Where any member of the Corps fails or has 
failed, in the opinion of the Controller, to discharge his duties as such member satisfactorily or is or has 
been found guilty of any misconduct in the discharge of his duties as such member, the Controller may, 
after an inquiry in which such member of the Corps has been given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in respect of the charges against him, by an order, dismiss such member from the Cor ps. 
(2) Where the Controller is of opinion that the continued presence of any member of the Corps is 
undesirable, he may, without assigning any reason, summarily dismiss such member from the Corps.  
7. Appeal .—A member of the Corps who is dismissed from the Corps under section 6 may prefer an 
appeal to the State Government within thirty days from the date of such dismissal and that Government 
may, on such appeal, confirm, modify or reverse the order made by the Controller or other authority.  
8. Functions of members of Civil Defence Corps .—(1) The members of the Corps shall perform 
such functions in relation to the carrying out of measures for civil defence as may be assigned to them by 
rules made under this Act or by any other l aw for the time being in force.  
(2) The State Government or the Controller may, by order, call out a member of the Corps for training 
or for discharging such functions in relation to the carrying out of measures for civil defence as may be 
specified in such order.  
(3) Subject to such or ders as the Central Government may make in this behalf, any member of the 
Corps of any State may at any time be required, by order, to discharge functions in relation to civil 
defence in any other State and shall while discharging such functions, be deemed  to be a member of the 
Corps of that other State and be vested with the powers, functions and privileges and be subject to the 
liabilities of a member of the Corps in that other State.  
9. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Central Government may, by notif ication, make regulations 
for carrying ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer such regulat ions 
may— 
(a) prescribe  the functions of the members of the Corps and regulate the manner in which they  
may be called out for service;  6 
 (b) regulate the organisation, appointment, conditions of service, discipline, accoutrement and 
clothing of members of an y or all of the Corps;  
(c) prescribe the form of certificates of members hip of any or all of the Corps.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
10. Provisions of the Personal Injuries (Emergency Provisions) Act to apply to injuries 
sustain ed by the members of the Corps .—The provisions of the P ersonal Injuries (Emergency 
Provisions) Act, 1962 (59 of 1962), and of every scheme made thereunder shall apply, so far as may be, 
to every personal service injury sustained by any person appointed to be a member of the Corps as they 
apply to personal serv ice injury sustained by a civil defence volunteer, su bject to the modifications that — 
(a) any reference to a civil defence volunteer under that Act or any scheme made thereunder shall 
be construed as referenc e to a member of the Corps; and  
(b) any  reference therein to the period of emergency shall, in relation to a member of the Corps, 
be construed as the period dur ing which this Act is in force.  
11. Penalties .—(1) If any member of the Corps on being called out by an order under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8 neglects or refuses without sufficient excuse to obey such order or to discharge his functions 
as such member or to obey any lawful order or direction given to him for the performance of his 
functions, he shall be punishable with fine which may e xtend to five hundred rupees, and where such 
neglect or refusal is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day, 
after the first, during whic h such contravention continues.  
1(2) If any person neglects or fails  withou t any reasonable excuse to obey any order made or direction 
given to him under this act or rules made thereunder, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, and where such negligence or failure is a continuing one, with a fur ther fine which 
may extend to fifty rupees for every day, after the first, during which such negligence or failure continues.  
12. Effect of Act and rules, etc., inco nsistent with other enactments .—(1) The provision s of this 
Act or any rules thereunder or any order made under this Act or any such rule shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any  enactment other than this Act.  
(2) Every app ointment, order or rule made in relation to civil defence before the commencement of 
this Act by or under any law relating to civil defence shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, continue to be in force until it is resc inded or altered under this Act, and be deemed 
to have been made under the corres ponding provisions of this Act.  
Explanation .—“Commencement of this Act ”, in relation to any provision or area, means the 
commencement of that provision or, as the case may be, the commencement of this Act in that area.  
13. Ordinary avocations of life to be interfe red with as little as possible .—Any authority or 
person acting  in pursuance of this Act shall interfere with the ordinary avocations of life and the 
enjoyment of property as little as may be consonant with the purpose of ensuring the p ublic safety and 
civil defence.  
14. Savings as to orders .—(1) No order made in exercise of any power conferred by or under this 
Act shall be c alled in question in any court.  
(2) Where an order purports to have been made and signed by any authority in exercise of any power 
conferred by or under this Act, a court shall, within the mean ing of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  
(1 of 1872), presume that such order was so made by that authority.  
15. Act not to apply to measures taken for the protection of the Armed Forces .—Nothing 
contained in this Act or any rule, regulation or order made th ereunder shall apply to the Armed Forces of 
                                                           
1. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by Act 42 of 1971, s. 6 (during emergency and six months thereafter) and  restored thereafter  
(w.e.f. 3-12-1971 ). 7 
 the Union or to any measures taken by any of the authorities in control of the Armed Forces of the Union 
for the purpose of securing civil defence or safety of such forces or for the protection of any naval, 
military or air force installations or stores.  
16. Limitation of prosecutions .—No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be 
instituted against any person except by, or with the consent of, the Controller or any person authorised by  
the Controller in this behalf.  
1[16A.  Power of the Central Government to delegate .—The Central Government may, by order, 
direct that any power or duty, which by this Act or any rule made thereunder is conferred or imposed 
upon the Central Government  shall , in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in the direction, be exercised or discharged also by any officer or authority subordinate to the 
Central Government.  
16B. Effect of order made by the Central Government, etc .—Any order made by the Central 
Government or the officer or authority authori sed by it under section 16A in relation to a matter to which 
this Act or any rule made thereunder relates shall have effect, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
order made by the State Government or any other authority with regard to such matter. ] 
17. Power to delegate .—The State Government may , by notification, direct that — 
(a) all or any of the powers which may be exercised by it under this Act shall, in such 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in that notification, be exercised 
also by such officer, not being, in the opinion of the State Government, inferior in rank to that of a 
District Magistrate, as may be spec ified in the said notificati on; 
(b) all or any of the powers which may be exercised by the Controller under this Act shall, in such 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in that notification, be exercised 
also by such officer, not being, in the opinion of the State Government, inferior in rank to that of a 
Sub- Divisional Magistrate, as may be specifi ed in the said notification.  
18. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Governm ent, the Director or the Controller or any person, authorised by the 
Government or the Controller, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act or any rules or orders made thereunder or any ord ers issued under any such rul e. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the Director or the Controller 
or any person, authorised by the Government or the Controller, for any damage caused or likely to be 
caused by anything which is in good faith done or  intended to be done under this Act or any rule made 
thereunder or any or der issued under any such rule.  
19. Authorised persons and members of t he Corps to be public servants .—Any person authorised 
by1[the Central Government] the Controller or the State Government under this Act and every member of 
the Corps, while functioning as such, shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 
21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
20. Rules and regulation s to be l aid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made by 
the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be com prised in one session 
or 2[in two  or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, the 
rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment sh all be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 42 of 1971, s. 6 (during emergency and six months thereafter)  (w.e.f. 3 -12-1971 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
--------------------------The Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control (Nasirabad Cantonment Repeal) Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
  THE DELHI AND AJMER RENT CONTROL (NASIRABAD CANTONMENT REPEAL)  
ACT, 1968  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Repeal of Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 , in its application to the Cantonment of 
Nasirabad.  
3. Saving.  
  2 
  THE DELHI AND AJMER RENT CONTROL  (NASIRABAD  CANTONMENT REPEAL)  
ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1968  
 [30th November , 1968]  
An Act to repeal the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 as in force in the Cantonment 
of  Nasirabad.  
Be it enacted by Parliament in the  Nineteenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control (Nasirabad 
Cantonment Repeal) Act, 1968.  
2. Repeal of Delhi a nd Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 , in its application to th e Cantonment 
of Nasirabad .—The Delhi a nd Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 (38 of 1952) as in force in the 
Cantonment of Nasirabad , shall stand repealed on the date on which the Rajasthan Premises (Control 
of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950  (Rajasthan Act XVII of 1950)  is extended to that cantonment by 
notification under section 3 of the Cantonment (Extension of Rent Control Laws)                               
Act, 1957  (46 of 1957) . 
3. Saving .—The repeal of the Delhi an d Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952 (38 of 1952) , under 
section 2 shall  not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of the said Act or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired accrued or incurred under the said     
Act; or  
(c) any  penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
the said Act; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid , 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and 
any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the said Act had not                     
been repealed.  
 
--------------------------The Enemy Property Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE ENEMY PROPERTY ACT, 1968  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Appointment of Custodian of Enemy Property for India and Deputy Custodian, etc.  
4. Appointment of Inspectors of Enemy Property.  
5. Property vested in the Custodian of Enemy Property for India under the Defence of India    
Rules, 1962 and the Defence of India Rules, 1971  to continue to vest in Custodian.  
6. Transfer of property vested in Custodian by enemy on enemy subject or enemy firm.  
7. Payment to Custodian of money otherwise payable to an enemy, enemy subject or enemy firm.  
8. Power of Custodian in respect of enemy property vested in him.  
8A. Sale of Property by Custodian.  
9. Exemption from attach ment, etc . 
10. Transfer of securities belonging to an enemy . 
10A. Power to issue certificate of sale.  
11. Power s of Custodian to summon persons and call for documents.  
12. Protection for complying with orders of Custodian . 
13. Validity of action taken in pursuance of orders of Custodian.  
14. Proceedings against companies whose assets vest in Custodian.  
15. Return s as to enemy property.  
16. Registers of returns.  
17. Levy of fees.  
18. Divesting of enemy property vested in the Custodian . 
18A. Income not liable to be returned.  
  18B. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts . 
  18C. Appeal to High Court.  
       19. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
20. Penalty.   
21. Offences by companies.        
22. Effect of laws inc onsistent with the Act.  
22A. Validation.  
23. Power to make rules.  
24. Certain orders made under the Defence of India Rules , 1962  and the Defence of India Rules, 
1971  to continue in force.  
25. Repeal and saving.  2 
 THE ENEMY PROPERTY ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1968  
[20th August , 1968.]  
An Act to provide for the continued vesting of enemy property vested in the Custodian of 
Enemy Property for India under the Defence of India Rules, 1962  1[and the Defence  of 
India Rules, 1971], and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Enemy 
Property Act, 1968.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and it applies also to 
all citizens of India outside India and to branches and agencies outside India of companies or bodies 
corporate registered or incorporated in India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 10th day of July, 1968.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “Custodian ” means the Custodian of Enemy Property for India appointed or deemed to 
have been appointed un der section 3 and includes a Deputy Custodian and an Assistant Custodian 
of Enemy Property appointed or deemed to have been appointed under that section;  
(b) “enemy ” or “enemy subject ” or “enemy firm ” means a person or country who or which 
was an enemy, 2[an enemy subject including his legal heir and successor whether or not a citizen 
of India or the citizen of a country which is not an enemy or the enemy, enemy subject or his legal 
heir and successor who has changed his nationality] or 3[an enemy firm, including its succeeding 
firm whether or not partners or members of such succeeding firm are citizen of India or the citizen 
of a country which is not an enemy or such firm which has changed its nationality] , as the case 
may be, under the Defence of India Act, 1962 (51 of 1962), and the Defence of India Rules, 1962 
4[or the Defence of India   Act, 1971 ( 42 of 1971) and the Defence of India Rules, 1971], but  
5[does not include a citizen of India other than those citizens of India, being the legal heir and 
successor of the "enemy" or "enemy subject" or "enemy firm”].  
6[Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression "does not include a citizen 
of India" shall exclude and shall always be deemed to have been excluded those citizens of India, 
who are or have been the legal heir and successor of an "enemy" or an "enemy subject" or an 
"enemy firm" which or who has ceased to be an enemy due to death, extinction, winding up of 
business or change of nationality or that the legal heir and successor is a citizen of India or the 
citizen of a country which is not an enemy.  
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified that nothing contained 
in this Act shall affect any right of the legal heir and successor referred to in this clause  (not being 
inconsistent to the provisions of this Act) which have been conferred upon him under any other 
law for the time being in force; ] 
(c) “enemy property ” means any property for the time being belonging to or held or managed 
on behalf of an enemy, an enemy subject or an e nemy firm :  
Provided that where an individual enemy subject dies in the territories to which this Act  
extends,  6[or dies in any territory outside India ], any property which immediately before his death, 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1977, s.  2 (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 2017, s.  2 “for enemy subject” (w.e.f. 10-7-1968) . 
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 10 -7-1968).  
4. Ins. by  Act 40 of 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  
5. Subs. by Act 3 of 2017, s.  2, for certain words  (w.e.f. 10-7-1968) . 
6. Ins. by s.  2, for ibid. (w.e.f. 10-7-1968) . 3 
 belonged to or was held by him or was managed on his behalf, may, notwithstanding his death, 
continue to be regarded as enemy proper ty for the purposes of this Act ; 
1[Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified that "enemy property" 
shall, notwithstanding that the enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy firm has ceased to be an 
enemy due to death, extinction, winding up of business or change of nationality o r that the legal 
heir and successor is a citizen of India or the citizen of a country which is not an enemy, continue 
and always be deemed to be continued as an enemy property.  
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression "enemy property " shall mean 
and include and shall be deemed to have always meant and included all rights, titles and interest 
in, or any benefit  arising out of, such property;]  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Appointment of Custodian of  Enemy Property for I ndia and Deputy C ustodian, etc. —The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Custod ian of Enemy 
Property for India  and one or more Deputy Custodians and Assistant Custodians or Enemy Property 
for such local areas as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that the Custod ian of Enemy Property for India  and any Deputy Custodian or Assistant 
Custodian of Enemy Property appointed under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 2[or the Defence  of 
India Rules, 1971, as the case may be], shall be deemed to have been appointed under this section.  
4. Appointment o f Inspectors of Enemy Property.—The Central Government may, either 
generally or for any particular area, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint one or more 
Inspectors of Enemy Property for securing compliance with the provisions of this Act and may, by 
general or special order, provide for the distribution and allocation of the work to be performed by 
them for securing such compli ance:  
Provided that every Inspector of Enemy Firms appointed under th e Defence of India Rules, 1962 
3[or the Defence of India Rules, 1971, as the case may be], shall be deemed to be an Inspector of 
Enemy Property appointed under this section.  
5. Property vested in the Custodian of Enemy  Property for India under the Defence of India 
Rules, 1962, and the Defence of India Rules, 1971 to continue to vest in Custodian. —4[(1)] 
Notwithstanding the expiration of the Defence  of India Act, 1962 (51 of 1962), and the Defence of 
India Rules, 1962, all enemy property vested before such expiration in the Custodian of Enemy 
Property for India appointed under the said Rules and continuing to vest in him immediately before 
the commen cement of this Act, shall, as from such commen cement, vest in the Custodian.  
5[(2) Notwithstanding the expiration of t he Defence of India Act, 1971 (4 2 of 1971) and the 
Defence of India Rules, 1971, all enemy property vested before such expiration in the C ustodian of 
Enemy Property for India appointed under t he said Rules and continuing to vest in him immediately 
before the commencement of the Enemy  Property,  (Amendment)  Act, 1977 (40 of 1977) shall, as 
from such commencement, vest in the Custodian.]  
6[(3) The enemy property vested in the Custodian shall, notwithstanding that the enemy or the 
enemy subject or the enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to death, extinction, winding up of 
business or change of nationality or that the legal heir and successor  is a citizen of India or the citizen 
of a country which is not an enemy, continue to remain, save as otherwise provided in this Act, vested 
in the Custodian.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, "enemy property vested in the Custodian" 
shall  include and shall always be deemed to have been included all rights, titles, and interest in, or any 
benefit arising out of, such propert y vested in him under this Act.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-7-1968 ). 
2. Ins. by  Act 40 of 1977,  s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  
4. Section  5 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  
5. Ins. by  s. 6, for ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  
6. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10-7-1968 ).  4 
 1[5A. Issue of certificate by Custodian . —The Custodian may, after making such inquir y as he 
deems necessary, by order, declare that the property of the enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy 
firm described in the order, vests in him under this Act and issue a certificate to this effect and such 
certificate shall be the eviden ce of the fa cts stated therein.]  
2[5B. Law of succession or any custom or usage not to apply to enemy property. —Nothing 
contained in any law for the time being in force relating to succession or any custom or usage 
governing succession of property shall apply in relation to the enemy property under this Act and no 
person (including his legal heir and successor) shal l have any right and shall be deemed not to have 
any right (including all rights, titles and interests or any benefit arising out of such property) in 
relation to such enemy property.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expressions "custom"  and "usage" signify any 
rule which, having been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained the force 
of law in the matt ers of succession of property.]  
3[6. Prohibition to transfer any property vested in Custodian by an enemy, enemy subject or 
enemy firm. —(1) No enemy or enemy subject or enemy firm shall have any right and shall never be 
deemed to have any right to transfer any property vested in the Custodian under this Act, whether 
before or after the commencement of this Act and an y transfer of such property shall be void and shall 
always be deemed to have been void.  
(2) Where any property vested in the Custodian under this Act had been transferred, before the 
commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2017,  by an enemy or 
enemy subject or enemy firm and such transfer has been declared, by an order, made by the Central 
Government, to be void, and the property had been vested or deemed to have been vested in the 
Custodian [by virtue of the said order made unde r section 6, as it stood before its substitution by 
section 6 of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2017] such property shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority, co ntinue to vest or be deemed to have been vested in the Custodian and no person 
(including an enemy or enemy subject or enemy firm) shall have any right or deemed to have any 
right (including all rights, titles and interests or any benefit arising out of su ch property) over the said 
property vested or deemed to have been vested in the Custodian.]  
7. Payment to Custodian of money otherwise payable to an enem y, enemy subject or enemy 
firm.—(1) Any sum payable by way of dividend, interest, share profits or otherwise to or for the 
benefit of an enemy or an enemy subject or an enemy firm shall, unless otherwise ordered by the 
Central Government, be paid by the person by whom such sum would have been payable but for the 
prohibition under th e Defence of India Ru les, 1962 4[or the Defence of India Rules, 1971, as the case 
may be], to the Custodian or such person as may be authorised by him in this behalf and shall be held 
by the Custodian or such person subject to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In cases in which  money would, but for the prohibition under the Defence of India                    
Rules, 196 2 4[or the Defence of India Rules, 1971, as the case may be], be payable in a foreign 
currency to or for the benefit of an enemy or an enemy subject or an enemy f irm (other than cases in 
which money is payable under a contract in which provision is made for specified rate of exchange), 
the payment shall be made to the Custodian in rupee currency at the middle official rate of exchange 
fixed by the Reserve Bank of I ndia on the date on which the payment became due to that enemy, 
enemy subject or enemy firm.  
(3) The Custodian shall, subject to the provisions of section 8, deal with any money paid to him 
under the Defence of India Rules, 1962  4[or the Defence of India Rules, 1971, as the case may be] or 
under this Act and any property vested in him under this Act in such manner as the Central 
Government may direct.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017, s.  4 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016 ). 
2. Ins. by  s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 10-7-1968 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for section 6 (w.e.f. 10 -7-1968).  
4.  Ins. by Act 40 of 1977, s. 7  (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  5 
 8. Power of Custodian in respect of enemy property vested in him. — 1[(1) With respect to the 
property vested in the Custodian under this Act, the Custodian may take or authorise the taking of 
such measures as he considers necessary or expedient for preserving such property till it is disposed of 
in accordance with the provisi ons of this Act.]   
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Custodian or such person as 
may be specifically authorised by him in this beha lf, may , for the said purpose, — 
(i) carry on the business of the enemy;  
2[(ia) fix and collect the rent, standard rent, lease rent, licence fee or usage charges, as the case 
may be , in respect of enemy property;]  
(ii) take action for recovering any money due to the enemy;  
(iii) make any contract and execute any document in the name and on behalf of the enemy ;  
(iv) institute, defend or continue any suit or other legal proceeding, refer any dispute to 
arbitration and compromise any debts, claims or liabilities;  
2[(iva) secure vacant possession of the enemy property by evicting the unauthorised or illegal 
occupant or trespasser and remove unauthorised or  illegal constructions, if any ]. 
(v) raise on the security of the property such loans as may be necessary;  
(vi) incur out of the property any expenditure including the payment of any  taxes, duties, 
cesses and rates to Government or to any local authority and of any wages, salaries, pensions, 
provident fund contributions to, or in respect of, any employee of the enemy and the repayment of 
any debts due by the enemy to persons other tha n enemies;  
(vii) transfer by way of sale, mortgage or lease or otherwise dispose of any of the properties;  
(viii) invest any moneys held by him on behalf of enemies for the purchase of Treasury Bills 
or such other Government securities as may be approved  by the Central Government for the 
purpose;  
(ix) make payments to the enemy and his dependents;  
(x) make payments on behalf of the enemy to persons other than those who are enemies, of 
dues outstan ding on the 25th October, 1962 3[or on the 3rd December, 1971]; and  
(xi) make such other payments out of the funds of the enemy as may be directed by the 
Central Government.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section and in sections 10 and 17, “enemy ” includes an enemy 
subject and an enemy firm.  
4[8A. Sale of property by Custodian. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority or any law for the time being in 
force, the Custodian may, within such time as may be specified by the Central Government in this 
behalf, dispos e of whether by sale or otherwise, as the case may be, with prior approval of the 
Central Government, by general or special order, enemy properties vested in him immediately 
before the date of commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) A ct, 2017 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment 
and Validation) Act, 2017.  
(2) The Custodian may, for the purpose of disposal of enemy property under sub -section ( 1), 
make requisition of the services of any police officer to assist him and it shall be the duty of such 
officer to comply with such requisition.  
(3) The Custodian shall, on disposal of enemy property under sub -section ( 1) immediately 
deposit the sale proceeds into the Consolidated Fund of Indi a and intimate details thereof to the 
Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2017, s. 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 10-7-1968 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f.  10-7-1968 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 40 of 1977, s. 8 (w.e.f. 29-7-1977).  
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017, s. 8 (w.e.f. 7-1-2016 ). 6 
  (4) The Custodian shall send a report to the Central Government at such intervals, as it may 
specify, for the enemy properties disposed of under sub -section ( 1), containing such details, 
(including the price for which such property has been sold and the particulars of the buyer to 
whom the properties have been sold or disposed of and the details of the proceeds of sale or 
disposal deposited into the Consolidated  Fund of India) as it may specify.  
(5) The Central Government may, by general or special order, issue such directions to the 
Custodian on the matters relating to disposal of enemy property under sub -section ( 1) and such 
directions shall be binding upon th e Custodian and the buyer of the enemy properties referred to 
in that sub -section and other persons connected to such sale or disposal.  
 (6) The Central Government may, by general or special order, make such guidelines for 
disposal of enemy property under sub-section ( 1). 
 (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Central Government may direct 
that disposal of enemy property under sub -section ( 1) shall be made by any other authority or 
Ministry or Department instead of Custodian and in tha t case all the provisions of this section 
shall apply to such authority or Ministry or Department in respect of disposal of enemy property 
under sub -section ( 1).  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 7), the Central Government 
may deal with or utilise the enemy property in s uch manner as it may deem fit.]  
9. Exemption from attachment, etc. —All enemy property vested in the Custodian under this 
Act shall be exempt from attachment, seizure or sale in execution of decree of a civil court or orders 
of any other authority.  
10. Transfer of securities belonging to an enemy. —(1) Where, in exercise of the powers 
conferred by section 8, the Custodian proposes to sell any security issued by a company and 
belonging to an enemy, the company ma y, with the consent of the Custodian, purchase the securities, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any law or in any regulations of the company and any 
securities so purchased may be re -issued by the company as and when it thinks fit so to do.  
(2) Where the Custodian executes and transfers any securities issued by a company, the company 
shall, on receipt of the transfer and an order in this behalf from the Custodian, register the securities in 
the name of the transferee, notwithstanding that the re gulations of the company do not permit such 
registration in the absence of the certificate, script or other evidence of title relating to the securities 
transferred:  
Provided that any such registration shall be without prejudice to any lien or charge in f avour of 
the company and to any other lien or charge of which the Custodian gives  express notice to the 
company.  
Explanation .—In this section, “securities ” includes shares, stocks, bonds, debentures and 
debenture stock but does not include bills of exchan ge. 
1[10A. Powe r to issue certificate of sale. —(1) Where the Custodian proposes to sell any enemy 
immovable property vested in him, to any person, he may on receipt of the sale proceeds of such 
property, issue a certificate of sale in favour  of such person and such certificate of sale shall, 
notwithstanding the fact that the original title deeds of the property have not been handed over to the 
transferee, be valid and conclusive proof of ownership of such property by such person.  
(2) Notwith standing anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the certificate of 
sale, referred to in sub -section ( 1), issued by the Custodian shall be a valid instrument for the 
registration of the property in favour of the transferee and the regist ration in respect of enemy 
property for which such certificate of sale had been issued by the Custodian, shall not be refused on 
the ground of lack of original title deeds in respect of such property or for any such other reason.].  
11. Power of Custodian t o summon persons and call for documents. —(1) The Custodian may, 
by notice in writing, require any person whom he believes to be capable of giving information 
concerning any enemy property to attend before him at such time and place as may be specified in t he 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017, s.  9 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016) . 7 
 notice and examine any such person concerning the same, reduce his statement to writing and require 
him to sign it.  
(2) The Custodian may, by notice in writing, require any person whom he believes to have in his 
possession or control any account book, letter book, invoice, receipt or other document of whatever 
nature relating to any enemy property, to produce the same or cause the same to be produced before 
the Custodian at such time and place as may be specified in the notice and to submit the same to his 
examination and to allow copies of any entry therein or any part thereof to be taken by him.  
1[(3) The Custodian, Deputy Custodian or Assistant Custodian shall have, for the purposes of 
exercising powers or discharging his functions under this Act, the  same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) , while dealing with any case under this Act, 
in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) requiring the discove ry and inspection of documents;  
(b) enforcing  the attendance of any person, including any officer dealing with land, revenue 
and registration matters, banking officer or officer of a com pany and examining him on oath;  
(c) compelling the production of books, d ocuments and other records; and  
(d) issuing commissions for the examinat ion of witnesses or documents.]  
12. Protection for complying with orders of Custodian. —Where any order with respect to any 
money or property is addressed to any person by the Custodian and accompanied by a certificate of  
the Custodian that the money or property is money property vested in him under this Act, the 
certificate shall be evidence of the facts stated therein and if that person complies with the orders of 
the Custodian, he shall not be liable to any suit or othe r legal proceeding by reason only of such 
compliance.  
13. Validity of action taken in pursuance of orders of Custodian .—Where under this Act, —  
(a) any money is paid to the Custodian; or  
(b) any  property is vested in the Custodian or an order is given to any person by the Custodian 
in relation to any property which appears to the Custodian to be enemy property vested in him 
under   this Act,  
neither the payment, vesting nor orde r of the Custodian  nor any pro ceedings in consequence thereof 
shall be invalidated or affected by reason only that at a material time, —  
(i) some person who was or might have been interested in the money or property, and who 
was an enemy or an enemy firm, had died or had ce ased to be an enemy or an enemy firm ; or  
(ii) some person who was so interested and who was believed by the Custodian to be an 
enemy or an enemy firm, was not an enemy or an enemy firm.  
14. Proceedings against companies whose assets vest in Custodian. —Whe re the enemy 
property vested in the Custodian under this Act consists of assets of a company, no proceeding, civil 
or criminal, shall be instituted under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), against the company, or 
any director, manager or other officer th ereof except with the consent in writing of the Custodian.  
15. Return s as to enemy property. —(1) The Custodian may call for from persons who, in his 
opinion, have any interest in, or control over, any enemy property vested in him under this Act, such 
retur ns as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every person from whom a return is called for under sub -section ( 1) shall be bound to submit 
such return within the prescribed period.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017, s. 10 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016) . 8 
 16. Registers of returns. —(1) All returns relating to enemy property submitted to the Custodian 
under this Act shall be recorded in such registers as may be prescribed.  
(2) All such registers shall be open to inspection subject to the payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed and to  such reasonable restrictions as the Custodian may impose, to any person who, in the 
opinion of the Custodian, is interested in any particular enemy property as a creditor or otherwise and 
any such person may also obtain a copy of the relevant portion from  the registers on payment of the 
prescribed fees.  
17. Levy of fees. —(1) There shall be levied by the Custodian fees equal to 1[five  per centum ] 
of— 
(a) the amount of moneys paid to him ;  
(b) the proceeds of the sale or transfer of any property which has be en vested in him under 
this Act; and  
(c) the value of the residual property, if any, at the time of its transfer to the original owner or 
other person specified by the Central Government under section 18:  
Provided that in the case of an enemy whose property is allowed by the Custodian to be managed 
by some person specially authorised in that behalf, there shall be levied a fee of 1[five  per centum ] of 
the gross income of the enemy or such less fee as may be  specifically fixed by the Central 
Government after taking into consideration the cost of direct management incurred by that 
Government, the cost of superior supervision and any risks that may be incurred by that Government 
in respect of the management:  
Provided further that the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reduce 
or remit the fees leviable under this sub -section in any special case or class of cases.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section “gross income of the enemy ” means inco me derived out of the 
properties of the enemy vested in the Custodian under this Act.  
(2) The value of any property for the purpose of assessing the fees shall be the price which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government or of an authority empowered in th is behalf by the Central 
Government, such property would fetch if sold in the open market.  
(3) The fees in respect of property may be levied out of any proceeds of the sale or transfer 
thereof or out of any income accrued therefrom or out of any other pro perty belonging to the same 
enemy and vested in the Custodian under this Act.  
(4) The fees levied under this section shall be credited to the Central Government.  
2[18. Transfer of property vested as enemy property in certain cases. —The Central 
Government may, on receipt of a representation from a person, aggrieved by an order vesting a 
property as enemy property in the Custodian within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of 
such order or from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette , whichever is earlier and after 
giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard, if it is of the opinion that any enemy property vested 
in the Custodian under this Act and remaining with him was not an enemy property, it may by general 
or special order, di rect the Custodian that such property vested as enemy property in the Custodian 
may be transferred to the person from whom such property was acquire d and vested in the Custodian.]  
3[18A. Income not liable to be returned. —Any income received in respect of t he enemy 
property by the Custodian shall not, notwithstanding that such property had been transferred by way 
of sale under section 8A or section 18, as the case may be, to any other person, be returned or liable to 
be returned to su ch person or any other p erson.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2017, s. 1 1, for “two per centum”  (w.e.f. 7-1-2016) . 
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for section 18 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016) . 
3. Ins. by s.  13, ibid. (w.e.f. 10-7-1968 ). 9 
 1[18B. Exclusion o f jurisdiction of civil courts. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no 
civil court or authority shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of any 
property, subject matter of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amen dment and Validation) 
Act, 2017 , or any action taken by the Central Government or the Custodian in this regard.  
18C. Appeal to High Court. —Any person aggrieved by an order of the Central Government 
under section 18 of this Act, may, within a period of sixty days from the date of communication or 
receipt of the order, file an appeal to the High Court on any question of fact or law arising out of such 
orders, and upon such appeal the High Court may, after hearing the parties, pass such orders thereon 
as it thinks proper:  
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing an appe al within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not 
exceeding sixty days.  
 Explanation .—In this section, "High Court" means the High Court of a State or Union territory in 
which the property referred  to in section 18 is situated.]  
 19. Protec tion of action taken under the A ct.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or the Custodian or an Inspector of Enemy Property for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under t his Act.  
20. Penalty. —(1) If any person makes any payment in contravention of the provisions of        
sub-section ( 1) of section 7, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine, or with both and the payment or dealing shall be void.  
(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 10, he shal l be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) If any person fails to comply with a requisition made by the Custodian under sub -section ( 1) 
or sub -section ( 2) of section 11, he shall be punisha ble wi th fine which may extend to 2[ten thousand  
rupees ].  
(4) If any person fails to submit the return under sub -section ( 2) of section 15, or furnishes such 
return containing any particular which is false and which he knows to be false or does not believ e to 
be true, he shall be punishable wi th fine which may extend to 2[ten thousand  rupees ]. 
21. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charg e of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contai ned in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due deligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything  contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed  
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this se ction, —  
(a) “company ” means anybody  corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
                                                           
1. Ins.  by Act 3 of 2017,  s.14 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016) . 
2. Subs. by s. 15 , ibid., for “five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016) . 10 
 22. Effect  of laws inconsistent with the Act. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force , 1[(including any law of succession or any custom or usage in relation to succession of 
property) ]. 
2[22A. Validation.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any 
court, tribunal or other authority, — 
 (a) the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, 2017, shall have and shall always be d eemed to have effect for all purposes as if 
the provisions of this Act, as amended by the said Act, had been in force at all material times;  
(b) any enemy property divested from the Custodian to any person under the provisions of this 
Act, as it stood imm ediately before the commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, 2017, shall stand transferred to and vest or continue to vest, free from all 
encumbrances, in the Custodian in the same manner as it was vested in the Custodian before s uch 
divesting of enemy property under the provisions of this Act, as if the provisions of this Act, as 
amended by the aforesaid Act, were in force at all material times;  
 (c) no suit or other proceedings shall, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provisions, be maintained or continued in any court or tribunal or authority for the enforcement of 
any decree or order or direction given by such court or tribunal or authority directing divestment of 
enemy property from the Custodian vested in him under section 5 of this Act, as it stood before the 
commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2017, and such enemy 
property shall continue to vest  in the Custodian under section 5 of this Act, as amended by the 
aforesaid Act, as the said section, as amended by the aforesaid Act was in force at all material 
times;  
(d) any transfer of any enemy property, vested in the Custodian, by virtue of any orde r of 
attachment, seizure or sale in execution of decree of a civil court or orders of any tribunal or other 
authority in respect of enemy property vested in the Custodian which is contrary to the provisions 
of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property (Am endment and Validation) Act, 2017, shall be 
deemed to be null and void and notwithstanding such transfer, continue to vest in  the Custodian 
under this Act.]  
23. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of  this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for —  
(a) the returns that may be called for by the Custodian under sub -section ( 1) of section 15 and 
the period within which such returns shall be submitted  under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(b) the registers in which the returns relating to enemy property shall be recorded under 
section 16;  
(c) the fees for the inspection of registers and for obtaining copies of the relevant portions 
from the register s under sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  
 3*         *                        *           *                         * 
 (e) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which m ay be comprised in one session 4[or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the 
expiry of the session immedi ately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017, s. 16 (w.e.f.  10-7-1968 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f.  2-7-2010). 
3. Clause ( d) omitted by s.18, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016) . 
4. Subs. by Act 40 of 1977, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  11 
 may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
24. Certain orders made under the Defence of India Rules , 1962 and the Defence of Indi a 
Rules, 1971 to continue in force. —1[(1)] Every order which was made under the Defence  of India 
Rules, 1962, by the Central Government or by the Custodian of Enemy Property for India appointed 
under those Rules, relating to enemy property and which was in force immediately before the 
expiration thereof shall, in so far as such order is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to continue in force and to have been made under this Act.  
2[(2) Every order which was made under the Defence of India Rules, 1971 by the Central 
Government or by the Custodian of Enemy Property for I ndia appointed under those Rules relating to 
enemy property and which was in force immediately before the expiration thereof shall, in so far as 
such order is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to continue in force and to 
have been  made under this Act.]  
25. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Enemy Property Ordinance, 1968 (7 of 1968), is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken un der the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
                                                           
1. Section  24 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by  Act 40 of 1977,  s. 10 (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -9-1977).  
--------------------------The Insecticides Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Application of other laws not barred.  
3. Definitions.  
4. The Central Insecticides Board.   
5. Registration Committee.  
6. Other committees.  
7. Procedure for Board.  
8. Secretary and other officers.  
9. Registration of insecticides.  
10. Appeal against non-registration or cancellation.  
11. Power of revision of Central Government . 
12. Licensing officers.  
13. Grant of licence.  
14. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.  
15. Appeal against the decision of a l icensing officer . 
16. Central Insecticides Laboratory.  
17. Prohibition of import and m anufacture of certain insecticides.  
18. Prohibition of sale, etc., o f certain insecticides.  
19. Insecticide Analyst s. 
20. Insecticide Inspectors.  
21. Powers of Insecticide Inspectors.  
22. Procedure t o be followed b y Insecticide Inspectors.  
23. Persons bound to d isclose place where insecticides are m anufactured or kept. 
24. Report of Insecticide Analyst.  
25. Confiscation.  
26. Notification of poisoning.  
27. Prohibition of sale, etc., of insecticides for reasons o f public safety.  
28. Notification of cancellation of registrat ion, etc. 
29. Offences and p unishment.  
30. Defences which may or may not be allowed in prosecutions under this Act.  
31. Cognizance and trial of o ffence s. 
31A. Special Courts.  
32. [Repealed. ] 2 
 SECTIONS  
33. Offences by companies.  
34. Power of Central Government t o give directions.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
36. Power of Central Governm ent to m ake rules. 
37. Power of the State Government s to make rules. 
38. Exemption.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 46 OF 1968  
[2nd September, 1968 .] 
An Act to regulate the import, manufacture, sale, transport, distribution and use of insecticides 
with a view to prevent risk to human beings or animals, and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Insecticides Act, 1968.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States and for different 
provisions of this Act.  
2. Application of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this A ct shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “animals ” means animals useful to human beings and includes fish and fowl, and such kinds 
of wild  life as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, being 
kinds which , in its opinion s, it is desirable to protect or preserve;  
(b) “Board ” means the Central Insecticides Board constituted under section 4;  
(c) “Central Insecticides Laboratory ” means the Central Insec ticides Laboratory esta blished  or as 
the case may be, the Institution specified, under section 16;  
(d) “import ” means bringing into any place within the territories to which this Act extends from a 
place outside those territories;  
(e) “insecticide ” means — 
(i) any substance specified in the Schedule; or  
(ii) such other substances (including fungicides and weedicides) as the Central Government 
may, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, include in the 
Schedule from time to time; or  
(iii) any preparation containing any one or more of such substances;  
(f) “Insecticide Analyst ” means an Insecticide Analyst appointed under section 19;  
(g) “Insecticide Inspector ” means an Insecticide Inspector appointed under section 20;  
(h) “label ” means any written, printed or graphic matter on the immediate package and on every 
other co vering in which the package is placed or packed and includes any written, printed or graphic 
matter accompanying the insecticide;  
(i) “licensing officer ” means a licensing officer appointed under section 12;  
(j) “manufacture ”, in relation to any insecticid e, includes — 
(i) any process or part of a process for making, altering, finishing, packing, labelling, 
breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting any insecticide with a view to its sale, distribution 
or use but does not include the packing or breaking u p of any insecticide in the ordinary course of 
retail business; and  
                                                           
1. 1st March, 1971, vide notification No. G.S.R. 300, dated 27th February, 1971, in respect of ss. 4, 7, 8 and 36, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary,  Part II, sec. 3( i). 
1st August, 1971, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1108, dated the 28th July, 1971, in respect of remaining provisions see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 4 
 (ii) any process by which a preparation containing an insecticide is formulated;  
(k) “misbranded ”—an insecticide shall be deemed to be misbranded — 
(i) if its label contains any statement, design or graphic representation relating thereto which 
is false or misleading in any material particular , or if its package is otherwise deceptive in respect 
of its contents; or  
(ii) if it is an imitation of, or is sold under the name of, another insectic ide; or  
(iii) if its label does not contain a warning or caution which may be necessary and sufficient, 
if complied with, to prevent risk to human beings or animals; or  
(iv) if any word, statement or other information required by or under this Act to appea r on the 
label is not displayed thereon in such conspicuous manner as the other words , statements, designs 
or graphic matter have been displayed on the label and in such terms as to render it likely to be 
read and understood by any ordinary individual unde r customary conditions of purchase and    
use; or  
(v) if it is not packed or labelled as required by or under this Act; or  
(vi) if it is not registered in the manner required by or under this Act; or  
(vii) if the label contains any reference to registratio n other than the registration number; or  
(viii) if the insecticide has a toxicity which is higher than the level prescribed or is mixed or 
packed with any substance so as to alter its nature or quality or contains any substance which is 
not included in the  registration;  
(l) “package ” means a box, bottle casket, tin, barrel, case, receptacle, sack, bag, wrapper, or other 
thing in which an insecticide is placed or packed;  
(m) “premises ” means any land, shop, stall or place where any insecticide is sold or man ufactured 
or stored or used, and includes any vehicle carrying insecticide;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) “registered ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions , means regis tered under 
this Act;  
(p) “sale”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means the sale of any 
insecticide, whether for cash or on credit and whether by wholesale or retail, and includes an 
agreement for sale, an offer for sale, the exposing for sale or having in p ossession for sale of any 
insecticide and include s also an attempt to sell any such insecticide;  
(q) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof;  
(r) “worker ” means a person employed under a contract of service or apprenticeship.  
4. The Central Insecticides Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, 
constitute a Board to be called the , Central Insecticides Board to advise the Central Government and State 
Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry out the other 
functions assigned to the Board by or under this Act.  
(2) The matters on which the Board may advise under sub -section ( 1) shall include matters        
relating to — 
(a) the  risk to human beings or animals involved in the use of insecticides and the safety 
measures necessary to prevent such risk;  
(b) the manufacture, sale, storage, transport and distribution of insecticides with a view to ensure 
safety to human beings or anim als. 
(3) The Board sha ll consist o f the following members, namely :— 
(i) the Director  General of Heath Services, ex officio , who shall be the Chairman;  5 
 (ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio ; 
(iii) the Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of Ind ia, ex officio ; 
(iv) the Director of Storage and Inspection, Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community 
Development and Co -operation (Department of Food), ex officio ; 
(v) the Chief Adviser of Factories, ex officio ; 
(vi) the Director, National Institute of Communicable Diseases, ex officio ; 
(vii) the Director  General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, ex officio ; 
(viii) the Director  General, Indian Council of Medical Research, ex officio ; 
(ix) the Director, Zoological Survey of India, ex officio;  
(x) the Director  General, Indian Standards Institution, ex officio ; 
(xi) the Director -General of Shipping or, in his absence, the Deputy Director  General of Shipping, 
Ministry of Transport and Shipping, ex officio ; 
(xii) the Jo int Director, Traffic (General), Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), ex officio ; 
(xiii) the Secretary, Central Committee for Food Standards, ex officio ; 
1[(xiiia) the Animal Husbandry Commissioner, Department of Agriculture, ex officio ; 
(xiiib) the Joint Commissioner (Fisheries), Department of Agriculture, ex officio ; 
(xiiic) the Deputy Inspector General of Forest s (Wild  Life), Department of Agriculture, ex officio ; 
(xiiid) the Industrial Adviser (Chemicals), Directorate General of Technical De velopment,          
ex officio ;] 
(xiv) one person to represent the Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals, to be nominated by the 
Central Government;  
(xv) one pharmacologist to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xvi) one medical texicologist to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(xvii) one person who shall be in charge of the department dealing with public health in a State, to 
be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xviii) two persons who shall be Directors of Agriculture in States , to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(xix) four persons, one of whom shall be an expert in industrial health and occupational hazards, 
to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xx) one person to represent the Council of Scientific and Industrial R esearch to be nominated by 
the Central Government;  
1[(xxi) one ecologist to be nominated by the Central Government.]  
(4) The persons nominated under clauses ( xiv) to 2[(xxi)] inclusive, of sub -section ( 3) shall , unless 
their seats become vacant earlier by resignation, death or otherwise, hold office for three years from the 
date of their nomination, but sha ll be eligible for re -nomination : 
Provided that the persons nominated under clauses ( xvii) and ( xviii) shall hold office only for so long 
as they hold th e appointments by virtue of which their nominations were made.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “(xx)” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  6 
 1[(5) No act or proceeding of the Board, the Registration Committee or any Committee appointed 
under section 6, shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or 
any defect in the constitution of, the Board, the Registration Committee or such Committee, as the case 
may be.]  
5. Registration Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a Registration Committee 
consisting of a Chairman, and no t more than five persons who shall be members of the Board (including 
the Drugs Controller, India and the Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of India) — 
(i) to register insecticides after scrutinising their formulae and verifying claims made by the 
importer or the manufacturer, as the case may be, as regards their efficacy and safety to human beings 
and animals; and  
(ii) to perform such other functions as are assigned to it by or under this Act.  
(2) Where the Chairman is not a member of the Board, his term of office and other conditions of 
service shall be such as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a member of the Registration Committee shall hold 
office for so long as he is a member of the  Board.  
(4) The Committee may also co -opt such number of experts and for such purpose or period as it may 
deem fit, but any expert so co -opted shall have no right to vote.  
(5) The Registration Committee shall regulate its own procedure and the conduct of business to be 
transacted by it.  
6. Other committees .—The Board may appoint such committees as it deems fit and may appoint to 
them persons who are not members of the Board, to exercise such powers and perform such duties as 
may, subject to such conditions , if any, as the Board may impose, be delegated to them by the Board.  
7. Procedure for Board .—The Board may , subject to the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make bye -laws for the purpose of regulating its own procedure and the procedure of any 
committee thereof and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it or such committee.  
8. Secretary a nd other officers .—The Central Government shall — 
(i) appoint  a person to be the Secretary of the Board who shall also function as Secretary to the 
Registration Committee; and  
(ii) provide the Board and the Registration Committee with such technical and other staff as the 
Central Government considers necessary.  
9. Registration of insecticides .—(1) Any person desiring to import or manufacture any insecticide 
may apply to the Registration Committee for the registration of such insecticide and there shall be a 
separate a pplication for each such insecticide : 
Provided tha t any person engaged in the business of import or manufacture of any insecticide 
immediately before the commencement of this section shall make an application to the Registration 
Committee within a period of  2[seventeen months] from the date of such commencement for the 
registration of any insecticide which he has been importing or  manufacturing before that date:  
3[Provided further that where any person referred to in the preceding proviso fails to make an 
application under that proviso within the per iod specified therein, he may make such application at any 
time thereafter on payment of a penalty of one hundred rupees for every month or part thereof after the 
expiry of such period for the registration of each such insecticide.]  
(2) Every application u nder sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and contain such particulars as 
may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 2, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 2, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
3. Proviso i ns. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  7 
 (3) On receipt of any such application for the registration of an insecticide, the Committee may, after 
such enquiry as it deems fit and after satisfying its elf that the insecticide to which the application relates 
conforms to the claims made by the importer or by the manufacturer, as the case may be, as regards             
the efficacy of the insecticide and its safety to human beings and animals, register  1[on such conditions as  
may be specified by it] and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, the insecticide, allot a 
registration number thereto and issue a certificate of registration in token thereof within a period of twelve 
months from the dat e of r eceipt of the application : 
Provided that the Committee may, if it is unable within the said period to arrive at a decision on the 
basis of the materials placed before it, extend the period by a further period not exceeding six months : 
Provided further that  if the Committee is of opinion that the precautions claimed by the applicant as 
being sufficient to ensure safety to human beings or animals are not such as can be easily observed or that 
notwithstanding the observance of such precautions the use of the i nsecticide involves serious risk to 
human beings or animals, it may refuse to register the insecticide.  
2[(3A) In the case of applications received by it prior to the 31st day of March, 1975, notwithstanding 
the expiry of the period specified in sub -sectio n (3) for the disposal of such applications, it shall be lawful 
and shall be deemed always to have been lawful for the Registration Committee to dispose of such 
applications at any time after such expiry but within a period of one year from the commencemen t of the 
Insecticides (Amendment) Act, 1977  (24 of 1977) : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall be deemed to make any contravention before 
the commencement of the Insecticides (Amendment) Act, 1977  (24 of 1977) , of a condition of a 
certificate of registration granted before such commencement, an offence punishable under this Act.  
(3B) Where the Registration Committee is of opinion that the insecticide is being introduced for the 
first time in India, it may, pending any enquiry, register it provisionally for a period of two years on such 
conditions as may be specified by it.  
(3C) The Registration Committee may, having regard to the efficacy of the insecticide and its safety 
to human beings and animals, vary the conditions subject to which a certificate of registration has been 
granted and may for that purpose require the certificate -holder by notice in writing to deliver up the 
certificate to it within such time as may be specified in the notice.]  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in t his section, where an insecticide has been registered on 
the application of any person, any other person desiring to import or manufacture the insecticide or 
engaged in the business of, import or manufacture thereof shall on application and on payment of 
prescribed fee be allotted a registration number and granted a certificate of registration in respect thereof 
on the same conditions on which the insecticide was originally registered.  
10. Appeal against non-registration or cancellation .—Any person aggrieved by a decision of the 
Registration Committee under section  9 may, within a period of thirty days from the date on which the 
decision is communicated to him, appeal in the prescribed manner and on payment of the proscribed fee 
to the Cen tral Government whose decision thereon shall be final : 
Provided that the Central Government may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period, if it 
is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
11. Power of revision o f Central Government .—The Central Government may, at any time, call for 
the record relating to any case in which the Registration committee has given a decision under section 9 
for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality  or propriety of any such decision and may pass any 
such order in relation  there to as it thinks fit : 
Provided that no such order shall be passed after the expiry of one yea r from the date of the decision : 
Provided further that the Central Government shall not pass any order prejudicial to any person unless 
that person has had a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed order.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 24 of 1977, s. 3, for “on such conditions” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  8 
 12. Licensing officers .—The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such persons as  it thinks fit to be licensing officers for the purposes of this Act and define the areas in 
respect of which they shall exercise jurisdiction.  
13. Grant o f licence .—(1) Any person desiring to manufacture or to sell, s tock or exhibit for sale or 
distribute  any insecticide  1[or to undertake commercial pest control operations with the use of any 
insecticide] , may make an application to the licensing off icer for the grant of a licence : 
Provided that any person engaged in the business of manufacturing or selling, s tocking or exhibiting 
for sale or distributing any insecticide immediately before the commencement of this section shall make 
an application to the licensing officer for the grant of a licence within a period of  2[seventeen months] 
from the date of such commencement:  
1[Provided further that any person engaged in the commercial pest control operations immediately 
before the commencement of the Insecticides (Amendment) Act, 1977  (24 of 1977) , shall make an 
application to the licensing officer for th e grant of a licence within a period of six months from the 
commencement of the said Act.]  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and shall contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of any such applicatio n for the grant of a licence , the licensing officer may grant a 
licence in such form, on such conditions and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.  
(4) A licence granted under this section shall be valid for the period specified therein and may be 
renewed from time to time for such period and on payment o f such fee as may be prescribed : 
Provided that where a licence has been granted to any person who has made an application            
under  3[the first proviso or, as the case may be, the second provis o] to sub -section ( 1), that licence shall be 
deemed to be cancelled in relation to any insecticide, the application for registration whereof has been 
refused or the registration whereof has been cancelled, under this Act, with effect from the date on which  
such refusal or cancellation is notified in the Official Gazette.  
1[(5) In prescribing fees for the grant or renewal of licences  under this section, different fees may be 
prescribed for the sale or distribution of insecticides for purposes of domestic use and for other purposes.]  
14. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences .—(1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, 
either  on a reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that — 
(a) the licence granted under section 13 has been granted because of misrepresentation as to an 
essential fact; or  
(b) the holder of a licence  has failed to comply with the conditions subject to which the licence 
was granted or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the licence may be lia ble under this 
Act, the licensing officer may, after giving the holder of the licence an opportunity of showing cause, 
revoke or suspend the licence.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may also vary or amend 
a licence granted under section 13.  
15. Appeal against the decision of a licensing officer .—(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of a 
licensing officer under section 13 [except under the proviso to sub -section ( 4)] or section 14 may, within a 
period of thir ty days from the date on which the decision is communicated to him, appeal to such 
authority in such manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed:  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 3, for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 24 of  1977, s. 4, for “the proviso” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  9 
 Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period  if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of showing cause, dispose of the appeal ordinarily within a period of six months 
and the decision of the appellate authority shall be final.  
16. Central Insecticides Laboratory .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a Central Insecticides La boratory under the control of a Director to be appointed by the 
Central Government to carry out the functions entru sted to it by or under this Act : 
Provided that if the Central Government so directs by a notification in the Official Gazette, the 
functions of the Central Insecticide s Laboratory shall, to such extent as may be specified in the 
notification, be carried out at any such institution as may be specified therein and thereupon the functions 
of the Director of the Central Insecticides Laboratory shal l to the extent so specified  be exercised by the 
head of that institution.  
17. Prohibition of i mport and m anufacture of certain insecticides .—(1) No person shall, himself 
or by any person on his behalf, import or manufacture — 
(a) any  misbranded insecticide;  
(b) any insecticide the sale, distribution or use of which is for the time being prohibited under     
section 27;  
(c) any insecticide except in accordance with the conditions on which it was registered;  
(d) any insecticide in contr avention of any other provision of this Act  or of any rule made 
thereunder : 
Provided that any person who has applied for registration of an insecticide  1[under any of the 
provisos] to sub -section ( 1) of section 9 may continue to import or manufacture any s uch insecticide and 
such insecticide shall not be deemed to be a misbranded insecticide within the meaning of sub -clause ( vi) 
or sub -clause ( vii) or sub -clause ( viii) of clause ( k) of section 3, until he has been informed by the 
Registration Committee of i ts decision to refuse to register the said insecticide.  
(2) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, manufacture any insecticide except under, 
and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Act.  
18. Prohibition of sale, e tc., of certain insecticides .—(1) No person shall, himself or by any person 
on his behalf, sell, s tock or exhibit for sale, distribute,  2[transport, use, or cause to be used] by any 
worker — 
(a) any insecticide which is not registered under this Act;  
(b) any insecticide, the sale, distribution or use of which is for the time being prohibited under   
section 27;  
(c) any insecticide in contravention of any other provision of this Act or of any rule made 
thereunder.  
(2) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, sell, s tock or exhibit for sale or         
distribute  3[or use for commercial pest control operations] any insecticide except under, and in accordance 
with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under t his Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section an insecticide in respect of which any person has 
applied for a certificate of registration  4[under any of the provisos] to sub -section ( 1) of section 9, shall be 
deemed to be registered till the date on which the refusal to register such insecticide is notified in the 
Official Gazette.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 4, for “under the proviso” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 5, for “transport or cause to be used” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977) . 
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 5, for “under the proviso” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  10 
 19. Insecticide Analyst s.—The Central Government or a State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint persons in such number as it thinks fit and possessing such technical and 
other qualifications as may be prescribed to be Insecticide Analysts for such areas and in respect of such 
insecticides or class of insecticides as may be sp ecified in the notification:  
Provided that no person who has any financial interest in the manufacture, import or sale of any 
insecticide, shall be so appointed.  
20. Insecticide Inspectors .—(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint persons in such number as it  thinks fit and possessing such 
technical and other qualifications as may be prescribed to be Insecticide Inspectors for such areas as may 
be specified in the notification : 
Provided that any person who does not possess the required qualifications may be so  appointed only 
for the purposes of clause ( a) and clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21 : 
Provided further that no person who has any financial interest in the manufacture, import or sale of 
any insecticide shall be so appointed.  
(2) Every Insecticid e Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of      
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as 
the Government appointing him may specify in this behalf.  
21. Powers of Insecticide Inspectors .—(1) An Insecticide Inspector shall have power — 
(a) to enter and search, at all reasonable times and with such assistance, if any, as he considers 
necessary, any premises in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder has been or is being or is about to be committed, or for the purpose of satisfying 
himself that the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the conditions of any certificate 
of registration or licence issued thereunder are being complied with;  
(b) to require the production of, and to inspect, examine and make copies of, or take extracts 
from, registers, records or other documents kept by a manufacturer, distributor, carrier, dealer or any 
other person in pursu ance of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder and seize the 
same, if he has reason to believe that all or any of them, may furnish evidence of the commission of 
an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(c) to mak e such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder are being complied with and for that purpose stop 
any vehicle;  
(d) to stop the distribution, sale or use of an insecticide  which he has reason to believe is being 
distributed, sold or used in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
for a specified period not exceeding  1[thirty] days, or unless the alleged contravention is such that the 
defect  may be removed by the possessor of the insecticide, seize the s tock of such insecticide;  
(e) to take samples of any insecticide and send such samples for analysis to the Insecticide 
Analyst for test in the prescribed manner; and  
(f) to exercise such other  powers as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder . 
2[(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , shall, as far as may be, 
apply to any search or seizure under this Act as they app ly to any search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.]  
(3) An Insecticide Inspector may exercise the powers of a police officer under  3[section 42 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ], for the purpose of ascertaining the true name and 
residence of the person from whom a sample is taken or an insecticide is seized . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 2, for “twenty” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “section 57 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  11 
 22. Procedure t o be followed b y Insecticide Inspectors .—(1) Where an Insecticide Inspector seizes 
any record, register or do cument under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21, he shall, as soon as may 
be, inform a Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.  
(2) Where an Insecticide Inspector takes any action under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of          
section 21 — 
(a) he shall use all dispatch in ascertaining whether or not the insecticide or its sale, distribution 
or use contravenes any of the provisions of section 18 and if it is ascertained that the insecticide or its 
sale, distribution or use does no t so contravene, forthwith revoke the order passed under the said 
clause or, as the case may be, take such action as may be necessary for the return of the stock seized;  
(b) if he seizes the s tock of the insecticide  he shall, as soon as may be, inform a Magistrate and 
take his orders as to the custody thereof;  
(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged contravention be such 
that the defect may be remedied by the possessor of the insec ticide, he shall, on being satisfied that 
the defect has been so remedied, forthwith revoke his order and in case where the Insecticide 
Inspector has seized the s tock of insecticide, he shall, as soon as may be, inform a Magistrate and 
obtain his orders as  to the release thereof.  
1[(3) Where an Insecticide Inspector takes any sample of an insecticide, he shall issue a receipt 
therefor stating therein that the fair price of such sample shall be tendered if the sample, after test or 
analysis is not found to b e misbranded and the Insecticide Analyst has reported to that effect and on such 
price having been tendered may require a written acknowledgement therefor.]  
(4) 2*** where the Insecticide Inspector seizes the s tock of any insecticide under clause ( d) of              
sub-section ( 1) of section 21, he shall tender a receipt therefor in the prescribed form.  
(5) Where an Insecticide Inspector takes a sample of an insecticide for the purpose of test or analysis, 
he shall intimate such purpose in writing in the  prescribed form to the person from whom he takes it and, 
in the prese nce of such person unless he wi lfully absents himself, shall divide the sample into three 
portions and effectively seal and suitably mark the same and permit such person to add his own s eal and 
mark to all or any of the portions so sealed and mark ed: 
Provided that where the insecticide is made up in containers of small volume, instead of dividing a 
sample as aforesaid, the Insecticide Inspector may, and if the insecticide be such that it is likely to 
deteriorate or be otherwise damaged by exposure shall, take three of the said containers after suitably 
marking the same and, where necessary, sealing them.  
(6) The Insecticide Inspector shall restore one portion of a sample so divided or one container, as the 
case may be, to the person from whom he takes it and shall retain the remainder and dispose of the same 
as follows: — 
(i) one portion or container, he shall forthwith send to the Insecticide Analyst for test or    
analysis; and  
(ii) the se cond, he shall produce to the court before which proceedings, if any, are instituted in 
respect of the insecticide.  
23. Persons bound to d isclose place w here insecticides are manufactured or k ept.—Every person 
for the time being in charge of any premises where any insecticide is being manufactured or is kept for 
sale or distribution shall, on being required by an Insecticide Inspector so to do, be legally bound to 
disclose to the Insecticide Inspector the place where the insecticide is being manufactured o r is kept, as 
the case may be.  
24. Report o f Insecticide Analyst .—(1) The Insecticide Analyst to whom a sample of any 
insecticide has been submitted for test or analysis under sub -section ( 6) of section 22, shall, within a 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
2. The words, brackets and figure “Where the price tendered under sub -section ( 3) is refused, or” omitted by s. 3,                     
ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  12 
 period of  1[thirty] days, deliver  to the Insecticide Inspector submitting it a signed report in duplicate in the 
prescribed form.  
(2) The Insecticide Inspector on receipt thereof shall deliver one copy of the report to the person from 
whom the sample was taken and shall retain the other c opy for use in any prosecution in respect of the 
sample.  
(3) Any document purporting to be a report signed by an Insecticide Analyst shall be evidence of the 
facts stated therein, and such evidence shall be conclusive unless the person from whom the sample was 
taken has within twenty -eight days of the receipt of a  copy of the report notified in writing the Insecticide 
Inspector or the court before which any proceedings in respect of the sample are pending that he intends 
to adduce evidence in controversion of the report.  
(4) Unless the sample has already been teste d or analysed in the Central Insecticides Laboratory, 
where a person has under sub -section ( 3) notified his intention of adducing evidence in controversion of 
the Insecticide Analyst ‟s report, the court may, of its own motion or in its discretion at the re quest either 
of the complainant or of the accused, cause the sample of the insecticide produced before the magistrate 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 22 to be sent for test or analysis to the said laboratory,  2[which shall, 
within a period of thirty days,  make the test or analysis] and report in writing signed by, or under the 
authority of, the Director of the Central Insecticides Laboratory the result thereof, and such report shall be 
conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein.  
(5) The cost of a test  or analysis made by the Central Insecticides Laboratory under sub -section ( 4) 
shall be paid by the complainant or the accused, as the court shall direct.  
25. Confiscation .—(1) Where any person has been convicted under this Act for contravening any of 
the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, the s tock of the insecticide in respect of which 
the contravention has been made shall be liable to confiscation.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), where the Court is satisfied on 
the application of an Insecticide Inspector or otherwise and after such inquiry as may be necessary, that 
the insecticide is a misbranded insecticide, such insecticide shall be liable to confiscation.  
26. Notification of poisoning .—The Stat e Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
require any person or class of persons specified therein to report all occurrences of poi soning (through the 
use or hand ling of any insecticide) coming within his or their cognizance to such office r as may be 
specified in the said notification.  
27. Prohibition of sale, etc., of insecticides for reasons o f public safety .—(1) If, on receipt of a 
report under section 26 or otherwise, the Central Government or the State Government is of opinion for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, that the use of any insecticide specified in  3*** clause ( e) of section 3 
or any specific batch thereof is likely to involve such risk to human beings or animals as to render it 
expedient or necessary to take immediate ac tion then that Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, prohibit the sale, distribution or use of the insecticide or batch , in such ar ea, to such extent and 
for such  period (not exceeding sixty days) as may be specified in the notification pending investigation 
into the matter:  
Provided that  where the investigation is not completed within the said period, the Central Government 
or the State Government, as the case may be, may extend it by such further period or periods not 
exceeding thirty d ays in the aggregate as it may specify in a like manner.  
(2) If, as a result of its own investigation or on receipt of the report from the State Government, and 
after consultation with the Registration Committee, the Central Govern ment , is satisfied that the use of 
the said insecticide or batch is or is not likely to cause any such risk, it may pass such order (including an 
order refusing to register the insecticide or cancelling the certificate of registration, if any, granted in 
respect thereof) as it de ems fit, depending on the circumstances of the case.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 4, for “sixty” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “which shall make the test or analysis” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
3. The w ords, brackets and figure “ sub-clause ( iii) of” omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  13 
 28. Notification of cancellation of registration, etc.—A refusal to register any insecticide or a 
cancellation of the certificate of registration of any insecticide shall be notified in the Official Gaze tte and 
in such other manner as may be prescribed.  
29. Offences and punishment .—(1) Whoever, — 
(a) imports, manufactures, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or distributes any insecticide deemed 
to be misbranded under sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause (iii) or sub-clause ( viii) of clause ( k) of        
section 3; or  
(b) imports or manufactures any insecticide without a certificate of registration; or  
(c) manufactures, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or distributes an insecticide without a      
licence; or  
(d) sells or distributes an insecticide, in contravention of section 27; or  
(e) causes an insecticides, the use of which has been prohibited under section 27, to be used by 
any worker; or  
(f) obstructs an Insecticide Inspector in the exercise of his powers or discharge of his duties under 
this Act or the rules made thereunder,  
1[shall be punishable — 
(i) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may e xtend to fifty thousand rupees, or 
with both;  
(ii) for the second and a subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine which shall not be less than fifteen thousand rupees but which may extend to 
seventy -five thousand rupees, or with both ]. 
(2) Whoever uses an insecticide in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule made 
thereunder shall be punishable with fine  2[which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may 
extend to five thousand rupees, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
both] . 
(3) Whoever contravenes any of the other provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder or any 
condition of a certificate of registration or licence  granted thereunder, shall be punishable — 
(i) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  3[one year, or with 
fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty -five thousand 
rupees, or with bo th]; 
(ii) for the second and a subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  
4[two years, or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees, or with both].  
(4) If any person c onvicted of an offence under this Act commits a like offence afterwards it shall be 
lawful for the court before which the second or subsequent conviction takes place to cause the offender ‟s 
name and place of residence, the offence and the penalty imposed t o be published in such newspapers or 
in such other manner as the court may direct.  
30. Defences which may or may not be allowed in prosecutions u nder this Act .—(1) Save as 
hereinafter provided in this section, it shall be no defence  in a prosecution under this Act to prove merely 
that the accused was ignorant of the nature or quality of the insecticide in respect of which the offence 
was committed or of the risk involved in the manufacture, sale or use of such insecticide or of the 
circumstances of its manufacture or import.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “six months, or with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “one year, or with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  14 
 (2) For the purposes of section 17, an insecticide shall not be deemed to be misbranded only by 
reason of the fact that — 
(a) there has been added thereto some innocuous substance or ingredient because the same is 
required for the manufacture or the preparation of the insecticide as an article of commerce in a state 
fit for carriage or consumption, and not to increase the bulk, weight or measure of the insecticide or to 
conceal its inferior quality or other defect; or 
(b) in the process of manufacture, preparation or conveyance some extraneous substance has 
unavoidably become intermixed with it.  
(3) A person not being an importer or a manufacturer of an insecticide or his agent for the distribution 
thereof, shall not  be liable for a contravention of any provision of this Act, if he proves — 
(a) that he acquired the insecticide from an importer or a duly licensed manufacturer, distributor 
or dealer thereof;  
(b) that he did not know and could not, with reasonable diligen ce, have ascertained that the 
insecticide in any way contravened any provision of this Act; and  
(c) that the insecticide, while in his possession, was properly stored and remained in the same 
state as when he acquired it.  
31. Cognizance and t rial of offenc e.—(1) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be 
instituted except by, or with the written consent of, the State Government or a person authorised in this 
behalf by the State Government.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a  1[metropolitan magistrate or a judicial magistrate of the first class] 
shall try any offence under this Act.  
2[31A. Special Courts .—(1) If the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary for the purpose 
of providing for speedy trial of offences under this Act in any district or metropolitan area, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette and after consultation with the High Court, notify one or more Courts 
of Judicial Magistrates of the first class, or, as the case may be, Metropolitan Magistrates, in such d istrict 
or metropolitan area to be Special Courts for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the High Court, a court notified under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise 
jurisdiction only in respect of cases under this Act.  
(3) Subject to the  provisions of sub -section ( 2), the jurisdiction and powers of the presiding officer of 
court notified under sub -section ( 1) in any district or metropolitan area shall extend throughout the district 
or the metropolitan area, as the case may be.  
(4) Subject  to the foregoing provisions of this section, a court notified under sub -section ( 1) in any 
district or metropolitan area shall be deemed to be a court established under sub -section ( 1) of section 11, 
or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 1) of section 16 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
and the provisions of that Code shall apply accordingly in relation to such courts.  
Explanation. —In this section, “High Court ” has the same meaning as in clause ( e) of section 2 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .] 
32. [Magistrate’s power to impose enhanced penalties .] Omitted by the Insecticides (Repealing and 
Amending) Act 1977  (24 of 1977) , s. 8 (w.e.f. 2-8-1977 ). 
33. Offences by c ompanies .—(1) Whenever an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible 
to the company for the conduct of the business of , the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and  shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 7, for “presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f.  2-8-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 7 (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  15 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has be en committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of , any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that  offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section :— 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation  to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
34. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions to any State Government as may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying 
into execution in the State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.  
35. Protection o f action taken in good faith.—No prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie 
against the Government or any officer of the Government or the Board, the Regi stration Committee or 
any Committee of the Board, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
36. Power of Central Government t o make r ules.—(1) The Central Government may, after 
consultation with the Board and subject to the con dition of previous publication, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effec t to the provisions of this Act : 
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of 
opinion that  circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation 
but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six months of the making of the rules and the 
Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestio ns which the Board may make in relation 
to the amendment of the said rules.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
prescribe — 
(a) the method of packing and labelling;  
(b) the manner of registration of an insecticide;  
(c) the functions of the Board and of the Registration Committee and the travelling and other 
allowances payable to members of the Board, the Registration Committee and any Committee of the 
Board;  
(d) the places a t which insecticides may be imported and prohibit their import at any other place;  
(e) the form of application for registration of an insecticide and the particulars relating thereto;  
(f) 1* * * the fee payable in respect of registration;  
(g) the manner of  appeal to the Central Government under section 10 and the fee payable 
therefore;  
(h) the form of application for the grant of licence and the particulars relating thereto;  
(i) the form of licence, the conditions attached thereto and the fee payable theref ore; 
(j) the period for which a licence may be renewed and the fee for such renewal;  
(k) the circumstances in which a licence may be varied or amended under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 14;  
                                                           
1. The words “the conditions of registration and” omitted by Act 24 of 1977, s. 9 (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  16 
 (l) the functions of the Central Insecticides Laboratory;  
(m) the qualifications, powers and duties of an Insecticide Analyst and an Insecticide Inspector;  
(n) the manner of testing or analysing the samples of any insectici de and the fee payable therefor ; 
(o) the form in which intimation shall be given by an Insecticide Inspector under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 22 to a person from whom a sample of an insecticide is taken for test or analysis;  
(p) the form in which an Insecticide Analyst shall submit a report of his test or analysis to the 
Insecticide Inspector under sub -section ( 1) of section 24;  
(q) the protective clothing and equipment to be used by workers during the manufacture, 
formulation, transport, distribution and application of insecticides and other fa cilities to be provided 
to keep themselves and things supplied to them free from any contamination;  
(r) the use by the workers of any such protective clothing, equipment and other facilities;  
(s) the precautions to be taken against poisoning through the us e or handling of insecticides;  
(t) the measures for detecting and investigating cases in which poisoning has occurred;  
(u) the facilities to be provided for ensuring first -aid treatment;  
(v) the instruction and training to be provided regarding the use of things supplied to the workers 
for ensuring their safety;  
(w) the facilities for medical examination of workers engaged in the manufacture or handling of 
insecticides;  
1*                                   *                                 *                                   *                               * 
(y) the equipment for, and method of, application of, an insecticide and the disposal of surplus 
material, washings and containers, following application;  
(z) the maintenance and inspection of records an d returns;  
(za) the restrictions on storage of insecticides during transport or , otherwise along with articles of 
food;  
(zb) the maximum proportion of any insecticide which may be added to, or contained in, any 
preparation for domestic use and the restrictions thereon;  
(zc) the manner in which refusal to register an insecticide or cancellation of certificate of 
registration thereof may be notified;  
(zd) the officer or authority to whom the Central Government may delegate any of the powers and 
functi ons conferred on it by this Act;  
(ze) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in se ssion for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session  2[or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree in making  
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be with out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
37. Power of the State Government s to make r ules.—(1) The State Government may, after 
consultation with the board and subject to the condition of previous publication, by notification in the 
                                                           
1. Clause ( x) omitted by Act 24 of 1977, s. 9  (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  17 
 Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act and not 
inconsistent with the rules, if any, made by the Central Government.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the authority to which, the manner in which, and the fee on payment of which, an appeal may 
be filed under section 15 and the procedure to be followed by the appellate authority in disposing of 
the appeal;  
(b) the delegation of any of the powers and functions conferred by this Act on the Sta te 
Government to any officer or authority specified by that Government.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the State  Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before the State Legislature.]  
38. Exemption .—(1) Nothing in this Act shall apply to — 
(a) the use of any insecticide by any person for his own household purposes or for kitchen g arden 
or in respect of any land under his cultivation;  
(b) any  substance specified or included in the Schedule or any preparation containing any one or 
more such substances, if such substance or preparation is intended for purposes other than preventing, 
destroying, repelling or mitigating any insects , rodents , fungi , weeds and other forms of plant or 
animal life not useful to human beings.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as it may specify therein, exempt from all or any of the provisions  of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder , any educational, scientific or research organisation engaged in carrying out 
experiments with insecticides.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  18 
  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( e)] 
LIST OF INSECTICIDES  
Acrylonitrile  
Aldrin ( 1:2:3:4:10 :10—hexachloro -1:4:4a ; 5:8; 8a-hexahydro -1:4:5:8-dimethanonaphthalene)  
Allethrin (allyl homologue of Cinerein I)  
Aluminium Phosphide  
Amiton  
Antu (Alpha -naphthyl thiourea)  
Aramite [2 (p -tert-butylphenoxy) ispropyl 1 -2 chloroethyl sulphit e] 
Barium Carbonate  
Barium Fluoro  Silicate  
BHC (Ben zene Hexachloride) ( 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 -hexachlorohexane)  
Bis-dimethylamino Fluoropho sphine Oxide  
Calcium Arsenate  
Calcium Cyanide  
Captan (N -trichloromethylmercapto -4-cyclohexane) , 1, 2-discarboximide  
Carbaryl (1-naphthyl -N-methyl carbamate)  
Carbon Disulphide  
Carbon Tetrachloride  
Chlorbenside (p -chloro benzyl -p-chlorophenyl sulphide)  
Cholorobis ethyl amino triazine  
Chlord ane (1,  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8-Octachlore -2, 3, 3a, 4, 7, 7a-hexahydro -4, 7-methanoindane)  
Chlorobenzilate  (Ethyl  4, 4‟-dichlorobenzilate)  
Chlorothion (o , o-dimethyl -o-3-chloro -4-nitrophenyl thiono phosphate)  
Chloro -I.P.C  
Chloropicrin  
Chlorofenson (p -chlorophenyl -p-chlorobenzene sulphonate)  
S-(p-chlorophenylthio) methy -o-o-diethyl  phosphorodithioa te (Trithion)  
CIPC [isoprop yl-N (3-chloropheny l) carbamate]  
CMU (Manuron)  
Copper Arsenate  
Copper Cyanide  
Copper naphthanate  
Copper Sulphate  
Coumachlor [3 -(a-acetony 1-4-chlorobenzy 1-4-hydroxy  coumarin)]  19 
 Copper Oxychloride  
Cuprous Oxide  
Dalapon (Sodium 2,  2, dichloro propionate)  
D-D mixture  
DDD (Di chloro Diphenyl Dichloroethane)  
DDT [a mixture of 1, 1, 1-trichloro -2, 2 -bis (p -chloropheny l) ethane and 1, 1, 1 -trichloro -2-                          
(o-chlorop heny l)-2 (p-chloropheny l) ethane]  
DDV P (2, 2-dichlorovinyl dimethyl phosphate)  
Demeton -O (O, O -diethyl -S [(2-ethylthio )-ethyl ] phosphorothioate)  
Demeton -S (O, O -diethyl -S [(2-ethylthio)-ethyl ] phosphorothioate)  
Diazinon (O, O -diethyl -O [(2-isopropyl -6-methyl -4-pyrimidinyl] phosphorothioate)  
Dibrom (1, 2 -dibromo, 1, 2, 2-dichloroethyl dimethyl phosph ate) 
Dichlorophenoxy acetic acid (2 , 4-D) 
Dieldrin (1 : 2 : 3 : 4 : 10 : 10 -hexachloro -6 : 7 -epoxy -l : 4a : 5 : 6 : 7 : 8 :  8a-Octahydro -1 : 4 : 5 :           
8-dimethanonaphthalene)  
Dimethoate (O, O -dimethyl -S-(N-methylcarbam oyl methyl) phosphorodithioate)  
Dipterex (O, O -dimethyl -2, 2, 2 -trichloro hydroxy ethyl phosphonate)  
DNOC (Dinitro -ortho -compound) (3 : 5 -dinitro -o-cresol)  
EDCT mixture (Ethylene Dichlorid e Carbon Tetrachloride mixture)  
Ekatin  
Endri n (1, 2, 3, 4, 10 -10-hexachloro -6, 7-epoxy -1, 4, 4a, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a -Octahydre -1, 4-endo -endo, 5-8 
dimethanonaphthalene)  
E.P.N. (O -ethyl -O-p-nitriphenyl benzene thiophosphonate)  
Ethyoxy ethy l mercury chloride  
Ethyl di -n-propylthio ‟carbamate (Eptam)  
Ethyl mercury phosphate  
Ethyl mercury chloride  
Ethylene dibromide  
Ethylene Dichloride  
Fenson (Parachlorophenyl benzene sulphonate)  
Fenthion (3 -methyl -4-methyl thiophenyl phosphorothionate)  
Ferbam (Ferric Dimethyl dithio Carbamate)  
Gusathion [O, O -dimethyl S (4 -oxo-1, 2, 3 -benzotriazinyl -3-methyl) phosphorothioate ] 
Heptachlor (1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8 -heptachloro -4-7-methano -3a, 4, 7, 7a-tetrahydroindene)  
HETP (Hexaethyl tetraphosphate)  
Hexachlorobenzene  
1[Hirsutella species]  
                                                           
1. Added by G.S.R. 69(E), dated 5 -2-2001.  20 
 Hydrogen Cyanide  
Hydrogen Phosphide  
Lead arsenate  
Lime Sulphur  (Calcium Polysulphide, water -free sulphur, calcium thiosulphate mixture)  
Lindane (gamma, B.H.C.)  
Malathion (S -(1, 2-Bis (ethoxycarbony 1) ethyl) O, O -dimet hyl-phosphoro -dithioate)  
Maleic h ydrazide (1, 2 -dihydropyropyridazine 3, 6 -dione)  
Maneb Manganese eth ylene bisdithiocarbamate  
MCPA -(4-chloro -2 Methyl phenoxy acetic acid)  
Mercuric Chloride  
Metaldehyde  
Metasystox  
Methoxychlor (1, 1, 1 -trichloro -2, 2-di-p-metho xyphenyl ethane)  
Methoxy ethyl mercury chloride  
Methyl bromide  
Methyl demeton (Dim eton-methyl and Dimeton -Methyl)  
Methyl Mercury Chloride  
Methyl Parathion (O, O -dimethy l-O-p-nitrophenylthiophosphate)  
Metox (Chlorsulphicide)  
Nabam (Disodium ethylene -1, 2-bisdithiocarbamate)  
Nicotine sulphate  
Octa methyl pyrophosphoramide  
Para-dichloro benzene  
Parathion (O, O -diethyl -O-p-nitrophenylthiophosphate)  
Paris Green (Copper Aceto arsenite)  
Pentachloronitrobenzen e (P.C.N.B.)  
Pentachlorophenol  
Phenyl mercury acetate  
Phenyl mercury chloride  
Phenyl mercury urea  
Phosdrine  
Phthalimidomethyl -O-O-dimethyl phosphorodithioate (Imidan)  
Pipero nyl butoxide (butyl carbity l) (6-propyl piperonyl) e ther O  
Pival (2 -Pivalyl -indane 1 -3 dione)  
Potassium Cyanide  
n-Propyl ethyl -n-butyl thiolcarbamate (Tillam)  
Pyrethrins (insectically active principles of Chrysanthemum cin erariaefolium ) 21 
 Rotenone  
Ryania  
Sodium fluoroacetate  
Sodium cyanide  
Sodium Fluoro Silicate  
Sulphur (wettable or colloidal sulphur)  
Strychnine  
Sulphoxide [1, 2 -methylene -dioxy -4 (2-octylsulphinyl) propyl ben yene] 
TCA (trichlor acetic acid sodium and ammonium  salts)  
Tedion (tetrachlor diphenyl sulphone)  
TEPP (tetraethyl Pyrophosphate)  
Tetrachloro -p-benzoquinone  
Thanite  
Thiram [bis (dimethyl Thiocarbamyl) disulphide]  
Tolyl mercury acetate  
Trichlorphon  
Triorthocresyl Phosphate  
Thallium sulphate  
Thiometon  
Toxaphene (chl orinated camphene containing 67 —69% chlorine)  
Trichloro phenoxy acetic acid (2, 4, 5 -T) 
Warfarin (3 -a-acetonyl benzyl -4-hydroxy -coumarin)  
Zinc Phosphide  
Zimet  
Zineb (Zin c Ethylene bis -dithiocarbamate)  
Ziram (Zinc dimethyl -dithiocarbamate)  
Zulate  
 
1[Acrolein .   .   .    .   .    .   .   .  2-Propenal or Acrylaldehyde  
Actellic (Pirimiphosmethyl) .   . 2-diethylamino -6-methylp yrimidin -4-yl dimethyl phosphorothionate  
Afugon .   .     .     .     .     .     . Diethyl methyl ethoxy carbonyl pyrazolo -pyrimidine -yl-phosphoroth  
onate  
Alachlor .    .     .     .     .     .     .  2-Chloro -2; 6‟-dienthyl -n-(methoxymethyl) -acetanilide  
Aldicarb .   .     .     .     .     .      .  2-methyl -2-(methylthio) propionaldehyde -o-(methylcarbamo yl) oxime  
Amidithion .    .      .     .      .    .   S-(N-2 methoxyethyl -Carlomoyl -methyl) dimethyl  
phospho rothiolothionate  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 9(E), dated 9 -1-1974 . 22 
 Amitrole .   .     .     .      .    .     .  3-Amino -1, 2, 4 -triazole  
Ammonium Sulphamate .   .    .   Ammonium Sulphamate  
Asulam .   .     .      .      .      .     .  Methyl -N (4-aminobenzenesulphonyl) carbamate  
Atrazine .    .      .     .     .    .     .  2-Chloro -4-ethylamino -6-isopropylamino -1, 3, 5 -trizine  
Aureofungin .    .     .    .     .     .  Aureofungin  
Azinphos -ethyl .   .     .    .    .   .    S-(3, 4 -dihydro -4-oxobenzo -(d)-(1, 2, 3) -triazin -3-ylmethyl) diethyl 
phosphorothiolothionate  
Barban .    .     .      .     .      .     .  4-chloro -2-ynyl-3-chlophenyl carbamate  
Barium Polysulphide .   .     .    .     Barium Polysulphide  
Bassa .    .     .    .     .    .      .     . O-Secondary -butylpheny lmethyl carbamate  
BCPE (Chlorphenithel) .    .     .  1, 1-bis-(4-Chlorophenyl) -ethan ol 
Benomyl .    .     .    .     .     .     .      Methyl -N-benzimidazol -2-yl-N (butyl carbemoyal carbamate ) 
Bensulide .    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-(O, O-Di-isopropyl p hosphorodithionate) cester with                              
N-(2-mercaptoethyl) benzene Sulphenamide  
Binapacryl .    .     .    .     .    .   .  2-(1-methyl -n-propyl) -4, 6-dinitro pheni ly-2-methylcrotonate  
Bromacil .    .     .    .     .     .     .      5-bromo -6-methyl -3-(1-methylpropyl) uracil  
Brompyrazen .    .     .    .     .    .      5-amino -4-bromo -2-phenylpyridazin -3-one 
Bromoxynil .    .     .    .      .     .      3, 5-dibromo -4-hydroxybenzonitri le 
Brozone .    .     .    .     .     .      .      Methyl bromide & chloropic rin in petroleum solvent  
Buturon .    .     .    .     .     .      .      3-(4-chlorophenyl) -1-methyl -1 (1-methyl pro p-2-ynyl) urea  
Butylate .    .     .    .     .     .      .      S-ethyl -N, N -diisobutylthiocarbamate  
Bux.    .      .      .     .    .     .     .  Mixture of m-(1-methyl butyl) phenyl methyl carbamate and m-(1-ethyl 
propyl) phenyl methyl carbamate  
Cadmium  based compounds .   . (Cadmium chloride, Cadmium sulphate, Cadmium succinate)  
Captafel .    .     .    .     .     .      .      N-O (1, 1, 2, 2 -tetrachloroethylthio) cyelohex -4-ene-1 2-dicarboxymide  
Carbefuran .    .      .    .      .     .     2, 3-dihydro -2, 2 : dimethyl -7-benzofuranyl methyl carbamate  
Carbophenothion .    .     .    .    .  S-[(p-Chlorophenylthio )-methyl] -o, o-diethyl phosphorodithio ate 
Carboxin (DCMO) .    .     .     .      5, 6-Dihydro -2-methyl -1, 4-oxathi in-3-carboxanilide  
Chinomethionate .    .     .    .    .  6-methyl -2-oxo-1, 3-dithio (4, 5 -b) quinoxaline  
Chloramben .    .     .    .     .    .      3-amine -2, 5-dichoro benzonic acid  
Chlorbufam (BIPC) .    .     .    .      1-methyl -2-propynyl -m-chloroca rbanilate  
Chlorfen yinphos .    .     .    .     .     2-chloro -1 (2, 4 -dichloropheny l)-Vinyl diethylphosphate  
Chloromequate  chloride .    .    .   (2-chloroethyl) trimethyl  ammonium chloride  
Chloroneb .    .     .     .      .     .      1, 4-dichloro -2, 5-dimethexybenzine  
Chlorpropane .    .     .    .     .    .      Chloropropane  
Chloroxur -n.    .     .    .     .    .      N-4-(4-Chlorophenoxy) phenyl -NN-dimethyl -ureat 
Citicide .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Chlorinated turpene  
Citowett .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Alkylarylpolyglykelether  23 
 Clonitralid .    .     .     .     .     .      5, 2-dichloro -4‟nitro -salicylic -anilide -ethanolamine  
Copper Hydroxide .    .     .     .      Copper Hydroxide  
Coumafuryl .    .     .    .     .    .      3-(a-Acetonylfurfuryl) -4-hydrocyceumarine  
Coumaphos .    .     .    .     .    .      3-Chloro -4-methyl -7-coumarinyl  diethyl phosphorothionat  
Coumatetralyl .    .     .    .    .   .     4-hydrox y-3-(1, 2, 3, 4 -tetraphydro -1-naphthyl) coumarin  
Coyden .    .     .    .     .    .     .      3, 5-dichloro -2, 6-dimethyl -4-pyridinol  
CPAS .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  4-Chlorophenyl, 2, 4, 5 -trichlorophyny lazosulphide  
Cyclomorph .    .     .    .     .     .      N-Cyclodedecyl -2, 6-dimethyl -morpholinacetate  
Cycluren (OMU) .    .     .    .     
.     N‟-Cycle -octyl -N-N-dimethyl urea  
Cytrolane .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2-(diethoxy phosphraylimino) -4-methyl -1, 3-dithiolane  
Decarbofuran .    .     .    .     .    .      2, 3-dihydro -2-methylobenzofuren -7-yl-methyl carbamate  
Decazolin .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1-(alpha, alpha -dimethyl -beta-acetoxypropionyl -3-isopropyl -2,              
4-dioxodeo a-hydro quinazoline  
DEET .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  N, N -Diethyl -m-toluamide  
Dibromochloropropane .    .     .     1, 2-dibromo -3-chloropropane  
Dicamba .    .     .    .     .    .     .      3, 6-dichloro -2-methoxybenzoic acid  
Dichlobenil .    .     .    .     .     .      2, 6-dichlorobanzo nitr ile 
Dichlofen thion.    .     .     .      0-(2, 4-dichlorophenyl) O,  O-diethyl phosphorothioate  
Dichlone .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 3-dichloro -1, 4-naphthoquinone  
Dichloropropane .    .     .    .     .     1, 3-dichloropropane  
Dicloran .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 6-dichloro -4-nitroaniline  
Dicofol .    .     .    .     .     .     .      2, 2, 2 -trichloro -1, 1-di-(4-chlorophenyl) ethanol  
Dicrotoph os.    .     .    .     .    .      Dime thyl phosphate ester with (E) -3-Hydro xy-N, N -dimethyl -crs-
crotonamide dimethyl phosphate  
2, 4-D B.    .     .    .     .    .     .      4-(2, 4-Dichlorophenoxy) butyric acid  
Difenphos (Abate) .    .     .     .      O.O.O ‟, O‟-Tetramethyl O, O ‟-thiodi -p-phenylene phosphorothio ate 
Dikar .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  A blend of Dithane M -45 and Tech . Karathane  
Dimas (Alar) .    .     .    .     .    .      N-dimethylamino suceinic acid  
Dinocap .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Mixture of 4 & 5 parts of 2, 4 -dinitro -6-octophyany1  crotonates to 2 
parts of the isomer  of 2, 6 d initro -4-octylphenyl crotonates  
Dinoseb .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 4-dinitro -6-S-butylphenol  
Dinoseb acetate .    .     .    .     .     2, 4-dinitro -6-S-butylphenol acetate  
Dioxathion .    .     .    .      .     .      S-S-1, 4 -dioxane -2, 3-ylide ne (bis ) o, o -diethyl phos                    
phosphorothiolothionate  
Diphacinene .    .     .    .     .    .      2-diphenylacetyl 1, 3-indanediene  
Diphenamid .    .     .    .     .    .      NN-dimethyl -2, 2-diphenylacetamide  
Disulfoton .    .     .    .      .     .      diethyl s-[2-(ethylthio) ethyl ] phosphorothiolothionate  
Diuron .    .     .    .     .    .     .      N‟-3- (4-dichlorophenyl) -NN-dimethylurea  24 
 DMPA .    .     .    .     .     .     .      O-(2, 4-Dichlorophenyl) O ‟ methyl N -isopropyl -phosphoromidithicate  
Dodine .    .     .    .     .     .     .      Dodecylguanidine -monoacetate  
Dodomorph .    .     .    .     .    .      4-Cyclodode eyl-2, 6-dimethyl -morpholine  
Drat (Chlorophacinone) .   .   .  2-(a-P-Chlorophenyl -a-pheylacetyl) indane -1, 3-dione  
DSMA .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Disodium metha nearsonate  
Dursban .    .     .    .     .    .     .      O, O-diethyl O -(3, 5, 6 -trichloro -2-pyridyl) phosphoro phorothioate  
Dusting Sulphur .    .     .    .     .      
Ediphenphos .    .     .    .     .    .      O-ethyl -s, s-diphenyl -dithiophosphate  
Endosulfan .    .     .      .     .     .      6, 7, 8, 9, 10,  10-hexachloro -1, 5, 5a, 6, 9, 9a  hexahydro -6, 9-methano -
2, 4, 3 -benzo (e) -dioxathiepin -3-oxide  
Endothall .    .     .    .     .    .    .      7 oxabicylo (2, 2, 1) -heptane -2, 3-dicarboxylate  
E P T C.    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-ethyl -dipropylthiocarbamate  
Erbon .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  2-(2, 4, 5-trichlorophenoxy)  methyl 2, 2 -dichloropropionate  
Ethion .    .     .     .     .     .     .      Tetraethyl SS ‟ methyl ene bis phospherothiolothionate  
Ethrel .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  2-chloroethane phosphonic acid  
Fenac .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  Sodium 2, 3 , 6-trichlorophenylacetate  
Fenazeflor .    .     .    .    .    .   .   Phenyl 5, 6 -dichlore -2-trifluoromethyl  benzimidazole -1-carboxylate  
Fenitrothion .    .     .    .     .    .      dimethyl 3 -methyl -4-nitrophenyl phosp horothionte  
Fensulfothion .    .     .    .     .    .      diethyl 4 -(methyl  sulphinyl) phenyl phosphorothionate  
Fentinacetate .    .     .    .     .    .      triphenyltin acetate  
Fentin chloride .    .     .     .     .     triphenyltin chloride  
Fentin -hydroxide .    .     .    .    .  triphenyltin hydroxide  
Folex .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  SSS-Tributyl phosphorotrithioate  
Formethion .    .     .    .     .    .      S-(N-formyl -N-methylcarbamoyl methyl) OO -dimethy al 
phosphorodithioate  
Fonofos (Dyfonate) .    .     .    .      O-ethyl -s-phenyl  ethyl phosphorodithioate  
Fujithion .    .     .    .     .    .     .      O, O -Dimethyl -s-Parachlorophenyl phosphorothis  
Gibberellins .    .     .    .     .    .      Gibberellic acid  
Herban .    .     .    .    .    .    .   .      3-5-3-a, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8 -a-hexahydro -4, 7-methanoindanyl) -1, 1-dimethyl 
urea 
Indole  Acetic & Butyric   
Acids .  .    .     .    .     .    .     .     Indole Acetic Acid, Indole Butyric a cid 
loxynil (Pantrol)  .    .     .    .    .  3, 5-di-iodo-4-hydroxy be nzenitrile  
Isobenzan .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 7 , 7-Octac hloro-1, 3, 3a, 4,  7, 7a -hexahydro -4, 7, 
methanois olbenzofuran  
Isononuron .    .     .    .     .     .      N‟ (hexahydro -4, 7, methanoindan -1-yl) NN -dimethyl urea  
Kitazin .    .     .    .     .    .      .      O-O-Di-isopropyl -s-Benzyle thiophosphate  
Lenacil .    .     .    .     .    .      .      3-cyclohexyl -5, 6-trimethyleneuracil  25 
 Linuron .    .     .    .     .    .     .      N-(3, 4-dichlorophenyl) -N-methoxy -N-methylurea  
Lucel .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  5, 6, 7, 8 -tetrachloroquin ecxaline  
Machete (Butachlor) .    .     .    . (2-chloro -2‟, 6‟-diethyl -N-(Butoxymethyl) -acetanilide)  
M. C. P. B.   .    .     .    .     .    .      4-(4-Chloro -2-methylphenox y) butyric acid 
Menazon .    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-(4-, 6-diamino -1, 3, 5-triazin -2-yl methyl) dimethyl -
phosphorothiolothionate  
Methamidophos .    .     .    .     .     O-S-dimethyles ter amide of thiphosphoric acid  
Meta m Sodium .    .     .    .     .     N-methyldithiocarbamic acid  
Methomyl .   .     .    .     .    .    .  S-methyl N -((methylcarbamoyl) oxy) thioacetimidate  
Methylmetiram .    .     .    .     .     Ammonium complex with Zn -(N‟ N-1, 2 -propylene bis-
(dithiocarbamate) a nd N ‟, N‟-Poly-1, 2-propylene -bis (Thiocarbamoyl) -
di-sulphid  
Metiram .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Ammonium c omplex with Zn -(N, „N-1, 2 -Ethylene bis, 
(dithiocarbamate) and N ‟-N‟-Poly-1, 2-propylene -bi (Thiocarbamoyl) -
disulphid  
Metoxuron .    .     .    .     .     .      N‟ (3-chloro -4-methoxyphenyl) -N, N -dimethyl urea 
Mevinphos .    .     .    .     .    .      2-methoxy carbonyl -1-methyl vinyl dimethyl phosphate  
MIPCIN .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2-inpropylphenyl -N-methyl carbamate  
Menap .    .     .    .    .     .   .   .      O-Ethyl S, S-dipropyl p hosphordithi oate 
Molinate .    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-Ethyl -N-hexaphydro -1 H-azepinut hiolcarbamte  
Monocrotophos .    .     .    .     .     3-Hydroxy -N-methyl -crotonamide di methyl phosphate  
Monolinuron .    .     .    .     .    .      N-(4-chlorophenyl) -N-Methoxy -N-methyl urea  
MSMA .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Monosodium metha earsonate  
Neled .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  1, 2-dibromo -2, 2-dichloroethyl dimethyl phosphate  
Naphythylacetic acid .    .     .     Naphthylacetic acid and its derivations  
Naburon .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1-Butyl -3-(3-4-dichlorophenyl) -1-methyl urea  
Nemafos (Thinonzim) .    .     .     O, O -diethyl C -2 pyrazinyl phosphorothioate  
Neopynamin .    .     .    .     .    .      3, 4, 5,  6-tetrahydro -phthalimidomethyl chrysauthanate  
Nickel Chloride .    .     .    .     .    Nicke1 C hloride  
Nitrofen .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 4-dichlorophenyl 4 -nitrophenyl ether  
Omethoate .    .     .     .     .     .      dimethyl 8 (N -methyl -carbamoylmethyl) phosphorothioate  
Orthane .    .     .    .     .    .     .      O, S-Dimethyl N -acetyl phosphoramidothioate  
Oxapyrazon .    .     .    .     .    .      (5-bromo -1, 6 -dithydro -6-oxo-1-phenyl -4-pyridazinyl Oxamicacid - 
compound with 2  dimethyl aminoethanol  (1 & 1) 
Oxycarboxin (DCMCD) .    .   .  5, 6-dihydro -2-methyl -1, 4-oxathiin -3-carboxanilide 4, 4 -dioxide  
Paraquat .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1, 1-dimethyal -4, 4-bipyridylium ion  
Pebulate .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1, Propyl -butyl -ethylthiocarbamate  
Phenthoate .    .     .     .      .    .      S-a-ethoxy carbonylbenzyl -O, O -dimethyl phosphore rodithioate  26 
 Phorate .    .     .    .     .     .     .      diethyl S -(ethylthizethyl) phosphorothiolithicate  
Phosalone .    .     .    .   .    .    .      S (6 -echloro -2-oxabenzoxazol in-3-yl)-methyl -O, O di ethyl -
phosphorodithioate  
Phosphamidon .    .     .    .     .     2-chloro -2-2-diethyl car bamoyl -1-methylvinyl dimet hyle Phosphate  
Phosphorus paste .    .     .    .      Phosphorus paste  
Phosmet (Imidan) .    .     .     .      O, O -dimethy l-S-phthallimide -methylphosphoro dithioate  
Phosvel (Leptophos) .    .    .    .     O-(2, 5 dichlori -4-bromophenyl) O -methyl Phenyl -thiophosphorate  
Phoxim .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Phenylglyoxylonitrile oxime O -O-diethyl phosphorothioate  
Picloram .    .     .    .     .    .     .      4-amino -3, 5, 6, trichoroplcolinic acid  
Plictran .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Tricy clohexyl tinehydrox ide derivatives  
Pronamide (Kerb) .    .     .    .      3, 5-dichloro -N-(1,-dimethyl -2 propynyl) benxamide  
Propanil .    .     .    .     .    .     .      3, 4,-dichlorpropionanilide  
Propargite (Omite) .    .     .    .      Prop -2-ynyl-(4-butyl phonoxy) - eyclohexyl sulphite  
Propineb .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Zine propylenebdithiocatbamate (polymeric)  
Prop oxur.    .     .    .     .    .     .      O-Isoprop oxyphenylmethyl carbamate  
Pryn achlor .    .     .    .     .    .      O-N-butyn -(1)-y; Choloroacetanilide  
Pyracarbolid .    .     .    .     .    .      2-methyl -5, 6-dihydro -4-N-pyran -3-carboxylic anilide  
Pyrazon (PCA) .    .     .    .     .     5-amino -4-chloro -2-phenyl -3-pyridazone  
Quinalphos .    .     .    .     .    .      O, O-diethyl quinoxalin -2 yl phosphorothioate  
Rabicide .    .     .    .     .    .     .      4, 5, 6, 7,—tetrachloropthalide  
Ro-Neet .    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-ethyl N -ethyl -N-cyclohexylthiocarbamate  
Ronnel .    .     .    .     .    .     .      O, O -Dimethyl O -(2, 4, 5 -trichlorophenyl) Phosphorothioate  
S-421.    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  Octachlor odipropyl -ether  
Sclex.    .     .    .     .    .     .     . 3-(3, 5-dichlorophenyl) -5, 5-dimethyl oxazolidinedione -2,4 
Simazine .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2-Chloro -4, 6-bis (ethylamino) S -trazine  
Sindone A .    .     .    .     .    .      1, 1-dimethyl -4, 6-di-isopropyl -indanyl ethyl ketone  
Sindone B .    .     .    .     .    .      1, 1, 4-trimethyl -4, 6-di-isopropyl -5-indanyl ethyl ke ione 
Sirmate .    .     .    .     .    .     .      3, 4 and 2, 3 -Dichlorobenzyl N -methyl carbamate  
Swep .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  methyl 3, 4 dichlor ocarba -nilate  
Tar Acid .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Complex phenolic compounds or tar oil or creosotes  
Tavron G .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 2, 2 -trichlorocethyl stryrene  
Tecnazene .    .     .    .     .    .      1, 2, 4, 5-tetrachloro -3-nitrobenzenes  
Terbacil .    .     .    .     .    .     .      3-t-butyl -5-chloro -6-methyluracil  
Tetrachlorvinphos (Gardona) .  2-chloro -1-(2, 4, 5 -trichlorophenyl) vinyl dimethyl phosphate  
Tetram .    .     .    .     .    .     .      O, O -Diethyl S -(2-diethylamino) ethyl phosphorothioate hydrogen 
oxalate  
2, 4, 5 -TB.    .     .    .     .    .    .  4-(2, 4, 5 -trichlorophenoxy) butyric acid  
Thiadiazinthion (Terracur) .    .      5-Carboxymethyl -3-methyl -2 N-1, 3, 5 -thiadia -zin 2 -thione  27 
 Thiophanate -M.    .     .    .     .     1, 2-di-(3-methoxy -carbonyl -2-thio-ureid) benzene  
Tranid .    .     .    .     .     .      .      exo-3-chloro -endo -6-cyano -2 norbornan O (methyl -carbamoyl ) oxime  
Triallate .    .     .    .     .    .    .      S-2, 2, 3 -Trichloroallyl dis -lsopropyl thio -carbam ate 
Tridemorph .    .     .    .     .    .      2, 6-dimethyl -4-tridecyl morpholone  
Tunic .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  2, (3, 4-dichlorophenyl) -4-Methyl -1, 2, 4 -oxadiazolinine -3, 5-dione  
Udon kor.    .     .    .     .    .     .      N-(beta -cyanothyl) monochloroacetamide  
Vamidothion .    .     .    .     .    .      O, O -demethyl -S-(2-1-methyl 18 carbamoylethylthioethyl) 
phosphorothioate  
Vegetta .    .     .    .     .     .     .      Ethylene thiuram monosulphide  
Vornzolate .    .     .    .     .     .      S-propyl NN -diprophyl thiolcarbamate  
Zectran .    .     .    .     .    .     .      4-dimethylamino -3, 5-xylyl -N-methylcarbamate  
Basagram .    .     .    .     .    .     .      3-Isopropyl -I-N-2, 3-benxothiadixin 4 -(3H) -one 2, 2 -dioxide  
Basalin .    .     .    .     .    .      .      N-(2-chloresthyl) -N-propyl -trifluoro 2, 6 -dinitro -p-toluldne  
Bavistin .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2-(methoxy -carbomoyl) -benzim -dazole  
Campo gram M .    .     .     .     .     2, 5-dimethyl -furan 3 -carbonic acid anilide and 320 gms og (Zink)  
Trifluralin .    .     .     .      .     .      2, 6-dinitro -NN-dipropyl -4-triflouromethyl aniline  
Flume turon.    .     .     .     .     .      N-(3-trifluro -methylphenyl) -N‟-N”-dimethylurea  
Metabromuron .    .     .     .     .     N-(P-bromophenyl) -N‟-methyl -N‟-methexyurea  
Mancozeb .    .     .     .      .     .      Zinc-Manganese ethylene -bis-dithiocarbamate]  
1[Methabenz othiazuron .    .     .     1, 3-Dimethyl -3 (2, benzothiozolyl) -urea]  
2[Streptomycin .    .     .     .     .      
Tetracyclines .    .     .    .     .    .       
Terbuteryne .    .     .    .     .    .      (2-tert, butylamino -4-ethylamino -6-methylthio -S-trazine)  
Glysophosate .    .     .    .     .    .      [N-1 (Phosphonomethyl) glycine  present a s isoprop hylamine salt  
Bacil us thuringien isis].    .     .      
3[Benthiocarb .    .     .    .     .   .      S-(4-chlorobenzyl) -N, N -diethylthiol carbamate  
Cypermethrin .    .     .    .     .    .      OC-cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl -2, 2 -dimethyl -3-(2, 2 -dichlorovinyl) 
cyclopropane carbo xylate  
Decamethrin .    .     .    .     .    .      (S)-OC-cyano -m-phenoxybenzyl ( 1R, 3R) -3-(2, 2 -dibromoviny l)  
dimethyl, cyclopropane carboxylate  
Fenvalerate .    .     .    .     .    .      OC-cyano -m-phenoxybenzyl -OC isopropyl -p-chlorophenyl acetate  
Permethrin .    .     .     .     .    .      3-phenoxy benzyl ( trans -3-(2, 2 -dischlorovinyl) -2, 2- dimethyl -
cyclopropane carboxylate . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 823(E), dated 28 -9-1976.  
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 201(E),  dated 29 -3-1978.  
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 574(E), dated 6 -10-1979.  28 
 Tetrachloroi sophthalonitrile .   . 1, 2, 4 -Trichloro -3, 5-dinitro  benz ine] 
1[Bromophos .    .     .    .     .    .      O—(4-bromo -2, 5-dichlorophenyl)  OO-dimethyl phosphoroithioate . 
Bromophes ethyl .    .     .    .   .   O-(4-bromo -2, 5-dichlorophenyl) OO -diethyl phosphorothioate . 
Cartap .    .     .    .     .     .      .      1, 3-di (carbamoylthio) -2-dimethylaminopropan e. 
Dichlorophen  (Antiphen) .   .  . 5, 5-dichloro 2, 2, dihydroxy diphenyl methane . 
Dinobuton .    .      .     .     .     .      Isopropyl -2-(1-methyl -n-propyl) -4, 6-dinitrophenyl carbonate . 
Dithianon .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 3-dicyano-1, 4-dithia -anthr aquinone . 
Ethyl formate .    .     .    .     .    .      Ethyl formate . 
Fenfuram .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2-methyl furan -3-carboxanilide -glycine  
Glyphosine .    .     .    .     .     .      N, N-bis (phosphonomethyl) . 
Guazatine .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1,17-diguanidion -9-azahepta decane . 
Isofanphos .    .     .     .     .     .      O-ethyl -O-(2-isopropoxy -carbonyl)  phenyl isopropyl 
phosphoramidothioate  
Isoproturon .    .     .    .     .    .      N, N-dimethyl -N‟-4-isopropyl phenyl urea . 
Magnesium  phosphide .    .     .     Magnesium phosphide . 
Matribuzin .    .     .     .     .     .      4-amino -6-tort. butyl -3-(methyl thio) -1, 2, 4-triazin -5-(4H) -One. 
Triadimefon .    .     .    .     .    .      1-(4-chlorophenoxy) -3, 3 -dimethyl -1-(1H-1, 2 , 2, 4-tridzol -1-yl)-2-
butanone . 
Triforine .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1, 4-di-(2, 2, 2-trichlor o-1 formamidoethyl) -piperazine . 
Vacor .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  N-3-pyridyl methyl -N P-nitrophenyl urea .] 
2[Amirt raz.    .     .     .      .     .      2—methyl —1, 3—di—(2—4—xylylimino)  2—azapropane . 
Bendiocarb .    .     .    .     .     .      2, 2—dimethylbenzo —1, 3—dioxol 4 —yl methly l carbamate . 
Benzolyprop -ethyl .    .     .     .      ethyl N-benzoyl —N—(3, 4—dichlorophenyl)  —DL ala ninate . 
Cyanazine .    .     .     .     .     .      2—(4—Chloro —6—ethylamino —1, 3, 5 —triazin —2—ylamino) 2—
methyl prop ionitrile . 
Etrimfos .    .     .    .     .    .     .      0—(6—ethoxy —2—ethyl —4—pthrim-dinyl) 0, 0—dimethyl 
phosphorothioate . 
Glyodin .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2—heptadecyl —3, 4—dihydr o—I—H—imidazoly l acetate . 
Oxadiazon .    .     .    .     .   .    .      3—(2, 4 —dichloro —5—(I—methylethoxy) ph ynyl)—5—(1, 1-
dimethylethyl) —thyl)  —1, 3, 4—oxad iazol-2(3H)  —one. 
Oxyfluorfen .    .     .    .     .    .      2—Chloro —1—(3—ethoxy —4—nitrophenoxy) 4 —trifluormethyl 
benzene . 
Propetamphos .    .     .    .    .   .     (E)—0—2—isopropoxycarbony —1—methyl vinyl —0—methyl 
ethylpho s phoramidothioate . 
Scilliroside .    .     .    .     .    .      3B, 6B —6—accetyloxy —3—(B-D—glucopy -ranosyloxy) 8, 14 —
dihydroxybufa —1, 20,  22, trienolide . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 32(E), dated 12 -2-1980.  
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 501(E), dated 17 -7-1982.  29 
 Thiocyclam .    .     .    .     .    .      
(hydrogenoxalate ) N, N —dimethyl —1, 2, 3 —trithmn—5—amine hydrogenoxalate . 
Vinclozolin .    .     .    .     .    .      3—(3, 5 —dichlorophenyl) —5—ethenyl —5—methyl —2, 4 —
oxazol idinedione . 
Benodanil .    .     .    .    .   .    .      2—Iodo—N—phenylbenzamide . 
Diclofop -methyl .    .     .    .     .     2—(4—(2, 4—dichlorophenoxy) phenoxy) —propanoic acid . 
Metalaxyl .    .     .    .     .    .     .      methyl —2-(methoxyacetyl) —(2.6—xylyl) -DL-alaninate . 
Pendimethalin .    .    .   .    .    .     N—(1—ethyl propyl )—3, 4—dimethyl 2, 6—dinitrobenzeneamin . 
Foseth yl Aluminium .    .     .    .   Aluminium tris (ethyl —phosphonate)  
Thiabendazole .    .     .     .     .     2(4—Thiazoloyl) —benzimidazole . 
Butrizol .    .     .    .     .    .     .      4—n—butyl —4H—1, 24 —triazole  
TCMTB .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2—(Thioyanomethyl —thio) , ben zothiazole  
Bromadiolone .    .   .    .    .    .     3—3—4‟—bromol, 1 —biphenyl —4, Y —3 hydroxy —1—phenyl 
propyl —4 hydroxy —2 H—1—benzopyran —2—one.]  
 
1[Flucythrinate —RS—(Cyano -3-3-Phenoxy benzyl(s) —2—(4—difluometoxy phenyl) -methyl -
butyrate.  
Triazophos —O, O -diethyl , O-1-phenyl -1, 2-4-triazol -3 ylphosphorothioate.  
Diflbenzuron —1-(4-chlorophenyl) -3 (2), 6 -difluorobenzoyal) urea.  
Bitertanol —B-(1, 1-biphenyl)  4-yloxy) -L (1, 1-dimethylethyl -IH-1, 2, 4-triazole -1-ethrnol. 
Sethoxydim —2, 1-(ethoxymine) butyl -5 (2-ethylthiopropyl) -3-hydroxy -2-cyclo hexen -1-one. 
Brodifacoum —3-(3-(4‟-bromobiphenyl -4-yl)-1, 2, 3, 4 -tetrahydr o-1-naphthyl) -4-hydroxy -
coumarin.  
Methoprene —Isopropyl (2E, 4E) -11-methoxy -3, 7, 11-trimethyl -2, 4-dodecadienoate.]  
 
2[Isoprothiolane .    .     .    .     .     diesopropyl -1, 3-dithiolan -2-yl idenemalenate . 
Carbosulfan .    .     .    .     .    .      2, 3-dihydro -2, 2-dimethyl -7-benzofuranyl [(dibutylamine) thio] methyl 
carbamate . 
Prochloraz .    .     .    .     .    .   .   N-propy l-N-[2-(2, 4, 6 -trichilorophenox y) ethyl] -imidazole -1-
caroxamide.  
Methacrifos .    .     .    .     .    .      O-2-methoxycarbonylprop -1-enyl O, O -dimethyl -phosphorothioate.  
Chlortoluron .    .     .    .     .    .      3-(3-chloro -p-tolyl) -1, 1-dimethylurea.  
Probenazole .    .     .    .     .    .      3-allyloxy -1, 2-benzolsothiazol -I, 1-dioxide.  
Fluvalinate .    .     .    .     .    .      (RS) -d-cyano -3, phenoxybenzy -1, (R)-2-(2-chloro -4-trifluoromethyl —
aniline) -3-methyl butanoate.  
DEPA .    .     .    .     .    .    .   .    N-diethyl -phenyl acetamide.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 500(E), dated 18 -6-1985 . 
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 839(E), dated 14 -11-1985 . 30 
 Fenpropathrin .    .     .    .    .   .     d-Cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl -2, 2, 3, 3 -tetramethyl -1-
cyclopropancarboxylate.  
Phenothrin .    .     .     .      .     .      3-phenoxybenzyl (1RS) -cis, transchrysanthemate.  
Kasugamucin .    .     .    .     .    .      [5-amino -2-methyl -6-(2, 3, 4, 5, 6 -pentahydroxy cyclohexyl) 
totrahydropyran -3-yl] amino -a-iminoacetic acid.  
Amidin e   
Hydrazone .    .     .     .     .     .      Tetrahydro -5, 5 -dimethyl -2 (1H) -pyrimidilone [3 -[4-trifluoromethyl) 
phenyl] -1-[2-[4; trifluormethyl phenyl ethenyl -2-propenyldene] 
hydraz one. 
Anilofos .    .     .    .     .    .     .      S[N(4 -chloro -phenyl-)N-isopropyl -carbomoyl -methyl] -O, O -dimethy l-
dithiophosphate.  
A herbal extract containing diallyl disulphide, Allyl propyl disulphide and Allyl isothiocyanate, diallyl 
disulphide, Allyl propyl disulphide and allyl isothiocyanate.] . 
1[Phenamiphos .    .     .    .     .     ethyl 4 -methylthio -m-tolyl. 
(Fenamiphos) .    .     .    .     .     Isopropylphosphoramidate . 
Ametryne .    .     .    .     .    .     .      N-ethyl -N1-(1-methylethyl) -6-(methylthio) -1, 3, 5-triazine -2, 4 -
diamine . 
Prometryne .    .     .    .     .    .      N, N1 -bis (1 -methylethyl) -6-(methylthio) -1, 3, 5 -triazine -2, 4-diamine . 
Fluazifop .    .     .    .     .    .     .      P : (IUPAC) (R) -2-[4-(5-trifluoromethyl -2,-pyridyloxy) phenoxy l- 
propioni acid] . 
1[BORIC  ACID .    .     .    .     .     Ortho :  -boric acid . 
BROMOPROPYLATE .    .     .     Isopropyl 4, 4 —dibromobenzilate . 
RESMETHRIN .    .     .    .     .     5-benzyl -3-furylmethyl (1 RS, 3  RS, 1 RS, 3SR) -2, 2-dimethyl 3-(2-
methylprop -1-enyl)  cyclopropanecarboxylate . 
AZAMETHIPHOS .    .     .    .      S-6 chloro -2, 3-dihydro -2-oxooxazolo (4, 5 -b) pyridine -3-ylmethyl o, 
o-dimethyl phphorothiate . 
METOLACHLOR .    .     .    .      2-Chloro -6‟-ethyl -N-(2-methoxyl -1-methylethyl) acceto -toluidide . 
VALIDAMYCIN A .    .     .    .      1L-(1, 3, 4/2, 6) -2, 3-dihydroxy -6-hydroxymethyl -4-(1S, 4R, 5S, 6 S)-4, 
5, 6-trihydroxy 3 -hydroxymethycyclohex -2-enylamino ) cyclothexyl -B-
D-glucopyranoside . 
HALOXYFOP METHYL .    .      Methyl 2 -(4-[(3-chloro -5-(trifluoromethyl -2-pyridinyl)  oxy] phenoxy) 
propionate.  
PIMARICIN .    .     .    .     .    .      (8E, 14E, 16E, 18E, 20E) -(1S, 3R, 5S , 7S, 12R, 24R, 25S, 26R), -22-
(3- amino -3-6-dideoxy -B-D-mannopyranosyloxy) -1, 3, 26 -trihydroxy -
12-methyl -10-oxo-6, 11, 28 -trioxatricyclo (22.3.1.05.7) octacosa -8, 14, 
16, 18, 20 -pentaene -25-carboxylic acid . 
CYHALOTHRIN .   .    .    .    .      (RS)-a-cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl (Z) -(1RS, 3 RS)-(2-choloro -3, 3,                      
3-trifluoropropenyl) -2, 2-domethyl -cyclo -propane -carboxylate . 
CHOLECALCIREROL .    .    . 9, 10-seocholesta -5, 7, 10 (10) -trein-3 betaol ; activate                            
7- dehydrocholes terol. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. 511(E),  dated 25 -5-1987 . 31 
 TOLCLOFOS -METHYL .   .   .      0-(2, 6-dichloro -4-methylphenyl) 0 , 0-dimethyl phosphorothioat e. 
PIPEROPHOS .    .     .    .     .     S-2-methylp iperidincoarbonylmethyl  O, O -dipropyphos -phorodithioate.  
CHLORPYRIPHOSMETHYL . O, O -dimethyl 0-3, 5, 6-trichloro -2-pyridyl -phospho rothioate.]  
1. 1[CYPERMETHRIN .    .    .    
(SLR-Cis-and R-LS-L-Cis-
isomer)  (ALPHAMETHRIN)  (IUPAC) (S)- alpha -cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl (1 R, 3R) -3-(2,                   
2-dichlor ovinyl) -2, 2-dimethyl cyclopropane Carboxy late & ( R)-alpha -
cyano -3-Phenoxybenzyl ( 1S, 3S) -3-(2, 2 -dichlorovinyl) -2, 2-dimethyl 
cyclopropane  carboxylate . 
2. BENFURACAR B.    .     .    .      (IUPAC) Ethyl N -2, 3 -dihydro -2, 2 -dimethyl benzofuron -7-yl 
oxycarbonyl (methyl aminothio )-    N-isopropyl -  β-alaninate . 
3. CYPHENOTHRIN .    .     .         (IUPAC) (RS) -γ-cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl (IR) -Cis, trans -
chrysanthem ete. 
4. CYFLUTHRIN .    .     .    .      (IUPAC) Cyano -(4-fluro -3-phenoxyphenyl methyl -3-(2,                            
2-dichloroethenyl) -2, 2-dimethyl -cyclopropane  carboxylate . 
5. DIMETHAZONE .    .   .    .        (IUPAC) 2 -(2-chlorophenyl -4-4-dimethyl -3-isoxazolidi none) . 
6. DIENOCHLOR .    .     .    .      (IUPAC) Perchloro -1, 1-bicyclopenta -2, 4-diene. 
7. EPIIOFENPROX .    .    .    .    2-(4-ethroxyphenyl) -2-methylpropyl -3-phenoxy -benzyl ether . 
8. FLOCOUMAFEN .    .   .    .    4-hydroxy -3-(1, 2, 3, 4 -tetrahydro -3-[4-(4-trifluromethyl benzyloxy  = 
phenyl -1-napthy l] conmarin (mixture of Cis & trans  isomers ). 
9. FENARIMOL .    .     .    .     .     (IUPAC) ( ±)-2, 4-dichloro -a-(Pyrimidin -5-yl) benzhydryl alcohol . 
10. FLUROXYPYR .    .     .    .        (IUPAC) 4 -amino -3, 5-dichloro -6-fluro -2-pyridyloxy acetic acid . 
11. FLUFENOXURON .    .     .       1-(4-2-chloro -4- (trifluoromethly l) phenoxy 2-fluorophenyl) 3  (2-6-
difluorobenzoyl) urea . 
12. FOLPET .    .     .    .     .    .        (IUPAC) N -(trichloromethylthio) phthalimide . 
13. CLOPYRALID .    .     .    .        (IUPAC) 3, 6 -dichloropyridine -2-carboxylic acid . 
14. MYCLOBUTANIL .    .     .        (IUPAC) 2 -p-chlorophenyl -2-(1H-1, 2, 4-triazol -1-yl-methyl ) 
hoxane nitrile . 
15. METHEDATHION .    .     .       S-2, 3-dithydro -5-methoxy -2-oxo-1, 3, 4 -thiadizol -3-yl-methyl O -O- 
dimethyl phosphorodithioate . 
16. OXADIXYL .    .     .    .     .         (IUPAC) 2 - methoxy -N-(2-oxo-1, 3-oxazolidin -3-yl) acet -2, 6-xylidide . 
17. PENCONAZOLE .   .    .    .          (IUPAC) 1 -(2, 4-dichloro -β-propyphenethyl) 1 H-1, 2, 4, -triazole . 
18. PRETILACHLOR .     .     .         (IUPAC) 2 -chloro -2, 6-diethyl -N (2-propoxyethyl) acetanilide . 
19. PRALLETHRIN .    .     .    .         RS-2-methyl -3-(2-propynyl) 4 -oxocyclopen t-2-enyl (IR) -Cis, trans -
chrysanthemat . 
20. PYRIDATE .    .     .    .     .     (IUPAC) 6 - chloro-3-phenyl pyridazin -4-yl S-octyl  thiocarbonate . 
21. PYRO GULION.    .     .    .      (IUPAC) 1, 2, 5, 6-tetrahydropyrrolo (3, 2, 1 -i j) quinolin -4-one. 
22. PYRIDAPHENTHION .    .      O, O -diethyl 2, 3 -dihydro -3-OXO -2-phenyl -6-pyrida -zinyl -
phosphorothioate . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 858(E), dated 12 -8-1988 . 32 
 23. SULPROFOS .    .      .     .         (IUPAC) O-ethyl O-4 (methylthio) phenyl S-propyl phosphoro dithioate  
24. SEBUPHOS .    .     .    .     .        S, S-di-sec-butyl O -ethyl phosphorodithioate . 
25. TRIADIMENOL .     .     .         (IUPAC) 1 -(4-chlorophenoxy) -3, 3-dimethyl -1-LH-1, 2 4 -triazol -1-yl) 
butan -2-ol. 
26. TRICYCLAZOLE .    .     .        (IUPAC) 5-methyl -1, 2, 4, -triazole  (3, 4-b) (1, 3) benzothiazole . 
27. TRIDIPHANE .    .     .    .         (IUPAC)  (RS) -2- (3, 5 -dichloro phenyl) -2-(2, 2, 2, -trichloroethyl) 
oxirane].  
 
--------------------------The Jammu and Kashmir Representation of the People (Supplementary) Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(SUPPLEMENTARY) ACT, 1968  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Application of sections 116A, 116B and 116C of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, 
to orders made by Jammu and Kashmir High Court.  
3. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE 
(SUPPLEMENTARY) ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1968  
[23rd March , 1968 .] 
An Act to supplement the Jammu and Kashmir Representation of the People Act, 1957.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir 
Representation of the People (Supplementary) Act, 1968.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 9th day of February, 1968.  
2. Application of sections 116A, 116B and 116C of the Representation of the People          
Act, 1951, to orders made by Jammu and Kashmir High Court .—The provisions of sections 
116A, 116B and 116C of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) shall, so far as may 
be, apply to every order made by the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir subject to the following                
modifications, namel y:— 
(a) references therein to the High Court shall be construed as including references to the High 
Court of Jammu and Kashmir,  
(b) references therein to the State Legislature or to the Speaker or Chairman thereof, shall be 
construed as including reference s to the Legislature of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and to the 
Speaker or Chairman thereof, and  
(c) references therein to the provisions of the Represen tation of the People                           
Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) , shall, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, be construed as 
references to the corresponding provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Representation of the 
People Act, 1957  (Jammu and Kashmir Act No . IV of 1957) . 
 3. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Jammu and Kashmir Representation o f the People 
(Supplementary) Ordinance, 1968 (2 of 1968)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act  1957.  
 
 
--------------------------The Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) ACT, 1968  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and Commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Investigation into misbehaviour or incapacity of Judge by Committee.  
4. Report of Committee . 
5. Powers of Committee . 
6. Consideration of report and procedure for presentation of an address for removal of Judge.  
7. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE JUDGES (INQUIRY) ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 51 OF 1968  
[5th December , 1968.]  
An Act to regulate the procedure for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour  or 
incapacity of a judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and for the presentation of 
an address by Parliament t o the President and for matters  connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as fol lows:— 
1. Short title and Commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Council of States;  
(b) “Committee ” means a Committee constituted under  section 3;   
(c) “Judge” means a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and includes the Chief 
Justice of India and th e Chief Justice of a High Court ;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act ;  
(e) “Speaker” means the Speaker of the House of the Peop le.  
3. Investigation into misbehaviour or incapacity of Judge by Committee. —(1) If notice is 
given of a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for  the removal of a              
Judge signed, —  
(a) in the case of a notice given in the House of the People, by not less than one hundred 
members of that House;  
(b) in the case of a notice given in the Council of States, by not less than fifty members of   
that Council;  
then, the Speaker or, as the case ma y be, the Chairman may,  after consulting such persons,  if any, as 
he thinks fit and after considering such materials, if any, as may be available to him, either admit the 
motion or refuse to admit the same.  
(2) If the motion referred to in sub -section ( 1) is admitted, the Speaker or, as the case may be, the 
Chairman shall keep the motion pending and constitute, as soon as may be, for the purpose of making 
an investigation into the grounds on which the removal of a Judge is prayed for, a Committee 
consistin g of three members of whom —  
(a) one shall be chosen from among the Chief Justice and ot her Judges of the Supreme Court ;  
(b) one shall be chosen from among the Chi ef Justices of the High Courts, and  
(c) one shall be a person who is, in the opinion of , the Speaker or, as the case may be, the 
Chairman, a distinguished jurist:  
Provided that where notices of a motion referred to in sub -section ( 1) are given on the same day in 
both Houses of Parliament, no Committee shall be constituted unless the motion has been admitted in 
both Houses and where such motion has been admitted in both Houses, the Committee shall be 
constituted jointly by the Speaker  and the Chairman:  
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1969, vide notification No. G.S.R. 35, dated the 1st January, 1969, see Gazette of India, 1969, Extraordinary,    
Part II, sec. 3(i). 
 3 
 Provided further that where notices of a motion as aforesaid are given in the Houses of Parliament 
on different dates, the notice which is given later shall stand rejected.  
(3) The Committee shall frame definite charges against the Judge on the basis of which the 
investigation is proposed to be held.  
(4) Such charges together with a statement of the grounds on which each such charge is based 
shall be communicated to the Judge and he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a 
written statement of defence within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Committee.  
(5) Where it is alleged that the Judge is unable to discharge the duties of his office effici ently due 
to any physical or mental incapacity and the allegation is denied, the Committee may arrange for the 
medical examination of the Judge by such Medical Board as may be appointed for the purpose by the 
Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman or , where the Committee is constituted jointly by the 
Speaker and the Chairman, by both of them, for the purpose and the Judge shall submit himself to 
such medical examination within the time specified in this behalf by the Committee.  
(6) The Medical Board shall undertake such medical examination of the Judge as may be 
considered necessary and submit a report to the Committee stating therein whether the incapacity is 
such as to render the Judge unfit to continue in office.  
(7) If the Judge refuses to underg o medical examination considered necessary by the Medical 
Board, the Board shall submit a report to the Committee stating therein the examination which the 
Judge has refused to undergo, and the Committee may, on receipt of such report, presume that the 
Judge suffers from such physical or mental incapacity as is alleged in the motion referred to in        
sub-section ( 1).  
(8) The Committee may, after considering the written statement of the Judge and the medical 
report, if any, amend the charges framed unde r sub -section ( 3) and in such a case, the Judge shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity of presenting a fresh written statement of defence.  
(9) The Central Government may, if required by the Speaker or the Chairman, or both, as the case 
may be, appoint an  advocate to conduct the case against the Judge.  
4. Report of Co mmittee.—(1) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the 
Committee shall have power to regulate its own procedure in making the investigation and shall give 
a reasonable opportu nity to the Judge of cross -examining witnesses, adducing evidence and of being 
heard in his defence.  
(2) At the conclusion of the investigation, the Committee shall submit its report to the Speaker or, 
as the case may be, to the Chair man, or where the Committee has been constituted jointly by the 
Speaker and the Chairman, to both of them, stating therein its findings on each of the charges 
separately with such observations on the whole case as it thinks fit.  
(3) The Speaker or the Cha irman or, where the Committee has been constituted jointly by the 
Speaker and the Chairman, both of them, shall cause the report submitted under sub -section ( 2) to be 
laid, as soon as may be, respectively before the House of the Peop le and the Council of S tates.   
5. Powers of Committee. —For the purpose of making any investigation under this Act the 
Committee shall have the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit, under th e Code of Civil  
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters , namely:—  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any perso n and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents ;  
(c) receiving evidence on oath ;  
(d) issuing  commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents ;  
(e) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
6. Consideration of report and procedure for presentation of a n address for removal           
of Judge. —(1) If the report of the Committee contains a  finding that the Judge is not guilty of any 4 
 misbehaviour or does no t suffer from any incapacity, then  no further steps shall be taken in either 
House of Parliament in relation to the report and the motion pending in the House or the Houses of 
Parliament s hall not be proceeded with.  
(2) If the report of the Committee contains a finding that the Judge is guilty of any misbehaviour 
or suffers from any incapacity, then, the motion referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 shall ,         
together with the report of the Committee, be taken up for consideration by the House or the Houses 
of Parliament in which it is pending.  
(3) If the motion is adopted by each House of Parliament in accordance with the provisions of 
clause ( 4) of article 124 or, as the case may be, in accordance with that clause read with article 218 of 
the Constitution, then, the misbehavio ur or incapacity of the Judge shall be deemed to have been 
proved and an address praying for the removal of the Judge sha ll be presented in the prescribed 
manner to the President by each House of Parliament in the same session in which the motion has 
been adopted.  
7. Power to make rules. —(1) There shall be constituted a Joint Committee of both Houses of 
Parliament in accord ance with the provisions hereinafter contained for the purpose of making rules to 
carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Joint Committee shall consist of fifteen members of whom ten shall be nominated by the 
Speaker and five shall be nominated by the  Chairman.  
(3) The Joint Committee shall elect its own Chairman a nd shall have power to regulate its        
own procedure.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Joint Committee 
may make rules to provide for the  following among other matters, namely: —  
(a) the manner of transmission of a motion adopted in one House to the other House of 
Parliament;  
(b) the manner of presentation of an address to the President  for the removal of a Judge;   
(c) the  travelling and other allowances payable to the members of the Committee and the 
witnesses who may be re quired to attend such Committee ;  
(d) the facilities which may be accorded to the Judge for defending himself;  
(e) any other matter which has to be, or  may be, provided for by rules or in respect of which 
provision is, in the opinion of the Joint Committee, necessary.  
(5) Any rules made under this section shall not take effect until they are approved and confirmed 
both by the Speaker and the Chairman an d are published in the Official Gazette, and such publication 
of the rules shall be conclusive proof that they have been duly made.  
--------------------------The Legislative Assembly of Nagaland (Change in Representation) Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF NAGALAND (CHANGE IN  
REPRESENTATION) A CT, 1968  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1968  
[31st December, 1968 .] 
An Act to provide for a change in representation in the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland and 
for that purpose to make consequential amendments in the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 and 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland (Change in 
Representation) Act, 1968.  
2. Change in representation in the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland .—For the period referred to 
in clause ( 2) of article 371 A of the Constitution, the total number of seats allotted to the Legislative 
Assembly  of Nagaland shall be increased from forty -six to fifty -two, of which — 
(a) the seats allotted to the Tuensang district shall be increased from six to twelve and shall be 
filled by persons chosen by the members of the regional council, referred to in that a rticle, from 
amongst themselves in such manner as the Governor of Nagaland, after consulting that council may , 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, and  
(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by persons chosen by direct elections from as sembly 
constituencies in the rest of the State of Nagaland.  
3. [Amendment of Act 27of 1962 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974  (56 of 1974), s. 2 
and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
4. [Amendment of Act 43 of 1950 .] Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
5. Saving as to present Legislative Assembly .—Nothing in this Act shall affect any representation 
in the present Legislative Assembly of Nagaland until its dissolution.  
 
--------------------------The Pondicherry (Extension of Laws) Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE PONDICHERRY (EXTENSION OF LAWS) ACT, 1968  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
 ___________   
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Extension with amendments of certain laws to Pondicherry and their commencement therein . 
4. Repeal and saving . 
5. Extension of rules, orders, etc., under certain laws . 
6. Rules of construction . 
7. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE PONDICHERRY (EXTENSION OF LAWS) ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 26 OF 1968  
[24th May , 1968 .] 
An Act to extend certain Central Acts to the Union territory of Pondicherry.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
 1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Pondicherry (Extension of Laws) Act, 1968.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Act” means an Act or the Ordinance specified in the Schedule;  
(b) “Administrator ” means the administrator of Pondicherry appointed by the President under 
article 239 of the Constitution;  
(c) “Pondicherry ” means the Union territory of Pondicherry.  
3. Extension with amendments of certain laws to Pondicherry and their commencement 
therein .—(1) The Acts specified in Part I of the Schedule as they are generally in force in the territories 
to which t hey extend and the Acts specified in Part II of the Schedule as they were in force on the 1st day 
of August, 1966, in the State or Union territory m entioned there  against shall extend to Pondicherry, 
subject to the modifications, if any, specified in the S chedule.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), or in the relevant provision, if any, of each 
such Act for the commencement thereof, the provisions of each such Act shall come into force in 
Pondicherry on such date as the Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of any Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of the Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming  
into force of that provision.  
4. Repeal and saving .—(1) Any law in force in Pondicherry or any area thereof corresponding to any 
Act referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 or any part thereof (except in so far as such law continues to 
be applicable to Renoncants) shall stand repealed as from the coming into force of such Act in 
Pondicherry.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall effect — 
(a) the previous operatio n of any law so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any law so 
repealed ; or 
(c) any  penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any law so repealed; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishm ent as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act ha s not been passed:  
Provided that anything done or any action ta ken (including any appointment or delegation made, 
notification, instruction or direction issued, form, bye -law or scheme framed, certificate obtained, permit 
or licene granted, or registration effected) under any such law, shall be deemed to have been don e or 
taken under the corresponding provision of the Act extended to Pondicherry by this Act and shall 
continue to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken 
under the said Act.  
  3 
 5. Extension of rules, orders, etc., under certain laws .—All rules, notifications, orders, regulations 
and bye -laws made or issued by the Central Government under the provisions of any Act generally for the 
territories to which such Act extends shall , as from the commencement of the provisions  of such Act in 
Pondicherry, extend to, and come into force in, Pondicherry.  
6. Rules of construction .—(1) In any Act or in any of the rules, notifications, orders, regulations and 
bye-laws made or issued thereunder and extended to Pondicherry by  this Act, — 
(a) any reference to any provision of law not in force, or to any functionary not in existence, in 
Pondicherry shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to the 
corresponding functionary in existence, in that Union territo ry: 
Provided that — 
(i) if any question arises as to who such corresponding functionary is, or  
(ii) if there is no  such corresponding functionary, the Administrator shall decide as to who 
such functionary will be a nd his decision shall be final;  
(b) any reference to the State Government shall be construed as a reference to the Central 
Government and also as including a reference to the Administrator.  
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to Pondicherry of any Act or any rule,  
notification, order, regulation or bye -law made or issued thereunder, any court or other authority may 
construe it in such manner, not affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the 
matter before the court or other authority.  
7. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect in Pondicherry to the 
provisions of any Act extended by this Act to Pondicherry, the Central Government may, as occasion may 
require, by order, make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of 
such Act as appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty and any such order may 
provide for the transfer of any matter pending before any court, tribunal or other authority immed iately 
before the commencement of such Act in Pondicherry to any corresponding court, tri bunal or authority 
for disposal : 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section in respect of any Act after the expiration 
of two years from the date on which such Act comes into force in Pondicherry and in respect of an Act, 
the provisions of which are brought into force in Pondicherry on different dates, the period of two years 
shall be reckoned with reference to the commencement of the relevant provisio n as specified in the 
proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 3.  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 1)] 
PART I 
Year  No. Short title  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 
1839  32 The Interest Act, 1839.    
1850  12 The Public Accountants ‟ Default Act, 
1850.   
1850  18 The Judicial  Officers Protection Act, 1850.    
1850  21 The Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850.    
1851  8 The Indian Tolls Act, 1851.    
  4 
 Year  No. Short title  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 
1855  12 The Legal Representatives ‟ Suits  
Act, 1855.   
1855  13 The Indian Fatal Accidents Act, 1855.    
1856  9 The Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856.    
1856  12 The Civil Courts Amins Act, 1856.    
1859  9 The Forfeiture Act, 1859.    
1863  23 The Waste Lands (Claims) Act, 1863.    
1864  15 The Indian Tolls Act, 1864.    
1865  3 The Carriers Act, 1865.    
1866  21 The Converts‟  Marriage Dissolution  
Act, 1866.  After section 1 , insert: — 
“2. Nothing contained in this Act shall 
apply to saving the Renoncants of the 
Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
1872  9 The Indian Contract Act, 1872.    
1872  15 The Indian Christian Marriage  
Act, 1872.  In section 1, at the end, insert: — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this 
Act shall apply to the Renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
1873  10 The Indian Oaths Act, 1873.    
1875  9 The Indian Majority Act, 1875.  In section 1, at the end insert: — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this 
Act shall apply to the Renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
1880  1 The Religious Societies Act, 1880.    
1880  12 The Kazis Act, 1880.    
1880  13 The Vaccination Act, 1880.    
1882  4 The Transfer of Property Act, 1882.    
1882  5 The Indian Easements Act, 1882.    
1882  7 The Powers -of-Attorney Act, 1882.    
1887  7 The Suits Valuation Act, 1887.    
1887  9 The Provincial Small Cause Courts Act,  
1887.    
1890  1 The Revenue Recovery Act, 1890.    
  5 
 Year  No. Short title  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 
1890  8 The Guardian s and Wards Act, 1890.  In section 1 , after sub -section ( 2), insert: — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this 
Act shall apply to the Renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry. ”  
1891  18 The Bankers ‟ Books Evidence Act, 1891.    
1893  4 The Partition Act, 1893.    
1894  9 The Prisons Act, 1894.    
1897  3 The Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.    
1899  4 The Government Buildings Act, 1899.    
1900  3 The Prisoners Act, 1900.    
1908  16 The Indian Registration Act, 1908.    
1914  9 The Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914.    
1916  15 The Hindu Disposition of Property  
Act, 1916.  In section 1, after sub -section ( 2), insert: — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this 
Act shall apply to the Renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
1917  5 The Destruction of Records Act, 1917.    
1918  10 The Usurious Loans Act, 1918.    
1919  12 The Poisons Act, 1919.    
1920  5 The Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920.    
1920  10 The Indian Securities Act, 1920.    
1920  15 The ind ian Red Cross Society Act, 1920.    
1920  33 The Identification of Prisoners Act, 1920.    
1921  18 The Maintenance Orders Enforcement Act, 
1921.    
1922  7 The Emigration Act, 1922.    
1922  22 The Police(incitement to Disaffection)Act, 
1922.    
1923  5 The Indian Boilers Act, 1923.    
1928  12 The Hindu Inheritance (Removal of 
Disabilities) Act, 1928.  In section 1, in sub-section ( 3), add at the 
end:— 
“or to the Renoncants of the  Union 
territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
  6 
 Year  No. Short title  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 
1929  19 The Chi ld Marriage Restraint  
Act, 1929 . In section 1 , after sub -section ( 2), insert :— 
“Provided that nothing contained in this 
Act shall apply to the Renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
1930  3 The Sale of Goods Act, 1930 .   
1930  30 The Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1930.    
1936  3 The Parsi Marriage and Divorce  
Act, 1936 . In section 1, in sub -section ( 2), after the 
proviso, insert: — 
“Provided further that nothing contained 
in this Act shall apply to the 
Renoncants of the Union territory of 
Pondicherry.” . 
1937  26 The Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ), 
Application Act, 1937 . In section 1, after sub -section ( 2), insert:  
“Provided that nothing contained in this 
Act shall apply to the Renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
1939  8 The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages 
Act, 1939 . In section 1, after sub -section ( 2), insert :— 
“Provided that nothing contained in this 
Act shall apply to the Renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
1939  30 The Commercial Documents Evidence 
Act, 1939 .   
1940  10 The Arbitration Act, 1940 .   
1943  9 The Reciprocity Act, 1943 .   
1944  38 The Criminal Law Amendment 
Ordinance, 1944.    
1945  ... The International Monetary Fund and 
Bank Act,1945.    
1947  43 The United Nations(Security Council) 
Act, 1947.    
1947  46 The United Nations (Privileges and 
Immunities) Act, 1947 .   
1948  41 The Diplomatic and Consular Officers 
(Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948 .   
1950  29 The Transfer of Prisoners Act, 1950 .   
  7 
 Year  No. Short title  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 
1950  64 The Road Transport Corporations  
Act, 1950 .  
1950  74 The Telegraph Wires (Unlawful 
Possession) Act, 1950 .   
1951  50 The Tariff Commission Act, 1951.    
1951  54 The Companies (Donations to National 
Funds) Act, 1951.    
1951  61 The All -India Services Act, 1951.    
1952  35 The Mines Act, 1952 .   
1952  53 The Notaries Act, 1952 .   
1954  29 The Wakf Act, 1954 .   
1955  32 The Prisoners (Attendance in Courts)  
Act, 1955 .   
1955  42 The Prize Competitions Act, 1955 .   
1955  45 The Working Journalists (Conditions of 
Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions  
Act, 1955.    
1956  3 The University Grants Commission  
Act, 1956 .   
1956  31 The Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 .   
1956  32 The Hindu Minority and Guardianship  
Act, 1 956 . In section 3, after sub -section ( 2), insert: — 
“(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section ( 1), nothing contained in this 
Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the 
Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
1956  42 The Securities Contracts (Regulation)  
Act, 1956 .   
1956  78 The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance 
Act, 1956 . In section 2, after sub-section ( 2), insert: — 
“(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub -section ( 1), nothing contained 
in this Act shall apply to the 
Renoncants of the Union territory of 
Pondicherry. ”. 
1956  93 The Young Perso ns (Harmful Publications) 
Act, 1956.    
  8 
 Year  No. Short title  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 
1956  96 The Slum Areas (Improvement and 
Clearance) Act, 1956 .  
1956  104 The Suppression of Immoral Traffic in 
Women and Girls Act, 1956 .  
1958  20 The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 .  
1958  21 The Rice-Milling Industry (Regulation) 
Act, 1958 .  
1958  29 The Working Journalists (Fixation of 
Rates of Wages) Act, 1958 .  
1958  42 The International Finance Corporation 
(Status, Immunities and Privileges)  
Act, 1958 .  
1960  6 The Geneva Conventions Act, 1960.  
1960  32 The International Development 
Association (Status, Immunities and 
Privileges) Act, 1960 .  
1960  63 The Preference Shares (Regulation of 
Dividends) Act, 1960 . In section 1, after sub -section ( 2), insert: — 
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section ( 2), the provisions of this 
Act shall , in their application to the 
Union territory of Pondicherry, have 
effect subject to the modifications 
specified in the Schedule. ”. 
After section 7, add: — 
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 1( 3)] 
Modifi cations of the Act in its application to 
the Union territory of Pondicherry  
1. Sections 3 and 4 shall be omitted.  
2. In section 4A, for the words, brackets, 
letters and figures “twenty-seven and a half 
per cent. of the aggregate of ( i) the stipulated 
divid end, and ( ii) an a mount equal to eleven 
per cent. of the stipulated dividend as 
specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 3 ”, the 
followi ng shall be substituted, namely :— 
“twenty -seven and a half per c ent. of the 
stipulated dividend : 
Provided that in a case where the preference 
shares in respect of which dividend is 
declared or paid from part of the preference 
share capital of a company which, in respect  
  9 
 Year  No. Short title  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 
   of the greater part of its total income, is 
entitled to a deduction from the tax 
chargeable from it under the Income -tax Act, 
1961 (43 of 1961), under a notification 
issued b y the Central Government under 
section 294A of that Act, the reference to 
twenty -seven and a half per cent.  of the 
stipulated dividend shall be construed as a 
reference to — 
(i) where the stipulated dividend in respect of 
such preference share is declared or paid in 
respect of the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on  the 1st day 
of April, 1965, the said tw enty-seven and a 
half per cent. asreduced by forty -five per 
cent. thereof ; 
(ii) where such dividend is declared or paid 
in respect of the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1 st day 
of Apr il, 1966, the said t wenty -seven and a 
half per cent. as reduced by twenty -five per 
cent. thereof;  
(iii) where such dividend is declared or paid 
in respect of the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1 st day 
of April , 1967, or the 1st day of April, 1968, 
or the 1st day of April, 1969, the said tw enty-
seven and a half per cent. as reduced by ten 
per cent. thereof.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts it is 
hereby declared that any reference in this 
section to deduction made from a dividend 
on account of the income -tax payable by the 
company does not include any amount 
deducted by the company from that dividend 
under section 194 of the Income -tax Act, 
1961 (43 of 1961). ”. 
3. In section 5, sub -section ( 2) shall be 
omitted.  
4. Section 6 shall be omitted. ‟. 
1961 
  25 
  The Advocates Act, 1961  
  In section 3. in sub -section ( 1),— 
(1) in clause ( a), omit, “Madras ”; 
(2) re -letter clause ( cc) (inserted by 
Regulation 8 of 1963) as clause ( ccc) and 
before the clause as so re -lettered, insert: — 
“(cc) for the State of Madras and the Union 
territory of Pondicherry to be known as the 
Bar Council of Madras. ”. 
After Section 58A, insert : — 
“58AA. Special Provisions in relation to the 
Union Territory of Pondicherry .— 
 10 
 Year  No. Short title  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 
   (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, all persons who, immediately before 
the date on which the provisions of Chapter 
III are brought into force in the Union 
territory of Pondicherry, were entitled to 
practise  the profession of law (whether by 
way of pleading or acting or both) under any 
law in force in the said Union territory or 
who would have been so entitled had they 
not been in public service on the said date, 
shall for the purposes of clause ( a) of sub -
section ( 1) of section 17, be deemed to be 
persons who were entered as advocates on 
the roll of a High Court under the Indian Bar 
Councils Act, 1926, (38 of 1926) and every 
such person may, on an application made in 
this behalf within such time as may be 
specified by the Bar Council of Madras, be 
admitted as an advocate on the State roll 
maintained in respect of the said Union 
territory.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, every person who, immediately 
before the date on which the provisions o f 
Chapter IV are brought into force in the 
Union territory of Pondicherry, was 
practising the profession of law (whether by 
way of pleading or acting or both or in any 
other way) by virtue of the provisions of any 
law in force in the said Union territory, who 
does not elect to be or is not qualified to be, 
enrolled as an advocate under  
sub-section ( 1), shall, notwithstanding the 
repeal of the relevant provisions of such law 
by the Pondicherry (Extension of Laws) Act, 
1968, continue to enjoy the same rights  as 
respects practice in any court or revenue 
office or before any authority or person 
andbe subject to the disciplinary jurisdiction 
of the same authority which he enjoyed, or, 
as the case may be, to which he was subject, 
immediately before the said date and 
accordingly the relevant provisions of the 
law aforesaid shall have effect in relation to 
such persons as if they had not been 
repealed. ” 
1961  28 The Dowry Prohibition Act, 196l.   
1961  45 The Foreign Awards (Recognition and 
Enforcement ) Act, 19 61.  
 11 
 PART II  
Year  No. Short title  In force in a State  
or a Union 
Territory  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 5 
1870  7 The Court -fees  
Act, 1870.  As in force in the 
Union territory of 
Andaman and  
Nicobar Islands  
on the 1st day of 
August, 1966.  In section 2, for clause  (b), substitute: — 
„(b) “State Government ” in relation to 
the Union territory of Pondicherry means 
the administrator thereof. ‟. 
1899  2 The Indian 
Stamp Act, 
1899.  As in force in the  
State of Madras on  
the 1st day of 
August, 1966.  In section 2, after clause ( 25), insert: — 
(26) “State Government ” in relation to 
the Union territory of Pondicherry 
means the administrator thereof. ‟. 
In section 3, omit  the first and second 
provisos.  
In section 19A, — 
(a) for “Presidency of Madras ”, 
substitute “Union territory of 
Pondicherry ”; 
(b) for“Presidency ” substitute “Union 
territory ”. 
In section 57, in sub -section ( 1), omit 
“and” at the end of clause (d) and 
after clause ( e) insert : — 
“(ee) if it arises in the Union territory 
of Pondicherry, to the High Court 
of Madras. ”.  
In section 75 A, for sub -section ( 2), 
substitute : — 
“(2) Every rule made under this Act 
shall , as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before the Legislative 
Assembly while it is in session for a 
total period of fourteen days which 
may be comprised in one session or in 
two successive sessions, and if before 
the expiry of the session in which it is 
so laid or the session immediately 
following, the Legislative Assembly 
makes any modification in the rule or 
decides that any such rule should no t 
be made, that rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect , as the case may be;so, 
however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall b e without p rejudice 
to the validity of any thing previously 
done after under that  rule.”. 12 
  
Year  No. Short title  In force in a State  
or a Union 
Territory  Modifications  
1 2 3 4 5 
    In Schedule 1 — 
(i) in entry 9, omit the Exemption;  
(ii) in entry 15, for “Madras Court -
fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1955 
(Madras Act XIV of 1955) ”, substitute 
“Court -fees Act,  1870 (7 of 1870) ”; 
(iii) omit entry 20A;  
(iv) in entry 62, in clause ( d), for 
“Administrator General‟s Act, 1913 
(Central Act III of 1913), section 25” , 
substitute “Administrators -General  
Act, 1963 (45 of 1963), section 22 .”. 
1908  
  5 
  The Code of 
Civil Procedure, 
1908  
  As in force in the 
State of  
Madras on the  
1st day of  
August, 1966.  After section 45, insert : — 
  “45A. Execution of decrees, etc., passed 
or made before the commencement of the 
Code in Pondicherry. —Any judgment, 
decree or order passed or made before 
the commencement of this Code by any 
civil court in the Union territory of 
Pondicherry shall, for the purpose of 
execution, be deemed to have been  
passed or made under this Code:  
Provided that nothing con tained in this 
section shall be construed as extending 
the period of limitation to which any 
proceeding in respect of such judgment, 
decree or order may be subject. ”. 
 
--------------------------The Public Provident Fund Act, 1968--------------------------
1 
 THE PUBLIC PROVIDENT FUND ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 23 OF 1968  
[16th May , 1968 .] 
An Act to provide for the institution of a provident fund for the general public.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1.  Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2.  Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Fund ” means the Public Provident Fund established under the Scheme;  
(b) “minor ” means a person who is not deemed to have attained majority under the Indian 
Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875);  
(c) “Scheme ” means the Public Provident Fund Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(d) “subscriber ” means an individual who makes subscription to the Fund under section 4 and 
where such subscription is made by an individual on behalf of a minor, of whom  he is the 
guardian, such minor;  
(e) “year” means the financial year.  
3.  Public Provident Fund Scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Public Provident Fund Scheme for the establishment 
of a provident fund for the general public and there shall be established, as soon as may be after the 
framing of the Scheme, a Fund in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Scheme.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Scheme may provide for all or any of the matters 
specified in the Schedul e. 
(3) The Scheme shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force other than this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than 
this Act.  
(4) The Central Government may, from time to time , by notif ication in the Official Gazette,  add 
to, amend or vary the Scheme.  
 4.  Subscriptions to Fund .—Any individual may, on his own behalf or on behalf of a minor, of 
whom he is the guardian, subscribe to the Fund in such manner and subject to such maximum and 
minimum limits as may be specified in the Scheme.  
5.  Interest .—All subscription made under section 4 shall bear interest at such rate as may be 
notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette, from time to  time, and the interest sha ll be 
calculated in such manner as may be specified in the Scheme.  
6. Withdrawals .—(1) A subscriber shall be entitled to make withdrawals  from the amount 
standing to his credit in the Fund (including any interest accrued thereon) to such extent and subject  to 
such terms and conditions as may be specified in the Scheme : 
Provided that such withdrawals shall be allowed only after the expiry of a period of five years 
from the end of the year in which he makes the initial subscription to the Fund.  2 
 (2) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a subscriber shall be entitled to 
withdraw the entire balance standing to his credit in the Fund after the expiry of a period of fifteen 
years from the end of the year in which he makes the initial subscription to the Fund.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), an individual who has made subscriptions 
to the Fund on behalf of a minor, of whom he is the guardian, shall be entitled to withdraw any 
amount from the Fund only for the use of the mi nor. 
7.  Grant of loans .—A subscriber may be granted loans out of the amount standing to his credit 
in the Fund on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the Scheme and where the subscriber 
is a minor, such loans shall be granted to his guardian only for the use of the minor.  
8.  Payment on death of subscriber .—(1) If a subscriber dies and there is in force at the time of 
his death a nomination in favour of any person, all amounts standing to his credit in the Fund shall be 
payable to the nominee.  
(2) Where the nominee is a minor, the amounts referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be payable to 
any guardian of the property of the minor appointed by a competent court, or where no such guardian 
has been so appointed, to either parent of the minor, or w here neither parent is alive, to any other 
guardian of the minor.  
(3) Where there is no nomination in force at the time of the death of the subscriber, the amounts 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be payable to his legal heir s. 
9.  Protection against attachment .—The amount standing to the credit of any subscriber in the 
Fund shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any court in respect of any debt or 
liability incurred by the subscriber.  
10. Protection of acti on taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act or the Scheme . 
11.  Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions 
of this Act or the Scheme, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. as appear to it to be necessary 
or expedient  for the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 
each Hou se of Parliament.  
12.  Scheme to be laid before Parliament .—The Scheme s hall be laid, as soon as may be,  after it 
is framed before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session 
in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in any provision of the Scheme or both Houses agree that any provision in the Scheme 
should not be made, the provision of the Scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form  or be of no effect, as the case may be , so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that provision.  
 
 
 
 3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3 (2)] 
Matters for which provision may be made in the Scheme :— 
(1) The manner in which subscriptions to the Fund may be made and the maximum and minimum 
limits of such subscriptions.  
(2) The manner in which interest on subscriptions to the Fund may be calculated.  
(3) The documents to be issued to subscribers as evidence of the subscriptions made by them to 
the Fund.  
(4) The extent to which and the terms and conditions under which withdrawals may be made by 
subscribers from the amount standing to their credit in the Fund.  
(5) The authority or aut horities by or through whom subscriptions to the Fund may be collected or 
withdrawals therefrom may be made.  
(6) The terms and conditions under which loans may be granted to subscribers out of the amounts 
standing to their credit in the Fund and the author ity or authorities by whom such loans may be 
granted.  
(7) The accounts to be maintained with respect to subscriptions to the Fund, and withdrawals and 
final payment s made and loans granted therefrom and the authority or authorities by whom such 
accounts sh all be maintained.  
(8) The nomination of any person to receive the amount standing to the credit of a subscriber in 
the Fund in the event of his death and the cancellation or change of such nomination.  
(9) The issue of duplicate of any document issued as e vidence of any subscription to the Fund in 
the event of damage, loss or destruction of the original and the fee on the payment of which such 
duplicate may be issued.  
(10) Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Scheme or which may be necessary or 
proper for the purpose of implementing the Scheme.  
 
 
 
 
 
