--------------------------The Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969--------------------------
1 
 THE ASSAM REORGANISATION (MEGHALAYA) ACT, 1969  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PART I 
PRELIMINARY   
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II 
FORMATION OF THE AUTONOMOUS  STATE OF MEGHALAYA  
3. Formation of Meghalaya.  
4. Executive power of Meghalaya . 
5. Extent of  executive power of Meghalaya.  
6. Council of Ministers.  
7. Other provisions as to Ministers.  
8. Advocate -General for Meghalaya.  
9. Conduct of business.  
10. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc . 
PART III 
THE LEGISLATURE  
General  
11. Constitution of the Legislature of Meghalaya.  
12. Delimitation of constituencies.  
13. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date.  
14. Electors and electoral rolls.  
15. Right to vote.  
16. Qualification for membership . 
17. Election to the Legislative Assembly.  
18. Duration of Legislative Assembly.  
19. Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution . 
20. Right of Governor to address and send messages to Legislative Assembly.  
21. Special address by the Governor.  
22. Righ ts of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly.  
23. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.  
24. Speaker and Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution for his removal from office is under 
consideration . 
25. Secretariat of Legislative Assembly.  
Cond uct of business  
26. Oath or affirmation by members . 
27. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.  
  2 
 Disqualifications of members  
SECTIONS  
28. Vacation of seats.  
29. Disqualifications for membership.  
30. Penalty for sitting and voting before making an oath or affirmation or when not qualified or when 
disqualified.  
31. Powers, privileges, etc., of members.  
32. Salaries and allowances of members . 
Legislative powers and procedure  
33. Extent of Legislative power.  
34. Exemption from taxation of properties o f the Union and the State of Assam and of certain 
vehicles registered in Assam or Meghalaya.  
35. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislature of Meghalaya.  
36. Inconsistency between laws made by the Legislature of the State of Ass am and laws made by the 
Legislature of Meghalaya.  
37. Special provisions as to financial Bills.  
38. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.  
39. Assent to Bills.  
40. Bills reserved for consideration.  
41.  Requirements as to sanction and recommendation to be regarded as matters of procedure only.  
Procedure in financial matters  
42. Annual Financial Statement.  
43. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates.  
44. Appropriation Bills.  
45. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.  
46. Votes on Account and exceptional grant.  
Procedure generally  
47. Rules of procedure . 
48. Restrictions on discussion in the Legislative Assembly.  
49. Courts not to enquire into the proceedings of Legislative Assembly.  
Legislative power of the Governor  
50. Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislative Assembly.  
PART IV 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS  
51. Consolidated Fund.  
52. Contingency Fund.  
53. Custody of suitors ’ deposits and other moneys received by public servants and courts.  
54. Custody, etc., of Consolidated Fund, Contingency Fund and moneys credited to the public 
account.  
55. Certain taxes levied by Assam to be appropriated by Meghalaya.  
56. Distribution of revenues.  
57. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative Assembly.  3 
 PART V 
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
SECTIONS  
58. Apportionment of assets and liabilities.  
PART VI 
ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS  
59. Obligation of Meghalaya, the State of Assam and the Union.  
60. Control over the autonomous State in certain  cases . 
61. Entrustment of functions.  
PART VII  
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
62. Provisions as to Provisional Legislative Assembly.  
PART VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
63. Special Committee for development of Shillong . 
64. Provisions as to continuance of courts.  
65. Provisions relating to services.  
66. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptations.  
67. Autonomous State to be a State for certain purposes of the Constitution.  
68. Power of Governments of Assam and Meghalaya to carry on trade, etc., in Meghalaya.  
69. Power to suspend provisions of this Act in case of failure of constitutional machinery.  
70. Construction of reference to ―State‖ and ―State Government‖ in other laws in relation to 
Meghalaya.  
71. Power to construe laws.  
72. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws.  
73. Power to remove difficulties.  
74. Amendment of the S ixth Schedule.  
75. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.  
76. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.  
77. Power to make rules.  
THE FIRST SCHEDU LE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
  4 
 THE ASSAM REORGANISATION (MEGHALAYA) ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 55 OF 1969  
[29th December , 1969 .] 
An Act to provide for the formation within the State of Assam of an autonomous State to be 
known as Meghalaya and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY   
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Assam Reorganisa tion 
(Meghalaya) Act, 1969.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act , unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―appointed day ‖ means such date  as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint for the formation of the autonomous State;  
(b) ―article ‖ means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) ―autonomous State ‖ means the autonomous State of Meghalaya formed under section 3;  
(d) ―constituency ‖ means a territorial constituency provi ded by order made under section 12 for 
the purpose of election to the Legislative Assembly;  
(e) ―Election Commission ‖ means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
article 324;  
(f) ―Governor ‖ means the Governor of Assam exercising his functions as Governor in relation to 
Meghalaya by virtue of this Act;  
(g) ―law‖ includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument, hav ing immediately be fore the appointed day, the force of law in the 
whole or in any part of the autonomous State;  
(h) ―Legislative Assembly ‖ means the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya;  
(i) ―Meghalaya ‖ means the autonomous State referred to in section 3;  
(j) ―member ‖ means a member of the Legislative Assembly;  
(k) ―Official Gazette ‖ means the Official Gazette of Meghayala or the Gazette of India; and  
(l) ―prescribed ‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. 12 th January, 1970, vide notification  No. G.S.R. 74, 12th January, 1970 , in respect of sections 2 and 3, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
30th January, 1970, vide notification No. G.S.R. 182, dated 30th January, 1970,  in respect of sections 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 28, 
29, 62, 73 and 77, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
25th February,  1970, vide notification N o. G.S.R. 310, dated 25 th  February, in respect of sections 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 28, 29, 
62, 73 and 77 1970,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
2nd April , 1970,  vide notification No. G.S.R. 493, dated 2th March, 1970, in respect of the provisions (other than those which 
have already been brought into force) , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
 
 5 
 PART II 
FORMATION OF THE AUTONOMOUS STATE OF MEGHALAYA  
3. Formation of Meghalaya .—(1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed within the 
State of Assam an autonomous State to be known as Meghalaya which shall , subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2), comprise the following tribal areas, namely: — 
(i) The United Khasi Jaintia Hills District as described in sub -paragraph ( 2) of paragraph 20 of 
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (exclusive of the proviso thereto) but excluding the areas 
transferred to the Mikir Hills autonomous district by the no tification of the Government of Assam  
No. TAD/R/31 /50/149 dated the 13th April, 1951, and  
(ii) the Garo Hills District specified in Part A of the table appended to paragraph 20 aforesaid.  
(2) If, before such date as the Central Government may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, fix for 
the purpose not being a date later than the appointed day, the District Council for the autonomous district 
of the North Cachar Hills or the Mikir Hills or both , as the case may be, has or have by resolution passed 
by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members thereof, expressed a desire that the said 
autonomous district or districts shall form part of Meghalaya, the President may, by order, make a 
declaration to that effect and accordingly, on and from the a ppointed day, the North Cachar Hills District 
or the Mikir Hills District or both, as the case may be, shall also form part of Meghalaya.  
 4. Executive power of Meghalaya .—(1) The executive power of Meghalaya shall be vested in the 
Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in 
accordance with this Act.  
(2) Not hing in this section shall — 
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by any existing law on any 
other authority; or  
(b) pre vent Parliament or the Legislature of the State of Assam or Meghalaya from conferring by 
law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.  
5. Extent of executive power of Meghalaya .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the executive 
power o f Meghalaya shall extend to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of Meghalaya has 
power to make laws:  
Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of Meghalaya, the Legislature of the 
State of Assam and Parliament have power to make laws, the executive power of Meghalaya shall be 
subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly conferred by this Act , or by any law made by 
Parliament upon the Union or the State of Assam or the authorities thereof or, as the case may be, by the 
Legislature of the State of Assam upon the State of Assam or authorities thereof.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the executive power of the State of Assam shall not extend, in 
relation to Meghalaya to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of Meghalaya has exclusiv e 
power to make laws under this  Act. 
(3) For the removal of doubts , it is hereby declared that, save as otherwise provided in this Act, the 
executive power of the State of Assam shall, in relation to Meghalaya, cont inue to extend to the matters 
with respect to which the Legislature of Meghalaya has no power to make laws.  
6. Council of Ministers .—(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the 
head to aid and advice the Governor in the exercis e of his functions in relation to Meghalaya.  
(2) The question whether any, and if so, what , advice was tendered by Ministers to the Governor shall 
not be inquired into in any court. 
7. Other provisions as to Ministers .—(1) The Chief Minister shall be appoi nted by the Governor 
and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the 
Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor.  
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly.  6 
 (3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall administer to him the oaths of office 
and of secrecy according to the form set out for this purpose in the First Schedule.  
(4) A Minister who for any period of six c onsecutive months is not a member of the                     
Legislative Assembly shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.  
(5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislature of Meghalaya may from 
time to tim e by law determine and, until the Legislature so determines, shall be determined by the 
Governor.  
8. Advocate -General for Meghalaya .—(1) The Governor may, if he thinks fit to do so, appoint a 
person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a High Court to be Advocate -General for Meghalaya.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate -General to give advice to the Government of Meghalaya upon 
such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character as may, from time to time, be 
referred or as signed to him by the Governor, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) The Advocate -General shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor, and shall receive 
such remuner ation as the Governor may determine.  
9. Conduct of business .—(1) All executive actions of the Government of Meghalaya shall be 
expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor.  
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Governor  shall be 
authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the Governor, and the validity of 
an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not 
an order or instrument made or  executed by the Governor.  
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the 
Government of Meghalaya and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.  
10. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to Governor, etc. —It shall 
be the duty of t he Chief Minister of Meghalaya — 
(a) to communicate to the Governor all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the 
administration of the affairs of Meghalaya and proposals for l egislation;  
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of Meghalaya and 
proposals for legislation as the Governor may call for; and  
(c) if the Governor so requires , to submit for the consideration of the Council of Ministers any 
matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been considered by the 
Council.   
PART III 
THE LEGISLATURE  
General  
11. Constitution of the Legislature of Meghalaya .—(1) There shall be a Legislature for Meghalaya 
which shall consist of the Governor and the Legislative Assembly.  
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled by persons chosen by direct 
election from constituencies in Meghalaya sha ll be fixed by the Central Government by notification  in the 
Official Gazette after consultation with the Election Commission, but shall not be less than thirty -five or 
more than fifty -five. 
(3) The Governor may, if he is of opinion that any minority commu nities in Meghalaya need 
representation in the Legislative Assembly and are not adequately represented therein, nominate not more 
than three members of such communities, not being persons in the service of the Government, to the 
Legislative Assembly.  7 
 12. Delimitation s of constituencies .—(1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein 
provided, distribute the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly as fixed under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 11 to single member constituencies and delimit them  on the basis of the latest census figures 
having regard to the fol lowing provisions, namely: — 
(a) all constituencies shall , as far as practicable, consist of geographically compact areas, and in 
delimiting them, regard shall be had to the physical feature s, existing  boundaries of administrative 
units, facilities of communication and public convenience;  
(b) every constituency shall be so delimited as to fall only within an Assembly constituency of the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam;  
(c) the popu lation of each constituency shall, as far as practicable, be the same throughout 
Meghalaya.  
(2) For the purpose of assisting the Election Commission in the performance of its functions under 
this section, the Commission shall associate with itself such num ber of associate members not exceeding 
five as the Governor may nominate to represent Meghalaya:  
Provided that none of the associate mem bers shall have a right to vote or  to sign any decision of the 
Election Commission.  
(3) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled as 
soon as may be practicable by the Governor in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimit ation of constituencies, together with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof, in the Official Gazette 
and in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting 
objection s and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the 
proposals will be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified, and for the purpose of such consideration hold one or more public sittings at such place or 
places as it may think fit;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified, determine by one or more order s the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or orders 
shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. 
(5) As soon as ma y be after such publication, every such order shall be laid before the              
Legislative Assembly.  
(6) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly and the 
division of Meghalaya into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such 
manner as Parliament may by law determine:  
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the Legislative Assembly until the 
dissolution of the then existing Assembly.  
Explanation .—In this section, ―latest census figures ‖ mean the census figures with respect to 
Meghalaya ascertainable from the latest census of which the finally published figures are available.  
13. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders  up-to-date.—(1) The Election 
Commission may, from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under section 12 or any error arising therein 
from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the boun daries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any such order are or is 
altered , make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such order 
up-to-date.  8 
 (2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon  as may be after it is issued , before the 
Legislative Assembly.  
14. Electors and electoral rolls .—(1) The persons entitled to vote at an election of members shall be 
the persons entitled by virtue of the provisions of the Constitution and the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) to be registered as voters at elections to the House of the P eople.  
(2) The electoral roll for every constituency shall consist of so much of the electoral roll for an 
Assembly constituency of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam as relates to the areas 
comprised within each such constituency and it shall not be necessary to prepare or revise separately the 
electoral roll for any such constituency.  
15. Right to vote .—Every person, whose name is for the time being entered in the electoral roll for a 
constituency, shall be entitled to vote at the election of a member from that constituency.  
16. Qualification for membership .—A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the 
Legislative Assembly unless he — 
(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before some person authorised  in that behalf by 
the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the 
First Schedule;  
(b) is not less than twenty -five years of age; and  
(c) is an elector in any constituency in Meghalaya.  
17. Election to th e Legislative Assembly .—The provisions of Part I, Chapters III and IV of Part II 
and Parts III to XI of the Representation of the People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) , and of any rules and orders 
made thereunder for the time being in force, shall apply to and in relation to the elections to the 
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya as they apply to and in relation to an election to the                  
Legislative Assembly  of a State, subject to such modifications as the President may, after consultation 
with the Election Commission, by order, direct.  
18. Duration of Legislative Assembly .—The Legislative Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, shall 
continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer, and the expiration of 
the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Legislative Assembly:  
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency issued under clause  (1) of 
article 352 is in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year at a time 
and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.  
19. Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution —(1) The Governor shall, from 
time to time summon the Legislative Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six 
months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appoint ed for its first sitting 
in the next session.  
(2) The Go vernor may, from time to time, — 
(a) prorogue the Legislative Assembly;  
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.  
20. Right of Governor to address and send messages to Legislative Assembly .—(1) The Governor 
may address the Legislative Assembly and may for that purpose require the attendance of members.  
(2) The Governor may send messages to the Legislative Assembly, whether with respect to a Bill then 
pending in the Legislative Assembly or otherwise a nd when a message is so sent, the Legislative 
Assembly shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the message to be taken into 
consideration.  
 21. Special address by the Governor .—(1) At the commencement of the first session after e ach 
general election to the Legislative Assembly and at the commencement of the first session of each year, 
the Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform the Assembly of the causes of its 
summons.  9 
 (2) Provision shall be made by the rules r egulating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly for the 
allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to in such address.  
22. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly .—Every  Minister and the                  
Advocate -General for Meghalaya shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the 
proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings 
of, any committee of the Legislative Assembly of which he may be named a member, but shall not, by 
virtue of this section, be entitled to vote.  
Officers of the Legislative Assembly  
23. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly .—(1) The Legislative Assembly shall, as 
soon as may be, choose two members of the Assembly to  be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
thereof, and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall 
choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.  
(2) A member holding office as Speak er or Deputy Speak er of the Legislative Assembly — 
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases  to be a member of the Assembly;  
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the Speaker, to the 
Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and  
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Legislative Assembly passed by a 
majority of all the then members of the Assembly:  
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of  clause ( c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days ’ 
notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution:  
Provided further that whenever the Legislative Assembly is dissolved , the Speaker shall not vacate his 
office until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution.  
(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the               
Deputy Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Legislative 
Assembly as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.  
(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, the                 
Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedur e of the 
Legislative Assembly , or, if no such person is present, such other person as may be determined by the 
Legislative Assembly, shall act as Speaker.  
(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly such 
salari es and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislature of Meghalaya by law and, until 
provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as the Governor may, by order, 
determine.  
24. Speaker and Deputy Speaker not to preside while  a resolution for his removal from office is 
under consideration .—(1) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for the 
removal of the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or, while any reso lution for 
the remov al of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, 
though he is present, preside, and the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 23 shall apply in relation to 
every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the case may be, the 
Deputy Speaker is absent.  
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the 
Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from offi ce is under consideration in the 
Legislative Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 27, be entitled to vote only in the 
first instance on such reso lution or on any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an 
equality of votes.  
  10 
 25. Secretariat of Legislative Assembly .—(1) The Legislative Assembly shall have a separate 
secretarial staff.  
(2) The Legislature of Meghalaya may by law regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service 
of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the Legislative Assembly.  
(3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of Meghalaya under sub -section ( 2), the Governor may, 
after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, make rules regulating the recruitment, 
and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the Legislative Assembly, 
and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any law made under the said          
sub-section.  
Conduct of business  
 26. Oath or affirmation by members .—Every member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before 
taking his seat, make and subscribe before the Governor, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, 
an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the First Schedule.  
27. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies and           
quorum .—(1) Save  as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions at any sitting of the                   
Legislative Assembly shall be determined by majority of votes of the members present and voting other 
than the Speaker or person acting as such.  
(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and 
exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.  
(3) The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstandin g any vacancy in the 
membership  thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall be valid notwithstanding that 
it is discovered subsequently that some person who was no t entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise 
took part in the proceedings.  
(4) Until the Legislature of Meghalaya by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting 
of the Legislative Assembly shall be ten members.  
(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quorum, it shall be the 
duty of the Speaker or person acting as such either to adjourn the Assembly or suspend the meeting until 
there is a quorum.  
Disqualifications of members  
28. Vacation of seats .—(1) No person shall be a member of Parliament or of the                      
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam and also of the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya, and if a 
person is chosen a member of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of Assa m and also of the 
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya, then, at the expiration of such period, as may be specified in rules 
made by the President, that person ’s seat in Parliament or, as the case may be , in the                         
Legislative Assembly of  Assam, shall become vacant unless he has previously resigned his seat in the 
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya.  
(2) If a memb er of the Legislative Assembly — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 29, or  
(b) resigns his se at by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker,  
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.  
(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is, without permission of the 
Legislative Assembly, absent from all meetings thereof, the  Assembly may declare his seat vacant:  
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall be taken of any period 
during which the Legislative Assembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four consecutive days.  
  11 
 29. Disqualification  for membership .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and 
for being , a membe r of the Legislative Assembly, — 
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State 
or the Government of Meghalaya other than an office declared by the Legislature of Meghalaya by 
law not to disqualify its holder;  or 
(b) if he is of unsound mind any stands so declared by a competent court; 
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(d) if he is not  a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State or is 
under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;  
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any of the provisions of Chapter III of Part II of th e 
Representation of the People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) , as applied to and in relation to the              
Legislative Assembly by section 17.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit under the 
Government  of India or the Government of any State or the Government of Meghalaya by reason only, 
that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such State or for Meghalaya.  
(3) If any question arises as to whether a member has become disqualified for being such a member 
under the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the question shall be referred for the decision of the Governor and 
his decision shall be final.  
(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Governor shall obtain the opinion of the 
Election Co mmission and shall act according to such opinion.  
30. Penalty for sitting and voting before making an oath or affirmation or when not qualified or 
when disqualified .—If a person sits or votes as member of the Legislative Assembly before he has 
complied with the requirements of section 26, or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is 
disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the provisions of any law 
made by Parliament or the Legislature of Meghalaya, he sha ll be liable in respect of each day on which he 
so sits or votes, to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to Meghalaya.  
31. Powers, privileges, etc., of members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules 
and stand ing orders regulating the procedure of the Legislature of Meghalaya, there shall be freedom of 
speech in the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya.  
(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya shall be liable to any proceedings in any 
court in respec t of anything said or any vote given by him in the Assembly or any committee thereof, and 
no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority of the Assembly of any 
report, paper, votes or proceedings.  
(3) In other respects , the powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of the 
members and the committees thereof shall be such as may from time to time be defined by the Legislature 
of Meghalaya by law, and until so defined, shall be those for the time be ing enjoyed by the House of the 
People and its members and committees.  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall apply in relation to persons who by virtue of 
this Act have the right to speak in, or otherwise to take part in the proceedings  of, the Legislative 
Assembly or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of that Assembly.  
 32. Salaries and allowances of members .—Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled 
to receive such salaries and allowances as may from  time to time be determined by the Legislature of 
Meghalaya by law and , until provision in that respect is so made, such salaries and allowances as the 
Governor may, by order, determine.  
  12 
 Legislative powers and procedure  
 33. Extent of Legislative power .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Legislature of 
Meghalaya has exclusive power to make laws for Meghalaya or any part thereof with respect to any of the  
matters enumerated in Part A or Part B of the Second Schedule:  
Provided that the exclusive power of the Legislature of Meghalaya to make laws in so far as it relates 
to that part of the area comprised within the municipality of Shillong as immediately before the 
commencement of the Constitution formed part of the Khas i State of Mylliem, shall extend only to 
matters with respect to which the District Council having authority in that area has power to make laws 
(in whatever form it may be) immediately before the appointed day in exercise of any of the powers 
conferred by  the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Legislature of Meghalaya and the Legislature of the  
State of Assam also shall have power to make laws for Meghalaya or any part thereof with respect to any 
of the matt ers enumerated in Part C of the Second Schedule:  
Provided that the power of the Legislature of Meghalaya to make any such law shall not extend to the 
area comprised within the municipality of Shillong which immediately before the commencement of the 
Consti tution formed part of the Khasi State of Mylliem.  
(3) For the removal of doubt it is hereby declared that nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) 
shall derogate from the powers  conferred by the Constitution — 
(a) on Parliament to make laws for the who le or any part of the State of Assam, including 
Meghalaya, with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the Second Schedule; or  
(b) on the Legislature of the State of Assam to make laws for the whole or any part of Assam, 
including Meghalaya, with resp ect to any of the matters enumerated in List II or List II in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution, except in so far as any of the matters aforesaid falls within                      
sub-section ( 1). 
34. Exemption from taxation of properties of the Union and the State of Assam and of certain 
vehicles registered in Assam or Meghalaya .—(1) The property of the Union shall, save in so far as 
Parliament may, by law, otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by Meghalaya or by any 
authority withi n Meghalaya.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise provides, prevent any authority 
within Meghalaya from levying any tax on any property of the Union to which such property was 
immediately before the commencement of this A ct liable or treated as liable so long as that tax continues 
to be levied in Meghalaya.  
(3) The property of the State of Assam shall, so long as the property of Meghalaya in the rest of 
Assam is exe mpt from taxes imposed by the Government of Assam or by an y authority within the State of 
Assam, be exempt f rom all taxes imposed by Meghalaya or by any authority within Meghalaya.  
(4) No vehicle registered at any place in the State of Assam, not being a place in Megha laya, and 
transiting through Meghalaya shall be liable to any tax under any law enacted by the Legislature of 
Meghalaya so long as any vehicle registered at any place in Meghalaya and transiting through the territory 
of Assam (not comprised in Meghalaya) is exempt from payment of any tax under any la w enacted by the 
Legislature of the State of Assam.  
35. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the Legislature of 
Meghalaya .—(1) If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya is repugnant to any 
provision of a law m ade by Parliament which Parliament is competent to en act, or to any provision of any  
existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constitution, then, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the law made by Parliament, 
whether passed before or after the law, made by the Legislature of Meghalaya, or, as the case may be, the 
existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya shall , to the extent of the 
repugnancy, be void.  13 
 (2) Where a law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya with respect to one  of the matters enumerated 
in the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, which the Legislature of Meghalaya is 
competent to enact under this Act contains any provision repugnant to the provision of an earlier law 
made by Parliament or  an existing law with respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the 
Legislature of Meghalaya shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has 
received his assent, prevail in Meghalaya:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent Parliament from enacting at any time, any law 
with respect to the same matter, including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so 
made by the Legislature of Meghalaya.  
36. Inconsistency between laws made by the Legisl ature of the State of Assam and laws made by 
the Legislature of Meghalaya .—Where a law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya with respect to one 
of the matters enumerated in Part C of the Second Schedule contains any provisions repugnant to the 
provision of  an earlier law made by the Legislature of the State of Assam which that Legislature is 
competent to enact, or to any provision of any existing law with respect to that matter, then, the law so 
made by the Legislature of Meghalaya shall, to the extent of t he repugnancy, be void unless the law has 
received assent under section 39 after the Governor has obtained the advice of the Chief Minister of 
Assam:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Legislature of the State of Assam 
from e nacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending, 
varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of Meghalaya.  
Explanation 1.—In this section and in sections 35 and 59, ―existing law ‖ means any law, Ordinance, 
order, bye -law, rule or regulation passed or made before the appointed day by any Legislature, authority 
or person having power to make such a law, Ordinance, order, bye -law, rule or regulation.  
Explanation 2.—In this section and in sections 39 a nd 50, the reference to the advice of the                
Chief Minister of Assam shall, while a Proclamation issued in relation to the State of Assam under clause 
(1) of article 356 of the Constitution is in operation, be construed as a reference to the in structions from 
the President.  
37. Special provisions as to financial Bills .—(1) A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, 
or moved in, the Legislative Assembly except on the recommendations of the Governor if such Bill or 
amendment makes provisions dealing with any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the imposition, aboli tion, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;  
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any guarantee by Meghalaya or the 
amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by 
Meghalaya ; 
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of Meghalaya, the payment of 
moneys into, or withdrawal of moneys from, any such Fund;  
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya;  
(e) the declaring of any ex penditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of 
Meghalaya, or the increasing of the amount of any such expenditure;  
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya or the public account 
of Meghalaya or the custody or issue of such money:  
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this sub -section for the moving of an 
amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.  
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for an y of the matters specified in 
sub-section ( 1) by reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or 
for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides 
for the i mposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body 
for local purposes.  14 
 (3) A Bill, which, if enacted and brought into operation , would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya  shall not be passed by the Legislative Assembly unless the Governor 
has recommended to the Assembly the consideration of the Bill.  
38. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills .—A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse by 
reason of the prorogation of the Assembly, but shall lapse on a dissolution thereof.  
39. Assent to Bills .—When a Bill has been passed by t he Legislative Assembly, it shall  be presented 
to the Gov ernor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or  that he withholds 
assent there from or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:  
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation to  him of the Bill for 
assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting that the                
Legislative Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will 
consider the desira bility of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message and , 
when a Bill is so returned, the Legislative Assembly shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill 
is passed again by the Assembly with or without amendment and pres ented to the Governor for assen t, the 
Governor shall not — 
(a) give assent in the case of a Bill containing provisions of the nature referred to in section 36 
except after obtaining the advice of the Chief Minister of Assam;  
(b) withhold  assent in the case of any other Bill.  
Explanation .—For the purposes  of this section and section 40 a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money 
Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters specified in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 37 o r any matter incidental to any of those matters and there is endorsed thereon the certificate of 
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill:  
Provided that a Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it provides for the 
imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for licences or fees 
for services rendered or by reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or 
regulation of any ta x by any local authority or body for local purposes.  
40. Bills reserved for consideration .—When a Bill is reserved by the Governor for the consideration 
of the President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or  that he withholds a ssent 
there from:  
Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the Governor to return the 
Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a message as is referred to in section 39, and when a 
Bill is so returned, the Legisl ative Assembly shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months 
from the date of receipt of such message, and if it is again passed by the Legislative Assembly with or 
without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for his con sideration.  
41. Requirements as to sanction and recommendation to be regarded as matters of procedure 
only.—No Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya and no provision in any such Act shall be invalid by 
reason only that some recommendation or previous sanction required by the Constitution or this Act was 
not given, i f assent to that Act was given — 
(a) where the recommendation required was that of the Governor, either by the Governor or by 
the President;  
(b) where the recommendation or previous sanction required was that of the President, by the 
President.  
Procedure in financial matters  
42. Annual Financial Statement .—(1) The Governor shall in respect of every financial year cause to 
be laid before the Legislative Assembly a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of 
Meghalaya for that year, hereinafter referred to as ―the annual financial, statement ‖. 
  15 
 (2) The estimate s of expenditure embodied in the annual financial statement shall show separately — 
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Act as expenditure charged upon the 
Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya; and  
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund 
of Meghalaya,  
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.  
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of 
Meghalaya — 
(a) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the                       
Legislative Assembly;  
(b) debt charges for which the autonomous Sta te is liable including interest  sinking fund charges 
and r edemption charges, and other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and 
redemption of debt;  
(c) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal; 
and 
(d) any other expenditure declared by th e Constitution or by the Legislature of Meghalaya to be 
so charged.  
43. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates .—(1) So much of the estimates as 
relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya shall not be submitted to the 
vote of the Legislative Assembly, but nothing in this sub -section shall be construed as preventing the 
discussion in the Legislative Assembly of any of those estimates.  
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shal l be submitted in the form of 
demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent, 
or to refuse to assent , to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount 
specified therein.  
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the Governor.  
44. Appropriation Bills .—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 43 have been made 
by the Legislative Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the 
Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya of all moneys required to meet — 
(a) the grants so made by the Legislative Assembly; and  
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya ,  
but not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before the Assembly.  
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative Assembly which will have the 
effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of 
any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya, and the decision of the person 
presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under this sub -section shall be final.  
(3) Subject to the pr ovisions of sections 45 and 46, no money shall be withdrawn from the 
Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.  
45. Supplementary, additional or excess grants .—(1) The Gov ernor shall, — 
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the provisions of  section 44 to 
be expended for a particular service for the current financial  year is found to be insufficient for the 
purposes of that year or when a need  has a risen during the current financial year for supplementary or 
additional  expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial  statement for 
that year, or  16 
 (b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in excess of  the amount 
granted for that service and for that y ear, 
cause  to be laid before the Legislative Assembly another statement showing the  estimated amount of that 
expenditure or caus e to be presented to the Legislative  Assembly a demand for such excess, as the case 
may be.  
(2) The provisions of sections 42, 43 and 44 shall have effect in relation to any  such statement and 
expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made  authorisin g the appropriation of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of  Meghalaya to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand as  they 
have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the  expenditure mentioned therein or to a 
demand f or a grant and the law to be made  for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of  Meghalaya to meet such expenditure or grant.  
46. Votes on Account and exceptional grant .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything in the foregoing 
provisions of this Part, the Legisl ative Assembly shall have power — 
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any 
financial year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in s ection 43 for the voting of such 
grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of section 44 in relation to that 
expenditure;  
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the resources of the autonomous 
State when on accou nt of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the service the demand cannot 
be stated with the details ordinarily given in the annual financial statement;  
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current service of any financial yea r; 
and the Legislature of Meghalaya shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from 
the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya for the purpose for which the said grants are made.  
(2) The provisions of sections 43 and 44 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under 
sub-section ( 1) and to any law to be made under that sub -section as they have effect in relation to the 
making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law 
to be  made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya 
to meet such expenditure.  
Procedure generally  
47. Rules of procedure .—(1) The Legislative Assembly may make rules for regulating , subject to the 
provisions of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business including the language or languages 
to be used in the Legislative Assembly.  
(2) Until rules are made under sub -section ( 1), the rules of procedure and standing orders wit h respect 
to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam in force immediately before the commencement of this 
Act shall have effect in relation to the Legislative Assembly subject to such modifications and adaptations 
as may be made therein by the Gover nor. 
48. Restrictions on discussion in the Legislative Assembly .—No discussion shall take place in the 
Legislative Assembly with respect to the  conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court , or of a High Court, 
in the discharge  of his duties.  
49. Courts not to  enquire into the proceedings of Legislative Assembly .—(1) The validity of any 
proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall not be called in question on the ground of any al leged 
irregularity of procedure.  
(2) No officer or member of the Legislative Assem bly in whom powers are vested by or under this 
Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business or for maintaining order , in the                    
Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of 
those powers.  
  17 
 Legislative power of the Governor  
50. Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of Legislative Assembly .—(1) If 
at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly is in session, the Governor is satisfied that 
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such 
Ordinance as the circumstances appear to him to require:  
Provided that the Governor shall not without instructions from the President , promulgate any suc h 
Ordinance, if — 
(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under the Constitution or this Act have required 
the previous sanction of the President for the introduction thereof into the Legislative Assembly of 
Meghalaya; or  
(b) he would have deemed it  necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same provisions for the 
consideration of the President; or  
(c) an Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya containing the same provisions would under this Act 
have been invalid unless, having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received 
the assent of the President:  
Provided further that the Governor shall not, except on the advice of the Chief Minister of Assam, 
promulgate any such Ordinance if with respect to a Bill containing the same provisions he would have 
deemed it necessary under this Act to obtain the advice of the Chief Minister before assent ing thereto.  
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this section shall have the same force and effect as an Act of the 
Legislative Assembly assented to by the Governor, but every s uch Ordinance — 
(a) shall be laid before Legislative Assembly and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six 
weeks from the reassembly of the Legislative Assembly or if before the expiration of that period a 
resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly, upon the passing of the resolution 
and 
(b) may  be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.  
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this section makes any provision which would not be valid if 
enacted in an Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya assented to by the Governor, it shall be void:  
Provided that — 
(a) for the purposes of section 35 relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya 
which is repugnant to an Act of Parliament or an existing law with respect to a matter enumerated in 
the Concurrent List in the Seventh Schedule to the Cons titution , an Ordinance promulgated under this 
section in pursuance of in structions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature 
which has been reserved for the consideration of the President and assented to by him;  
(b) for the purpos es of section 36 relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya 
which is repugnant to an Act of the Legislature of the State of Assam or an existing law with respect 
to a matter enumerated in Part C of the Second Schedule , an Ordinance pr omulgated under this 
section on the advice of the Chief Minister of Assam shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature 
which has been assented to on the advice of the Chief Minister.  
PART IV  
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS  
 51. Consolidated Fund .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 52, all revenue received by the 
Government of Meghalaya, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or 
ways and means advances and all moneys received by that Government in repayment of loans shall form 
one consolidated fund to be entitled ―the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya ‖. 
(2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government of Meghalaya shall be 
credited to the public account of Meghalaya.  18 
 (3) No moneys out of the C onsolidated Fund of Meghalaya shall be appropriated except in 
accordance with law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Act.  
52. Contingency Fund .—The Legislature of Meghalaya may, by law, establish a Contingency Fund 
in the nature of an imprest to be entitled ―the Contingency Fund of Meghalaya ‖ into which shall be paid 
from time to time such sums as may be determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the 
disposal of the Governor to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of 
meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislature of 
Meghalaya by law under section 45 or section 46.  
53. Custody of suitors ’ deposits and other moneys received by public servants and courts .—All 
moneys  received by or deposited with — 
(a) any officer employed in connection with the affairs of Meghalaya in his capacity as such, 
other than revenues or public moneys raised or received by the Government of Meghalaya; or 
(b) any court within Meghalaya to the credit of any cause, matter , account or persons shall be 
paid into the public account of Meghalaya.  
54. Custody, etc., of Consolidated Fund, Contingency Fund and moneys credited to the public 
account .—The custody of the Consolidated Fund a nd the Contingency Fund of Meghalaya, the payment 
of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than 
those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of Meghalaya, their payment 
into the public account of Meghalaya and the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other 
matters connected with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by the Legislature 
of Meghalaya, and, until provision in that behalf is s o made, shall be regulated by rules made by the 
Governor.  
55. Certain taxes levied by Assam to be appropriated by Meghalaya .—(1) Notwith standing 
anything contained in this Act, any tax on the consumption or sale of electricity relatable to entry 53 in 
the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, and any tax on the sale or purchase of goods 
relatable to entry 54 in the said List levied by the Government of Assam shall be collected within 
Meghalaya but not including any area comprised within t he municipality of Shillong by the Government 
of Meghalaya, and the proceeds in any financial year of any such tax leviable within Meghalaya shall not 
form part of the Consolidated Fund of Assam , but shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya.  
(2) Where a tax relatable to entry 54 in the State List aforesaid levied by the Government of Assam is 
collected by that Government at the first point of sale or purchase of goods, such portion of the tax so 
collected as may be agreed upon by the Government s of Assam and Meghalaya or in default of such 
agreement, as such the Central Government may determine, shall be payable to Meghalaya.  
(3) The laws with respect to the taxes referred to in sub -section (1) shall have effect subject to such 
exceptions and modifications as the Central Government , may, by order, specify for the purpose of giving 
effect to the provisions of that sub -section.  
56. Distribution of revenues .—(1) The grant s-in-aid under clause (1) o f article 275 and the share of 
the taxes on income, the distributable Union duties of excise, the additional duties of excise on goods of 
special importance and estate duty payable to the State of Assam under the Constitution (Distribution of 
Revenues) Ord er, 1969, the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act , 1962  (3 of 1962) , the Additional 
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957  (58 of 1957)  and the Estate Duty (Distribution) 
Act, 1962  (9 of 1962) , shall be construed as from the appoint ed day, as payable to the State of Assam and 
the autonomous State of Meghalaya in such proportion as the President may, by order, determine.  
(2) Every order made by the President under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before Parliament as soon as 
may be after  it is made.  
57. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative Assembly .—The Governor 
may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
Meghalaya as he deems necessary for a period of not  more than six months beginning with the appointed 
day pending the sanction of that expenditure by the Legislative Assembly:  19 
 Provided that the Governor may, after the appointed day, authorise such further expenditure as he 
deems necessary from the Consolid ated Fund of Meghalaya for any period not extending beyond the said 
period of six months.  
PART V  
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
58. Apportionment of assets and liabilities .—The assets and liabilities of the State of Assam 
immediately before the appointed day shall  be apportioned between that State and Meghalaya in 
accordance with the provisions contained in the Third Schedule.  
PART VI  
ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS  
59. Obligation of Meghalaya, the State of Assam and the Union .—The executive power of 
Meghalaya shall be so  exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by Parliament, the 
Legislature of the State of Assam and any existing laws which apply in Meghalaya, and the executive 
power of the Union and of the State of Assam shall extend to the giving of such dir ections to Meghalaya 
as may appear to the Government of India or the Government of Assam, as the case may be, to be 
necessary for that purpose.  
60. Control over the autonomous State in certain  cases .—The executive power of Meghalaya shall 
be so exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union or the 
Government of Assam , as the case m ay be, and the executive power of the Union and the State of Assam 
shall extend to the giving of such directions to Meghalaya as may app ear to the Government of India or 
the Government of Assam, as the case may be, to be necessary for that purpose.  
61. Entrustment of functions .—Notwith standing anything in this Act, — 
(a) the  Government of Assam may, with the consent of the Government of Meghalaya, entrust 
either conditionally or unconditionally to that G overnment or to its officers fu nction in relation to any 
matter to which the executive power of the State of Assam extends;  
(b) the Government of Meghalaya may, with the consent fo r the Government of Assam, entrust 
either conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to 
any matter to which the executive power of Meghalaya extends.  
PART VII  
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
62. Provisions as to Provisional Legislative Assembly .—(1) Until the Legislative Assembly of 
Meghalaya has been duly constituted and summoned to meet for the first session under the provisions of 
Part III, there shall be a Provisional Legislative Assembly which shall consist of not less than thirty -five 
and not more  than fifty -five persons as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Election 
Commission, by order, determine, and such persons shall be elected in the manner specified in               
sub-section ( 2). 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the members of the Provisional Legislative Assembly 
shall be elected in  the following manner, namely: — 
(a) there shall be an electoral college for each autonomous district within Meghalaya which shall 
consist of the elected members of the District Council thereof, and each electoral college shall elect 
such number of persons to the Provisional Legislative Assembly as the President may, after 
consultation with the Election Commission, by order, determine;  
(b) the election of members to the P rovisional Legislative Assembly shall be in accordance with 
the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and shall be subject 
to such rules as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Election Commission , make 
in this behalf.  20 
 (3) The Central Government may nominate to the Provisional Legislative Assembly not more than 
three persons not being persons in the service of the Government, to represent any minority communities 
in Meghalaya which, in its opinion,  need representation in the Assembly.  
(4) No person shall be qualified to be chosen as a member of the Provisional Legislative Assembly 
unless he is a person whose name is for the time being entered in the electoral roll for so much of any 
constituency of the Legislative Assembly of Assam as is comprised within Meghalaya and is not less than 
twenty -five years of age.  
(5) If owing to death, resignation or otherwise, the office of a member of the Provisional Legislative 
Assembly falls vacant, it may be filled  up as soon as practicable under and in accordance with the 
foregoing provisions of this section.  
(6) The term of office of the members of the Provisional Legislative Assembly shall expire 
immediately before the first meeting of the Legislative Assembly du ly constituted under this Act.  
(7) The election by the electoral college under this section shall not be called in question on the 
ground merely of the existence of a vacancy in the membership of any District Council forming part of 
the electoral college.  
(8) The Provi sional Legislative Assembly con stituted under this section shall, for so long it is in 
existence, be deemed to be t he Legislative Ass embly duly constituted under this Act, and accordingly the 
provisions of Part III shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the Provisional Legis lative Assembly as 
they apply in  relation to the Legislative Assembly.  
PART VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
63. Special committee for development of Shillong .—The Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Governments of Assam and Meghalaya,  by order, constitute a committee consisting of such 
number of persons as it may  think fit for advising the two Governments on matters of common interest s 
with respect to Shillong in the field of education and water supply in particular,  and with respect to its 
development and administration in general.  
Explanation .—In this section, Shillong shall mean  the areas comprised within the cantonment and 
municipality of Shillong and  include such other areas adjoining the sai d cantonment or Municipality as 
may be  agreed upon by the Governments of Assam and Meghalaya in this behalf.  
64. Provisions as to continuance of courts .—All courts and tribunals and all authorities discharging 
lawful functions throughout Meghalaya or any part thereof immediately before the appointed day shall, 
unless their continuance is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or until other provision is made by 
a competent authority, continue to exercise their respective functions.  
65. Provisions rel ating to services .—(1) Every person who being a member of an All -India Service 
is for the time being borne on the Assam State Cadre of that Service or is otherwise serving in connection 
with the affairs of the State of Assam as a member of Class I service of that State may be required by the 
Government of that State to serve in connection with the affairs of Meghalaya for such period or periods 
as the Government of Assam may, by order, direct:  
Provided th at no such order shall be made — 
(a) before the appoin ted day, except with the approval of the Central Government; and  
(b) on or after the appointed day, except in accordance with such rules as may be made by the 
Central Government after consultation with the Governments of Assam and Meghalaya.  
(2) Subject to  any general or special order which the Central Government may make in this behalf, 
the control over any such person as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, for so long as he is required to 
serve in connection with the affairs of Meghalaya, be vested in the Government of Meghalaya.  
(3) Such persons serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Assam immediately before the 
appointed day, not being a person referred to in sub -section ( 1) as may be determined by agreement , 21 
 between the Government of Assam and the Government of Meghalaya or in default of agreement , by the 
Central Government, may, notwithstanding anything in the terms of their appointments or their conditions 
of service, be required to serve in connection with the affairs of the auto nomous State.  
(4) All previous service rendered by a person referred to in sub -section  (3) in connection with the 
affairs of the State of Assam shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the 
autonomous State for the purposes of  the rules regulating his conditions of service.  
(5) Nothing in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) shall be deemed to affect the power of the Legislature of 
Meghalaya or the Governor to determine the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with 
the af fairs of Meghalaya:  
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to any person 
referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of 
the Government of Assam.  
66. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptations .—(1) All laws in force immediately before 
the appointed day in the autonomous State shall continue to be in force therein until altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent legislature or other competent authority.  
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the applicatio n in relation to the autonomous State of any law made 
before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, within two years from that day, by order, 
make such adaptations or modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be 
necessary or expedient and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and 
modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent legislature or other competent 
authority.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expressio n ―appropriate Government ‖ means as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the               
Central Government, as respects any law relating to a matter in the Second Schedule, the G overnment of 
Meghalaya, and, as respects any other law, the Government of Assam.  
67. Autonomous State to be a State for certain purposes of the Constitution .—Subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Act, reference to a State (by whatever form of w ords) in any of the 
following articles of the Constitution shall be construed as including a reference to the autonomous State, 
namely:— 
Articles 12 to 15 (inclusive), 16 [except clause ( 3) thereof], 18, 19, 23, 25, 28 to 31 (inclusive), 
31A, 34 to 51 (inclusive), 58, 59, 66, 73, 102, 110( 1)(f), 131, 138, 149, 150, 151, 161, 209, 210, 233, 
234, 235, 237, 251, 252, 256 to 258A (inclusive), 261, 262, 263, 268, 269, 270, 272, 274 to 280 
(inclusive), 282, 288, 289, 293, 296, 298 to 305 (inclusive), 308 to 3 11 (inclusive), 320, 323 (2), 324 
to 329 (inclusive), 339 to 342 (inclusive), 3 45 to 348 (inclusive), 350, 350A, 350 B, 353, 355 to 358 
(inclusive), 360, 361, 364 to 367 (inclusive).  
Explanation. —Reference in any of the articles above specified to the High C ourt or to the                    
State Public Service Commission shall be construed as reference to the High Court of Assam or the 
Public Service Commission of the State of Assam , as the case may be.  
68. Power of Governments of Assam and Meghalaya to carry on trade, etc., in                
Meghalaya .—(1) The executive power which the Government of Assam may exercise under article  298 
in Meghalaya for the carrying on of any trade or business and for the acq uisition, holding and disposal of 
property and the making of contracts for any purpose shall, in so far as such trade or business or such 
purpose is not one with respect to which the Legislature of the State of Assam may make laws, be subject 
to legislatio n by the Legislature of Meghalaya.  
(2) The executive power which the Government of Meghalaya may exercise under article 298 in 
Meghalaya for the carrying on of any trade or business and for the acquisition, holding and disposal of 
property and the making o f contracts of for any purpose shall, in so far as such trade or business or such 
purpose is not one with respect to which the Legislature of Mehgalaya may make laws, be subject also to 
legislation by the Legislature of the State of Assam.  22 
 69. Power to sus pend provisions of this Act in case of failure of constitutional                         
machinery .—Where a Proclamation is issued under article 356 in respect of Meghalaya, the President 
may, by the same Proclamation or a subsequent Proclamation varying it, suspend also, in whole or in part, 
the operation of any of the provisions of this Act.  
70. Construction of reference to “State” and “State Government ” in other laws in relation to 
Meghalaya .—Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 66 and 71 the  Central Government may, 
after consulting the Government of Assam, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any 
reference to a ―State ‖ in a Central Act specified in the notification shall, in its application to Meghalaya, 
be construed as a ref erence to the whole or any part of Meghalaya and any reference to ―State 
Government ‖ in a Central Act specified in the  notification shall in its application to Meghalaya be 
construed as a reference to the Central Government.   
71. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 66 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilit ating its application in 
relation to the autonomous State, construe the law in such manner not affecting the substance as may be 
necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as the case may be.  
72. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
73. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to  
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid befor e both Houses of Parliament as soon as 
may be after it is made.  
74. Amendment of the Sixth Schedule .—The Sixth Schedule in the Constitution shall stand 
amended as specified in the Fourth Schedule.  
75. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934 .—In section 21A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in             
sub-section ( 1) , after the words ―any State ‖, the brackets and words ―(including the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya) ‖ shall be inserted.  
76. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 .—In section 16 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, in              
sub-section ( 1) , for clause ( d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
―(d) in the case of the Eastern Zone, — 
(i) the Chief Minister and another Minister of the autonomous  State of Meghalaya to be 
nominated by the Governor of Assam and if there is no Council of Ministers therein, not more 
than two members from the autonomous State of Meghalaya to be nominated by the              
President; and  
(ii) the person for the time being holding the office of the Adviser to the Governor of Assam 
for Tribal areas. ‖. 
77. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, befor e the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 4 of 1986,  s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  23 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 7, 16 and 26)  
FORMS  OF OATHS OR AFFIRMATIONS  
I 
Form of oaths or affirmation to be made by a candidate for electio n to the Legislative Assembly: — 
―I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of 
Meghalaya  do swear in the name of God     that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the  Constitution  of 
                                  solemnly affirm  
as by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India. ‖. 
II 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legis lative Assembly: — 
―I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative Assembly of 
Meghalaya    do swear in the name of God  that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution                  
solemnly affirm 
of  India as by law established , and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and 
that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter. ‖. 
III 
Form of oath of office for a membe r of the C ouncil of Ministers: — 
―I, A.B., do  swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the  Constitutio n 
solemnly affirm  
of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, that I will 
faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as Minister for Meghalaya, and that I will do right 
to all manner of people in accordance with the Con stitution and the law without fear or favour, 
affection or ill -will.‖. 
IV 
Form of oath of secrecy for a mem ber of the Council of Ministers :— 
―I, A.B., do  swear in the name of God that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or  reveal  to any 
solemnly  affirm 
person or persons any matter which shall be brought under any consideration or shall become known 
to me as a Minister for Meghalaya except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as 
such Minister. ‖. 
  24 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See sections  33 and 36)  
AUTONOMOUS STATE  LIST 
[See section 33( 1)] 
Matters with respect to  which the Legislative Assembly has exclusive power to make laws.  
PART A 
The following matters  enumerated or to the extent included in List II —State List1. 
1. Village  and town police within the meaning of clause ( f) of sub -paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 3 
of the Sixth Sche dule to the Constitution (Entry 2). 
2. Administration  of justice, constitution and organisation of all courts, except the Supreme  
Court and the High Court; procedu re in rent and revenue courts; fees taken in  all courts except the 
Supreme Court and the High Court (Entry 3).  
3. Prisons,  reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature, and  persons 
detained therein; arrangements with the State of Assam and other States  for the use of prisons and 
other institutions (Entry 4).  
4. Local  Government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of municipal  corporations, 
improvement trusts, district boards, mining settlement authorities  and other local authorities for the 
purpose of local self -Government or village  administration (Entry 5).  
5. Public  health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries (Entry 6).  
6. Pilgrimages,  other than pilgrimages to places outside India (Entry 7).  
7. Intoxi cating  liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture, possession, transport,  
purchase, and sale of intoxicating liquors (Entry 8).  
8. Relief  of the disabled and unemployable (Entry 9).  
9. Burials  and burial grounds : cremations and cremation grounds (Entry 10).  
10. Education including universities, subject to the  provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of 
List I and Entry 25 of List III  (Entry 11).  
11. Libraries,  museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the autonomous  
State; an cient and historical monuments and records other than those declared by  or under law 
made by Parliament to be of national importance (Entry 12).  
12. Communications,  that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries and other means of communication 
not specified in L ist I, but excluding roads, bridges and ferries declared by the  Legislature of Assam 
by law to be State highways; municipal tramways; ropeways;  inland waterways and traffic thereon 
subject to the provisions of List I and  List III with regard to such waterw ays; vehicles other than 
mechanically  propelled vehicles (Entry 13).  
13. Agriculture,  including agricultural education and research, protection against pests and  
prevention of plant disease subject to the provisions of entry 1 of Part C  (Entry 14).  
14. Pre servation,  protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases;  
veterinary training and practice (Entry 15).  
15. Pounds  and the prevention of cattle trespass (Entry 16).  
                                                           
1 NOTE.—Reference in this Schedule to List I, List II or List III or to entries therein are reference to the said list 
or entries therein the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; and references  in brackets at the end of each entry are 
references to the corresponding entries in List II or List III in the said Schedule and have been inserted for the sake 
of convenience only.  
 25 
 16. Water,  that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, dr ainage and embankments,  
water storage and water power, subject to the provisions of entry 56 of List I,  but excluding         
water -supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments,  water storage and water power in 
relation to irrigation, hydro -electric and  navigation projects financed by the Government of Assam 
wholly or in part and  declared by the Legislature of the State of Assam by law to be projects of 
State  Importance (Entry 17).  
17. Land,  that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the relation of  landlord 
and tenant; and the collection of rents; transfer and alienation of  agricultural land; land 
improvement and agricultural loans, colonization (Entry18).  
18. Forests,  subject to the provisions of entry 2 of Part C ( Entry 19).  
19. Protection  of wild animals and birds (Entry 20).  
20. Fisheries  (Entry 21).  
21. Courts  of wards subject to the provisions of entry 34 of List I; encumbered and  attached 
estates (Entry 22).  
22. Regulation  of mines and mineral development subje ct to the provisions of List I with  
respect to regulation and development under the control of the Union (Entry 23).  
23. Gas  and gas -works (Entry 25).  
24. Trade  and Commerce within the autonomous State subject to the provisions of entry 33  of 
List III (Entry 26).  
25. Markets  and fairs (Entry 28).  
26. Weights  and measures except establishment of standards (Entry 29).  
27. Money -lending and money -lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness (Entry 30).  
28. Inns  and inn -keepers (Entry 31).  
29. Incorporation,  regulation and winding up of universities; unincorporated trading, literary,  
scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co -operative  societies (Entry 32).  
30. Theatres  and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 6 0 of  
List I; sports, entertainments and amusements (Entry 33).  
31. Betting  and gambling (Entry 34).  
32. Works,  lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of the autonomous State           
(Entry 35).  
33. Elections  to the legislature of the autonomous State subject to the provisions of any law  
made by Parliament (Entry 37).  
34. Salaries  and allowances of members, Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the                 
Legislative  Assembly (Entry 38).  
35. Powers,  privileges and immunities of the Leg islative Assembly and of the members and  
committees thereof, enforcement of attendance of persons for giving evidence or  producing 
documents before committees of the Legislature of Meghalaya (Entry  39). 
36. Salaries  and allowances of Ministers for the auto nomous State (Entry 40).  
37. Public  Services of the autonomous State (Entry 41).  
38. Pensions  payable by the autonomous State or out of the Consolidated Fund of Meghalaya  
(Entry 42).  
39. Public  debt of the autonomous State (Entry 43).  
40. Treasure  trove (E ntry 44).  26 
 41. Land  revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the maintenance of  
land records, survey for revenue purposes and records of rights, and alienation  of revenue            
(Entry 45).  
42. Taxes  on agricultural income (Entry 46). 
43. Duties  in respect of succession to agricultural land (Entry 47).  
44. Estate  duty in respect of agricultural land (Entry 48).  
45. Taxes  on lands and buildings (Entry 49).  
46. Taxes  on mineral rights subjects to any limitations imposed by Parliament by law relating 
to mineral development (Entry 50).  
47. Duties of excise of the following goods  manufactured or produced in the autonomous 
State and countervailing duties at  the same or low er rates on similar goods manufactured o r 
produced elsewhere in India: — 
(a) alcoholic liquors for  human consumption;  
(b) opium, Indian hemp and  other narcotic drugs and narcotics;  
but not including medicinal and toilet  preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in            
sub-paragraph ( b) of this entry (Entry 51).  
48. Taxes  on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or sa le therein             
(Entry 52).  
49. Taxes  on advertisements ot her than advertisements published i n the newspapers              
(Entry  55). 
50. Taxes  on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways (Entry 56).  
51. Taxes  on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for use on roads  
includ ing tram -cars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List III (Entry  57). 
52. Taxes  on animals and boats (Entry 58).  
53. Tolls  (Entry 59).  
54. Taxes  on profession, trades, call ings and employments (Entry 60).  
55. Capitation  taxes (Entry 61).  
56. Taxes  on luxuries, including taxes on entertainments, amusements, betting and gambling  
(Entry 62).  
57. Rates  of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified in the  provisions 
of List I with regard to rates of stamp duty (Entry 63).  
58. Any  other matter not enumerated in this Part and in respect of which a District  Council 
has power to make laws under paragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule in the  Constitution, to the extent 
to which it is not included in entry 16 of this Part  and entry 2 of Part C.  
59. Offences  against laws with respect to any of the matters in this Part (Entry 64).  
60. Jurisdiction  and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the  
matters in this Part (Entry 65).  
61. Fees  in respect of any of the matters in this Part, but not including fees taken in  any court 
(Entry 66).  
PART B 
The following matters  enumerated or to th e extent included in List III —Concurrent List.  
1. Marriage  and divorce; wills, intestacy and succession; social customs; appointment or  
success ion of Chiefs or Headmen (Entry 5).  27 
 2. Offences  against laws with respect to any of the matters in this Part (Entry 1).  
3. Jurisdiction  and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the  
matters in th is Part (Entry 46). 
4. Fees  in respect of any of the matters in this Part, but not including fees taken in  any court 
(Entry 47).  
Concurrent List between the autonomous State and the State of Assam  
PART C 
(See section 33 ( 2)) 
Matters with respect to which the Legislature of Meghalaya  and the Legislature of the State of 
Assam also have power to make laws, namely,  the following matters enumerated or to the extent 
included in List II –State  List and List III —Concurrent List.  
1. Scheme  of agriculture designed to benefit both the areas of the autonomous State as  well as 
the rest of Assam (Entry 14 of List II).  
2. Conversion  of forests in catchment areas of projects referred to in entry 16 of Part A,  
financed by the Government of Assam wholly or in part and declared by the  Legislature of the  
State of Assam by law to be projects of State importance  (Entry 19 of List II).  
3. Industries  subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I (Entry 24 of List II).  
4. Production, supply and distribution of goods,  subject to the provisions of entr y 33 of            
List III (Entry 27 of List II).  
5. Removal  from the autonomous State to any other area of the State of Assam or to any  other 
State of prisoners and accused persons (Entry 4 of List III).  
6. Transfer  of property other than agricultural la nd, subject to entry 58 of Part A;  registration 
of deeds and documents (Entry 6 of List III).  
7. Economic  and social planning (Entry 20 of List III).  
8. Acquisition and requisitioning of property (Entry  42 of List III).  
9. Recovery  in the autonomous State of claims in respect of taxes and other public demands,  
including arrears of land revenue and sums recoverable as such arrears , arising  outside the 
autonomous State (Entry 43 of List III).  
10. Inquiries  and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters  specified in this Schedule  
(Entry 45 of List III).  
11. Offences  against laws with respect to any of the matters in this Part (Entry 64 of List  II 
and Entry 1 of List III).  
12. Jurisdiction  and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect t o any of the  
matters in this Part (Entry 65 of List II and Entry 46 of List III).  
13. Fees  in respect of any of the matters in this Part, but not including fees taken in  any court 
(Entry 66 of List II and Entry 47 of List III).  
  28 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 58)  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
1. Definitions .—In this Schedule: — 
(a) ―purpose of the autonomous State ‖ means a purpose relatable to any of the matters in respect 
of which the Legislature of Meghalaya has power to make laws under this A ct; and  
(b) ―population ratio ‖, in relation to Meghalaya means such ratio as Central Government may, by 
order, specify as the ratio between the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of 
Meghalaya and the rest of the State of Assam.  
2. Lands  and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Schedule, all land and all 
stores, articles and other goods held by the State of Assam within the territories of Meghalaya shall, on 
the appointed day, pass to Meghalaya, if the purposes for  which they were held will be purposes of the 
autonomous State.  
(2) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having jurisdiction over the 
areas comprised partly in Meghalaya and partly in the rest of Assam and unissued stores shall be divided 
between the State of Assam and Meghalaya in accordance with such directions as the                             
Central Government may think fit to issue for a just and equitable distribution thereof.  
Explanation —In this paragraph, the expr ession ―land‖ includes immov able property of every 
description and any rights in or over such property, and the expression ―goods ‖ does not include coins, 
bank notes and currency notes.  
3. Treasury and bank balances .—The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State of 
Assam and the balances of that State with the Reserve Bank of India or any other bank immediately 
before the appointed day shall be divided between the State of Assam and Meghalaya according to the 
population ratio:  
Provided that  for the purpose of such division there shall be no transfer of cash balance from any 
treasury to any other treasury, an d the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the balance of the 
States of Assam and Meghalaya in the books of the Reserve Bank of India on the appointed day or in such 
other manner as the Central Government may, by order, direct.  
4. Arrears of taxes. —Meghalaya shall have the right to recover the arrears of any tax or duty, 
including the arrears of land revenue, on property situate in  Meghalaya, and shall also have the right to 
recover the arrears of any other tax or duty if the place of assessment of that tax or duty is located in 
Meghalaya:  
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply in relation to arrears of  any tax or duty which 
Meghalaya is not competent to collect.  
5. Right to recover loans and advances .—(1) The right to recover any loans or advances made 
before the appointed day by the State of Assam to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in 
Meghalaya s hall belong to Meghalaya, if the purpose for which the loans or advances were made will 
thereafter be a purpose of the autonomous State.  
(2) The right to recover loans and advances of pay and travelling allowances to a Government servant 
made before the ap pointed day by the State of Assam shall pass to Meghalaya if, after the appointed day, 
that Government servant is required to serve in connection with the affairs of Meghalaya under                  
sub-section ( 3) of section 65.  
6. Investments  and credits  in certain funds. —The investments made before the appointed day from 
the Cash Balance Investment Account and any other general fund of the State of Assam shall, after the 
appointed day, be divided between the States of Assam and Meghalaya according to the  population ratio; 
and the investments in any special fund the objects of which are confined to a local area in Meghalaya 
shall pass to Meghalaya if such investment relates to a purpose of the autonomous State.  29 
 7. Assets and liabilities of State  undertakings and investments. —(1) The assets and liabilities in 
Meghalaya on the appointed day relating to any commercial or industrial undertaking of the State of 
Assam other than an undertaking on which the State of Assam has incurred a capital outlay e xceeding 
rupees fifty lakhs or a Government company shall, after the appointed day, pass to Meghalaya if the 
purpose of the undertaking relates to a purpose of the autonomous State.  
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the State of Assam for any such undertaking 
as is referred to in sub -paragraph ( 1), the securities held in respect of such investments made from that 
fund shall pass to Meghalaya.  
(3) The investments of the State of Assam made before the appointed day in any body corporate o r 
co-operative society whose area of operation or jurisdiction extends to areas comprised partly within 
Meghalaya and partly within the rest of the State of Assam, or in any Government company or private 
commercial or industrial undertaking, shall, if the Central Government so directs, be allocated between 
the Government of Assam and the Government of Meghalaya in such proportion as may be agreed upon 
between the two Governments within one year from the date of the direction aforesaid or, in default of 
such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct.  
8. Public debt. —(1) The public debt of the State of Assam attributable to loans raised by the issue of 
Government securities and outstanding with the public immediately before the appointed day sha ll 
continue to be the public debt of that State, and Meghalaya shall be liable to pay to the State of Assam its 
share of the sums due ’ from time to time for the servicing and repayment of the debt.  
(2) For the purpose of determining the share referred to i n sub -paragraph  (1), the debt shall be 
deemed to be divided between the States of Assam and Meghalaya as if it were a debt referred to in            
sub-paragraph ( 4). 
(3) Out of so much of the public debt of Assam, other than the public debt referred to i n                   
sub-paragraph ( 1), as is equal to the amount of loans and advances made by that State and outstanding on 
the appointed day, the share of the liability of Meghalaya shall be for an amount equal to the loans and 
advances recoverable by Meghalaya under paragraph 5.  
(4) The remaining public debt of the State of Assam attributable to loans taken from the                   
Central Government, the Reserve Bank of India or any other body or bank outstanding immediately 
before the appointed day , shall be divided between the State of Assam and Meghalaya in proportion to the 
total capital expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been 
incurred by the State of Assam up to the appointed day and the total e xpenditure on all capital works and 
other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred up to that day in Meghalaya for purposes 
of the autonomous State.  
(5) For the purposes of this paragraph, ―Government security ‖ means a security created and issued by 
the State of Assam for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in , or 
prescribed under clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944  (18 of 1944) . 
9. Refund  of taxes collected in excess. —After the appoint ed day, it shall be the liability of 
Meghalaya to refund any tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected  in excess on any 
property situ ate in Meghalaya or any other tax or duty collected in excess, if the place of assessment of 
that tax or duty is situate in Meghalaya.  
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the refund of any tax or duty which Meghalaya 
is not competent to collect.  
10. Deposits, etc. —The liability of the State of Assam in respect of any civil deposit or local  fund 
deposit made before the appointed day in any place situate in Meghalaya, shall become the liability of 
Meghalaya if the deposit is for any purpose of the autonomous State.  
11. Provident Fund. —The liability of the State of Assam in respect of the Prov ident Fund account of 
a Government servant required to serve in connection with the affairs of Meghalaya under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 65 shall, on and from the appointed day, be the liability of Meghalaya.  30 
 12. Pensions .—The liability of the State of As sam or Meghalaya in respect of pensions shall be 
apportioned between the two in such manner as may be agreed upon between them or in default of such 
agreement, in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, specify.  
13. Contract s.—(1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Assam has made any contract in 
the exercise of its executive power for any of the purposes of that State, that contract shall be deemed to 
have been made in the exercise of the executive power of Meghalaya if the purp ose is as from that day 
exclusively a purpose of the autonomous State , and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may 
accrue under any such contract shall, to the extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of 
Assam, be rights or liabilities of Meghalaya.  
(2) For the purposes of this paragraph, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which 
have accrued or  may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or tribunal in p roceedings relating 
to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in, or in connection with, any such proceedings.  
(3) This paragraph shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Schedule relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations; and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of contractual rights, be dealt 
with under those provisions.  
14. Liability i n respect of  actionable wrong. —Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
State of Assam is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong other than a breach of contract, 
that liability shall be the liability of Meghalaya if it relates thereafter to  a purpose of the                  
autonomous State.  
15. Liability as guarantor. —Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Assam is 
liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society or other person, that 
liability shall be the liability of Meghalaya if it relates thereafter to a purpose of the autonomous State.  
16. Items in susp ense.—If any item in suspense relating to a purpose of the autonomous State is 
ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of  the nature referred to in any of the foregoing paragraphs 
of this Schedule, it shall be dealt with in accordance with that provision.  
17. Residuary provisions. —The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the State of Assam 
which relates to a purpos e of the autonomous State and which is not dealt with in any of the foregoing 
paragraphs of this Schedule, shall pass to Meghalaya.  
18. Apportionment of assets and liabilities by agreement .—Where the States of Assam and 
Meghalaya agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned 
between them in a manner other than that as provided for in the foregoing paragraphs of this Schedule, 
then, notwithstanding anything contained therein , the benefit or burden of that asset o r liability shall be 
apportioned in the manner agreed upon.  
19. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where , 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Schedule, the State of Assam or Meghalaya is entitled to any 
property, or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability and the Central Government is of 
opinion, on a reference made to it within a period of three years from the appointed day by the State of 
Assam or the autonomous State, as the case may be , that it is just and equitable that that property or those 
benefits should be transferred to one of the two States or shared between them, or that a contribution 
towards that liability should be made by either of the States, the said property or benefits shall be 
allocated in such manner, or Meghalaya or the State of Assam shall make to the other State primarily 
subject to the liability such contribution in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after 
consultation with the Government of Assam and the Government of Meghalaya, by order, determine.  
  31 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 74)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE SIXTH  SCHEDULE OF THE CONSTITUTION  
1. In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (hereinafter referred to as the Sixth Schedule), in                 
sub-paragraph ( 3) of paragraph 1, after clause ( f), the following clau se shall be inserted, namely: — 
―(ff) alter the name of any autonomous district, ‖; 
2. In para graph 2 of the Sixth Schedule, — 
(i) for sub -paragraph ( 1) , the following sub -paragraph  shall be substituted, namely: — 
―(1) There shall be a District Council for each autonomous district consisting of not more 
than thirty members, of whom not more than four persons shall be nominated by the Governor 
and the rest shall be elected on the basis  of adult suffrage. ‖; 
(ii) in sub -paragraph ( 6)— 
(a) in clause ( e), for the words ―such Councils ‖, the words ―Regional Councils ‖ shall be 
substituted;  
(b) in clause ( g), after the words ―conduct of business ‖, the brackets and words 
―(including the power to  act notwithstanding any vacancy) ‖ shall be inserted;  
(iii) after sub -paragraph ( 6) the following sub -paragr aph shall be inserted, namely: — 
―(6A) The elected members of the District Council shall hold office for a term of               
five years from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Council after the general 
elections to the Council, unless the District Council is sooner dissolved under paragraph 16 
and a nominated member shall hold office at the pleasure of the Governor:  
Provided that the s aid period of five years may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in 
operation or if circumstances exist which, in the opinion of the Governor , render the holding of 
elections impracticable, be extended by the Governor for a period not exceeding one year at a 
time and in any case where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation not extending beyond a 
period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate:  
Provided further that a member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office only for  the 
remainder of the term of office of the member whom he replaces. ‖; 
(iv) in sub -paragraph ( 7)— 
(a) after the words ―make rules ‖, where they first occur the words ―with the approval of 
the Governor ‖ shall be inserted, and where they occur a second time, the words ―with like 
approval ‖ shall be inserted;  
(b) the second proviso shall be omitted.  
3. In pa ragraph 3 of the Sixth Schedule, in sub -paragraph ( 1),— 
(i) in the proviso to clause ( a), for the words ―Government of Assam ‖, the words 
―Government of Assam  or the Government of Meghalaya ‖ shall be substituted;  
(ii) for clause ( i), the following clause  shall be substituted, namely: — 
―(i) ―marriage and divorce; ‖. 
4. In paragraph 4 of the Sixth Schedule, the following sub -paragraph shall b e inserted at the end,  
namely :— 
―(5) On and from such date as the President may, after consulting the Governmen t of Assam or, 
as the case may be, the Government of Meghalaya, by notification appoint in this behalf, this 
paragraph shall have effect in relation to such autonomous  district or region as may be specif ied in 
the notification, as if — 
(i) in sub -paragraph ( 1), for the words ―between the parties all of whom belong to               
Scheduled Tribes within such areas, other than suits and cases to which the provisions of              32 
 sub-paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule apply ,‖, the words ―not being suits and cases of 
the nature referred to in sub -paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule, which the Governor 
may specify in this behalf, ‖ had been substitute d; 
(ii) sub -paragraphs ( 2) and ( 3) had been omitted;  
(iii) in sub -paragraph ( 4)— 
(a) for the words ―A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may with 
the previous approval of the Governor make rules regulating ‖, the words ―The Governor may 
make rules regulating ‖ had been substituted; and  
(b) for clause ( a), the following clause had been substituted, namely: — 
―(a) the constitution of village councils and courts, the powers to be exercised by 
them under this paragraph and the courts to whi ch appeals from the decisions of            
village councils and courts shall lie ‖; 
(c) for clause ( c), the following clause  had been substituted, namely: — 
―(c) the transfer of appeals and other proceedings pending before the Regional or 
District Council or any court constituted by such Council immediately before the date 
appointed by the President under sub -paragraph ( 5);‖, and  
(d) in clause ( e), for the words,  brackets and figures ―sub-paragraph s (1) and ( 2)‖, 
the word, brackets and figures ―sub-paragraph ( 1) ― had been substituted. ‖. 
5. In paragraph 5 of the Sixth Schedule , after sub -paragraph ( 3), the following sub -paragr aph shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
―(4) On and from the date appointed by the President under sub -paragraph ( 5) of paragraph 4 in 
relation to any autonomous district or autonomous region, nothing contained in this paragraph shall , 
in its application to that district or region, be deemed to autho rise the Governor to confer on the 
District Council or Regional Council or on courts constituted by the District Council any of the 
powers referred to in sub -paragraph ( 1) of this paragraph. ‖. 
6. For paragraph 6 of the Sixth Schedule, the following paragra ph shall be substituted, namely :— 
―6. Powers of the District Council to establish primary schools, etc .—(1) The District Council 
for an autonomous district may establish, construct, or manage primary schools, dispensaries, 
markets, cattle pounds, ferries, fisheries, roads, road transport and waterways in the district and may, 
with the previous approval of the Governor, make regulations for the regulation and control thereof 
and, in particular, may prescribe the language and the manner in which primary educa tion shall be 
imparted in the primary schools in the district.  
(2) The Governor may, with the consent of any District Council entrust either conditionally or 
unconditionally to that Council or to its officers functions in relation to agriculture, animal hu sbandry, 
community projects, co -operative societies, social welfare, village planning or any other matter to 
which the executive power of the State of Assam or Meghalaya, as the case may be, extends. ‖. 
7. In paragraph 7 of the Sixth Schedule, for sub -parag raph ( 2), the following sub -paragraphs  shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
―(2) The Governor may make rules for the management of the District Fund, or, as the case may 
be, the Regional Fund and for the procedure to be followed in respect of payment of money in to the 
said fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of moneys therein and any other matter 
connected with or ancillary to the matters aforesaid.  
(3) The accounts of the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regional Council shall be ke pt 
in such form as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India may, with the approval of the 
President, prescribe.  
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor -General, shall cause the accounts of the District and Regional 
Councils to be audited in such manner as he m ay think fit, and the reports of the Comptroller and 33 
 Auditor -General relating to such accounts shall be submitted to the Governor who shall cause them to 
be laid before the Council. ‖ 
8. In paragraph 8 of the Sixth Schedule, in sub -paragraph ( 4), the following words shall be inserted at 
the end, namely: — 
―and every such regulation shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, 
shall have no effect. ‖ 
9. After para graph  12 of the Sixth Schedule, the following paragr aph shall be inserted, namely: — 
―12A. Special provisions as respects app lication of laws in Meghalaya .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anyth ing contained in paragraph 12, — 
(a) if any provision of a law made by a District or Regional Council in Meghalaya with 
respect to a ny of the matters specified in clause  (b) o r clause  (c) of                                             
sub-paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 3 of this Schedule is repugnant to any provision of a law 
made by the Legislature of the State of Assam with respect to any project declared by the 
Legislature of that State to be of State importance, then, the law made by the District Council 
or, as the case may be, the Regional Council, whether made before or after the law made by 
the Legislature of the , State of Assam , shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void and the 
law made by the Legislature of the State of Assam shall prevail;  
(b) if any provision of a law made by a District or Regional Council in Meghalaya with 
respect to any of the matters specified in cl ause (b) or cl ause (c) or clause ( f) of                    
sub-paragraph  (1) of paragraph 3 of this Schedule is repugnant to any provision of a law 
made by the Legislature of Meghalaya with respect to that matter, then, the law made by the 
District Council or,  as the case may be, the Regional Council, whether made before or after 
the law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya shall to the extent of repugnancy, be void and 
the law made by the Legislature of Meghalaya shall prevail.  
(2) If it appears to two or more  District Councils or Regional Councils in Meghalaya to be 
desirable that any of the matters with respect to which they have power to make laws under paragraph 
3 of this Schedule should be regulated by the Legislature of Meghalaya by law, and if resolution s to 
that effect are passed by the said District Councils or Regional Councils , it shall be lawful for the 
Legislature of Meghalaya to pass an Act regulating that matter accordingly, and any Act so passed 
shall apply to the autonomous districts or regions concerned, and to any other autonomous district or 
region the District or Regional Council whereof adopts it afterwards by resolution passed in this 
behalf.  
(3) Any Act passed by the Legislature of Meghalaya under sub -paragraph  (2) of this paragraph 
may be  amended or repealed by an Act of the Legislature of Meghalaya passed in like manner, but 
shall not, as respects any autonomous district or region to which it applies, be amended or repealed by 
any law made by the District or Regional Council thereof.  
(4) The Governor may, with respect to any Act of the Legislature of the State of Assam, and the 
President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, by public notification direct, that it shall not 
apply to Meghalaya, or shall apply thereto, or to any part th ereof subject to such exceptions or 
modifications as he may specify in the notification, and any such direction may be so given as to have 
retrospective effect.  
(5) The provisions of clause ( b) of sub -paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 12 shall not apply to 
Meghal aya.‖ 
10. In sub -paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 15 of the Sixth Schedule, after the words ―safety of India ‖, the 
words ―or is likely to be prejudicial to public order ‖ shall be inserted.  
  34 
 11. Paragraph 16 of Sixth Schedule shall be re -numbered as sub-paragraph ( 1) of that paragraph, and 
to that paragraph as so re -numbered the following sub -paragraphs shall be added, namely: — 
―(2) If at any time the Governor is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the administration 
of an autonomous distri ct or region cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this 
Schedule, he may, by public notification, assume to himself all or any of the functions or powers 
vested in or exercisable by the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regio nal Council and 
declare that such functions or powers shall be exercisable by such person or authority as he may 
specify in this behalf, for a period not exceeding six months:  
Provided that the Governor may by a further order or orders extend the operation  of the initial 
order by a period not exceeding six months on each occasion.  
(3) Every order made under sub -paragraph ( 2) of this paragraph with the reasons therefor shall be 
laid before the Legislature of the State and shall cease to operate at the expira tion of thirty days from 
the date on which the State Legislature first sits after the issue of the order, unless, before the expiry 
of that period it has been approved by the State Legislature. ‖ 
12. After paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule, the following p aragraph shall be inserted, namely: — 
―20A. Interpretation .—(1) In this Schedule, — 
(a) ―Governor ‖, in relation to Meghalaya, means the Governor of Assam acting on 
the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers for Meghalaya; except in so far as he is by 
or under this Schedule required to exercise his functions in his discretion or to exercise 
his powers under sub -paragraph ( 4) of paragraph 12A;  
(b) ―Meghalaya ‖ means the aut onomous State formed under article 244A.  
(2) Subject to any express provision made in this behalf, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall, in their applica tion to Meghalaya, have effect — 
(i) as if references to the Government of Assam, State of Assam, State and 
Legislature of the State were references respectively to the Government of Meghalaya, 
the autonomous State of Meghalaya, Meghalaya and the Legislature of Meghalaya;  
(ii) as if in paragrap h 13, the words and figures ―under article 202 ‖ had been 
omitted. ‖ 
 
--------------------------The Bihar Land Reforms Laws (Regulating Mines and Minerals) Validation Act, 1969--------------------------
1 
 THE BIHAR LAND REFORMS LAWS (REGULATING MINES  
AND MINERALS) VALIDATION ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1969  
[26th December, 1969 .] 
An Act to validate certain provisions contained  in the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, and the 
Bihar Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1964, and action taken and things done in 
connection therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Bihar Land Reforms Laws (Regulating Mines and 
Minerals) Validation Act, 1969.  
2. Validation of certain Bihar State laws and action taken and things done connected 
therewith .—(1) The laws specified in the Schedule shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, as 
valid as if the pr ovisions contained therein had been enacted by Parliament.  
(2) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all action taken, things done, rules 
made, notifications issued or purported to have been taken, done, made or issued and rents or royalties 
realised under any such laws shall be deemed to have been validly taken, done, made, issued or realised, 
as the case may be, as if this section had been in force at all material times when such action was taken, 
things, were done, rules were made, notifications were issued, or rents or royalties were realise d, and no 
suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of rents or royalties 
realised under any such laws.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub -section ( 2) shall be construed 
as preventing any person from claiming refund of any rents or royalties paid by him in excess of the 
amount due from him under any such laws . 
 
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
1. Section 10 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXX of 1950), as amended by  the Bihar 
Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1964 (Bihar Act IV of 1965) and by the Bihar Land Reforms 
(Amendment) Act, 1965 (Bihar Act VI of 1965).  
2. Section 10 -A of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXX of 1950), as inserted by the Bihar 
Land Refo rms (Amendment) Act, 1964 (Bihar Act IV of 1965).  
3. Section 31 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXX of 1950), as amended by the Bihar 
Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1964 (Bihar Act IV of 1965) and by the Bihar Land Reforms 
(Amendment) Act, 19 65 (Bihar Act VI of 1965).  
4. Sub -rule ( 2) of Rule 20 of the Bihar Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1964, as inserted by the Bihar 
Minor Mineral Concession (First Amendment) Rules, 1964, published under the Bihar State 
Government notification No. A/MM -1099/ 64(Pt.) 7700/M, dated the 19th December, 1964, in the 
Gazette of Bihar (Pt. II) dated the 30th December, 1964.  
 
--------------------------The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969--------------------------
1 
 THE FOREIGN  MARRIEGE  ACT, 1969  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTONS  
 
CHAPTER   I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Marriage Officers.  
CHAPER   II  
SOLEMNIZATION OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES  
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of foreign marriages.  
5. Notice of intended marriage.  
6. Marriage Notice Book.  
7. Publication of notice  
8. Objection to marriage.  
9. Solemnization of marriage where no objection made.  
10. Procedure on receipt of objection . 
11. Marriage not to be in contravention of local laws.  
12. Declaration by parties and witnesses.  
13. Place and form of solemnization.  
14. Certificate of marriage . 
15. Validity of foreign marriages in India . 
16. New notice when marriage not solemnized within six months . 
CHAPTER   III  
REGISTRATION OF FOREIGN MAR RIAGES SOLEMNIZED UNDER OTHER LAWS  
17. Registration of foreign marriages . 
CHAPTER    IV  
MATRIMONIAL RELIEF IN RESPECT OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES  
18. Matrimonial reliefs to be under Special Marriage Act, 1954.  
CHAPTER   V  
PENALTIES  
19. Punishment for bigamy . 
20. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for marriage . 
21. Punishment for false declaration . 2 
 SECTION S 
22. Punishment for wrongful action of Marriage Officer.  
CHAPTER   VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Recognition of marriages solemnized under law of other countries.  
24. Certification of documents of marriages solemnized in accordance with local law in a           
foreign country.  
25. Certified copy of entries to be evidences . 
26. Correction of errors . 
27. Act not to affect validity of marriages outside it . 
28. Power to make rules . 
29. Amendment of Act 43 of 1954 . 
30. Repeal.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE .— FORM OF NOTICE OF INTENDED MARRIAGE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . —DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM  AND THE              
                                                    BRIDE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE .— FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE FOREIGN MARRIAGE ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1969  
[31st August,  1969.]  
An Act to make provision relating to marriages of citizens of India outside India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows : — 
CHAPTER   I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 . 
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “degrees of prohibited relationship ” shall have the same meaning as in the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954);  
(b) “district ”, in relation to a Marriage Officer, means the area withi n which the duties of his 
office are to be discharged;  
(c) “foreign country ” means a country or place outside India, and includes a ship which is for the 
time being in the territorial waters of such a country or place;  
(d) “Marriage Officer ” means a person appointed under section 3 to be a Marriage  Officer;  
(e) “official house ”, in relation to a Marriage Officer, means — 
(i) the official house of residence of the officer;  
(ii) the office in which the business of the officer is transacted;  
(iii) a prescribed place; and  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act.  
3. Marriage Officers. —For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint such of its diplomatic or consular officers as it may think fit to be Marriage 
Officers for any  foreign country.  
Explanation .—In this section, “diplomatic officer ” means an ambassador, envoy, minister, high 
commissioner, commissioner, charge  d’ affairs  or other diplomatic representative or a counsellor or 
secretary of an embassy, legation or high commission.  
CHAPER   II  
SOLEMNIZATION OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES  
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of foreign marriages. —A marriage between parties one of 
whom  at least is a citizen of India may be solemnized under this Act by or before a Marriage Officer in a 
foreign country, if, at the time of the marriage, the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: — 
(a) neither party has a spouse living,  
(b) neither part y is an idiot or a lunatic,  
(c) the bridegroom has completed the age of twenty -one years and the bride the age of eighteen 
years at the time of the  marriage, and  
(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:  4 
 Provided that where the  personal law or a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a 
marriage between them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they are within the 
degree s of prohibited relationship.  
5. Notice of intended marriage. —When a marriag e is intended to be solemnized under this Act, the 
parties to the marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the First Schedule to 
the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the marriage has res ided for a 
period of not less than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given, and the 
notice shall state that the party has so resided.   
6. Marriage Notice Book. —The Marriage Officer shall keep all notices given under section  5 with 
the records of his office and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of every such notice in a book 
prescribed for that purpose, to be called the “Marriage Notice Book ”, and such book shall be open , for 
inspection at all reasonable times, without f ee, by any person desirous of inspecting the same.   
7. Publication of notice .—Where a notice under section 5 is given to the Marriage Officer, he shall 
cause it to be published — 
(a) in his own office, by affixing a copy thereof to a conspicuous place, and  
(b) in India and in the country or countries in which the parties are ordinarily resident, in the 
prescribed manner.  
8. Objection to marriage. —(1) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the date of 
publication of the notice under section  7, object to the marriage on the ground that it would contravene 
one or more of the conditions specified in section 4.  
Explanation .—Where the publication of the notice by affixation under clause ( a) of section 7 and in 
the prescribed manner under clause ( b) of that section is on different dates, the period of thirty days shall, 
for the purposes of this sub -section, be computed from the later date.  
(2) Every such objection shall be in writing signed by the person making it or by any person duly 
authorised t o sign on his behalf, and shal l state the ground of objection ; and the Marriage Officer shall 
record the nature of the objection in his Marriage Notice Book.  
9. Solemnization of marriage where no objection made. —If no objection is made within the period 
specified in section 8 to an intended marriage, then, on the expiry of that period, the marriage may be 
solemnized.  
10. Procedure on receipt of objection .—(1) If an objection is made under section 8 to an intended 
marriage, the Marriage Officer shall not s olemnize the marriage until he has inquired into the matter of 
the objection in such manner as he thinks fit and is satisfied that it ought not to prevent the solemnization 
of the Marriage or the objection is withdrawn by the person making it.  
(2) Where a Marriage Officer after making any such inquiry entertains a doubt in respect of any 
objection, he shall transmit the record with such statement respecting the matter as he thinks fit to the 
Central Government; and the Central Government, after making such further inquiry into the matter and 
after obtaining such advice as it thinks fit, shall give its decision thereon in writing to the Marriage 
Officer, who shall act in conformity with the decision of the Central Government.  
11. Marriage not to be in contrav ention of local laws. —(1) The Marriage Officer may, for reason s 
to be recorded in writing , refuse to solemnize a marriage under this Act if the intended marriage is 
prohibited by any law in force in the foreign country where it is to be solemnized.  
(2) The  Marriage Officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to solemnize a marriage 
under this Act on the ground that in his opinion, the solemnization of the marriage would be inconsistent 
with international law or the comity of nations.  5 
 (3) Wher e a Marriage Officer refuses to solemnize a marriage under this section, any party to the 
intended marriage may appeal to the Central Government in the prescribed manner within a period of 
thirty days from the date of such refusal; and the Marriage Officer  shall act in conformity with the 
decision of the Central Government on such appeal.  
12. Declaration by parties and witnesses. —Before the marriage is solemnized, the parties and three 
witnesses shall, in  the presence of the Marriage Officer, sign a declara tion in the form specified in the 
Second Schedule, and the declaration shall be countersigned by the Marriage Officer.  
13. Place and form of solemnization. —(1) A marriage by or before a Marriage Officer under this 
Act shall be solemnized at the official house of the Marriage Officer with open doors between the 
prescribed hours in the presence of at least three witnesses.  
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt:  
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding  on the parties unless each party declares to the 
other in the presence of the Marriage Officer and the three witnesses and in any language understood by 
the parties, — “I, (A) take the ( B), to be my lawful wife (or husband) ”: 
Provided further that where th e declaration referred to in the preceding proviso is made in any 
language which is not understood by the Marriage Officer or by any of the witnesses, either of the parties 
shall interpret or cause to be interpreted the declaration in a language which the Marriage Officer, or, as 
the case may be, such witness understand s. 
14. Certificate of marriage .—(1) Whenever a marriage is solemnized under this Act, the Marriage 
Officer shall enter a certificate thereof in the form specified in the Third Schedule in a book to be kept by 
him for that purpose and to be called the Marriage Certificate Book, and such certificate shall be signed 
by the parties to the marriage and the three witnesses.  
(2) On a certificate being entered in the Marriage Certificate Book by the Marriage Officer, the 
certificate shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act has been 
solemnized, and that all formalities respecting the residence of the party concerned previous to the 
marriage and the signatures  of witnesses have been complied with.  
15. Validity of foreign marriages in India .—Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a 
marriage solemnized in the manner provided in this Act shall be good and valid in law.  
16. New notice when marriage not solemnized within six months .—Whenever a marriage is not 
solemnized within six months from the date on which notice thereof has been given to the Marriage 
Officer as required under section 5 or where the record of a case has been transmitted t o the Central 
Government under section 10, or where an appeal has been preferred to the Central Government under 
section 11, within three months from the date of decision of the Central Government in such case or 
appeal, as the case may be, the notice and all other proceedings arising therefrom shall be deemed to have 
lapsed, and no Marriage Officer shall solemnize the marriage until new notice has been given in the 
manner laid down in this Act.  
CHAPTER   III  
REGISTRATION OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED UND ER OTHER LAWS  
17. Registration of foreign marriages .—(1) Where — 
(a) a Marriage Officer is satisfied that a marriage has been duly solemnized in a foreign country 
in accordance with the law of  that country between parties of whom one at least was a citizen of 
India; and  
(b) a party to the marriage informs the Marriage Officer in writing that he or she desires the 
marriage to be registered under this  section,  6 
 the Marriage Officer may, upon payment of the prescribed fee, register the marriage.  
(2) No marriage shall be registered under th e section unless at the time of registration it satisfies the 
conditions mentioned in section 4.  
(3) The Marriage Officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to register a marriage 
under this section on the ground that in his opinion the marriage is inconsistent with international law or 
the comity of nations.  
(4) Where a Marriage Officer refuses to register a marriage under this section the party applying for 
registration may appeal to the Central Govern ment in the prescribed manner within a period of thirty days 
from the date of such refusal; and the Marriage Officer shall act in conformity with the decision of the 
Central Government on such appeal.  
(5) Registration of a marriage under this section shall  be effected by the Marriage Officer by entering 
a certificate of the marriage in the prescribed form and in the prescribed manner in the Marriage 
Certificate Book, and such certificate shall be signed by the parties to the marriage and by three 
witnesses.  
(6) A marriage registered under this section shall, as from the date of registration, be deemed to have 
been solemnized under this Act.  
CHAPTER    IV  
MATRIMONIAL RELIEF IN RESPECT OF FOREIGN MARRIAGES  
18. Matrimonial reliefs to be under Special Marriage Act, 1954. —(1) Subject to the other 
provisions contained in this section, the provisions of Chapters IV, V,  VI and VII of the Special Marriage 
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) shall apply in relation to marriages solemnized under this Act and to any other 
marriage solemnized in a foreign country between parties of whom one at least is a citizen of India as 
they apply in relation to marriages solemni zed under that Act.  
Explanation. —In its application to the marriages referred to in this sub -section, section 24 of the  
Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) , shall be subject to the following modifications, namely: — 
(i) the reference in sub -section ( 1) thereof to clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 4 of that Act 
shall be construed as a reference to clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) respectively of section 4 of this        
Act, and  
(ii) nothing contained in section 24 aforesaid shall apply to any marriage — 
(a) which is not solemnized under this Act; or  
(b) which is deemed to be solemnized under this Act by reason of the  provisions contained in 
section 17:  
Provided that the registration of any such marriage as is referred to in sub -clause ( b) may be declared 
to be of no effect if the registration was in contravention of sub -section ( 2) of section 17.  
(2) Every petition fo r relief under Chapter V or Chapter VI of the Special Marriage                         
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) as made applicable to the marriages referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
presented to the district court within the local limits of whose ordinary civil jurisdiction — 
(a) the respondent is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition; or  
(b) the husband and wife last resided together; or  
(c) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, provided that  the 
respondent is at that time residing outside India.  7 
 Explanation. —In this section, “district court ” has the same meaning as in the Special Marriage        
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) . 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall authorise any court — 
(a) to make any decree of dissolution of marriage, except where — 
(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of the 
petition; or  
(ii) the petitioner, being the wife, was domiciled in India immediately before the marriage  
and has been residing in  India for a period of not less than three years immediately preceding the 
presentation of the petition;  
(b) to make any decree annulling avoidable  marriage, except where — 
(i) the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at t he time of the presentation of the 
petition; or  
(ii) the marriage was solemnized under this Act and the petitioner being the wife, has been 
ordinarily resident in India for a period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of 
the petition;  
(c) to make any decree of nullity of marriage in respect of  a void marriage, except where — 
(i) either of the parties to the marriage is domiciled in India at the time of the presentation of 
the petition; or  
(ii) the marriage was solemnized under this Act and the petitioner is residing in India at the 
time of the presentation of  the petition ; 
(d) to grant any other relief under Chapter V or Chapter VI of the Special Marriage                   
Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) , except where the petitioner is residing in India at the time of the presentation 
of the petition.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall authorise any court to grant any relief under this Act in 
relation to any marriage in a foreign country not  solemnized under it, if the grant of relief in respect of 
such marriage  (whether on any of the grounds specified in the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43  of 1954) , 
or otherwise ) is provided for under any other law for the time being in  force.  
CHAPTER   V  
PENALTIES  
19. Punishment for bigamy .—(1) Any person whose marriage is solemnized or deemed to have 
been solemnized under this Act and who, during the subsistence of his marriage, contracts any other 
marriage in India shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 494 and secti on 495 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the marriage so contracted shall be void.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) apply also to any such offence committed by any citizen of India 
without and beyond India.  
20. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for marriage .—Any citizen of India 
who procures a marriage of himself or herself be solemnized under this Act in contravention of the 
condition specified in clause ( c) or clause ( d) of section 4 shall be punishable — 
(a) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause ( c) of section 4, with simple 
imprisonment which may extend to fifteen days,  or with the fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both; and  8 
 (b) in the  case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause ( d) of section 4, with simple 
imprisonment which may extend to one month,  or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
21. Punishment for false declaration. —If any citizen  of India for the purpose of procuring a 
marriage, intentionally — 
(a) where a declaration is required by this Act, makes a false declaration; or  
(b) where a notice or certificate is required by this Act, signs a false notice or certificate,  
he shall be pun ishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine.  
22. Punishment for wrongful action of Marriage Officer .—Any Marriage Officer who knowingly 
and wilfully solemnizes a marriage under this Act in contraven tion of any of the provisions of this Act 
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
CHAPTER   VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Recognition of marriages solemnized under law of other countries. —If the Central 
Government is satisfied that the law in force in any foreign country for the solemnization of marriages 
contains provisions similar to those contained in this Act,  it may, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
declare that marriages solemnized under the law in force in such foreign country shall be recognized by 
courts in India as valid.  
24. Certification of documents of marriages solemnized in accordance with local law in a 
foreign country. —(1) Where — 
(a) a marriage is solemnized in any foreign country specified in this behalf by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in accordance with the law of that country 
between parties of whom one at least is a citizen of India; and  
(b) a part y to the marriage who is such citizen produces to a Marriage Officer in the country in 
which the marriage was  solemnized — 
(i) a copy of the entry in respect of the marriage in the marriage register of that country 
certified by the appropriate authority in that country to be a true copy of that entry; and  
(ii) if the copy of that entry is not in the English language, a translation into the prescribed 
language of that copy; and  
(c) the Marriage Officer is satisfied that the copy of the entry in the marriage r egister is a true 
copy and that the translation, if any, is a true translation ; 
the Marriage Officer, upon the payment of the prescribed fee, shall certify upon the copy that he is 
satisfied that the copy is a true copy of the entry in the marriage registe r and upon the translation that he is 
satisfied that the translation is a true translation of the copy and shall issue the copy and the translation to 
the said party.  
(2) A document relating to a marriage in a foreign country issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
admitted in evidence in any proceedings as if it were a certificate duly issued by the appropriate authority 
of that country.  
25. Certified copy of entries to be evidence .—Every certified copy purporting to be signed by the 
Marriage Officer of an entry of a marriage in the Marriage Certificate Book shall be received in evidence 
without production or proof of the original.  9 
 26. Correction of errors .—(1) Any Marriage Officer who discovers any error in the form or 
substance of any entry in the Marriage Certificate Book may, within one month next after the discovery of 
such error, in the presence of the persons married , or, in case of their death or absence, in the presence of 
two other witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin without any alteration of the original entry 
and add thereto the date of such correction.  
(2) Every correction made under this section shall be attested by the witnesses in whose presence it 
was made.  
27. Act not to affect validity of marriages outside it .—Nothing  in this Act shall in any way affect 
the validity of a marriage solemnized in a foreign country otherwise than under this Act.  
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the  purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the duties and powers of Marriage Officers and their districts;  
(b) the m anner in which a Marriage Officer may hold any inquiry under this Act;  
(c) the manner in which notices of marriage shall be published ; 
(d) the places in which and the hours between which marriages under this Act may be 
solemnized;  
(e) the form and the manner in which any books required by or under this Act to be kept shall be 
maintained;  
(f) the form and manner in which certificates of marriages may be entered under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 17;  
(g) the fees that may be levied for the performance of an y duty imposed upon a Marriage Officer 
under this Act;  
(h) the authorities to which, the form in which and the intervals within which copies of entries in 
the Marriage Certificate Book shall be sent, and, when corrections are made in the Marriage 
Certifica te Book, the manner in which Certificates of such corrections shall be sent to the authorities;  
(i) the inspection of any books required to be kept under this Act and the furnishing of certified 
copies of entries therein;  
(j) the manner in which and the co nditions subject to which any marriage may be recognised 
under section 23;  
(k) any other matter which may be, or requires to be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parlia ment while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid ] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification o r 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and  the schedule ., for certain words (w.e.f. 15-3-1984).  10 
  29. Amendment of Act 43 of 1954 .—In the Special Marriage Act, 1954, — 
(a) in section 1, in sub -section ( 2), for the words “outside the said territories ”, the words “in the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir ” shall be substituted;  
(b) in section 2, clauses ( a) and ( c) shall be omitted;  
(c) in section 3, for sub -section ( 2), the following su b-section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(2) For the purposes of this Act,  in its application to citizens of India domiciled in the 
territories to which this Act extends who are in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such officers of the Central 
Government as it may think fit to be the Marriage Officers for the State or any part thereof. ”; 
(d) in section 4, for clause ( e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, both parties  are 
citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends. ”; 
(e) in section 10, for the words “outside the territories to which this Act extends in respect of an 
intended marriage outside and said territories ”, the words “in the State of Jammu and Kashmir in 
respect of an intended marriage in the State ” shall be substituted;  
(f) in section 50, in sub -section ( 1), the words “Diplomatic and consular officers and other ” shall 
be omitted.  
30. Repeal. —The Indian Foreign Marriage Act, 1903 (14 of 1903) , is hereby repealed.11 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
FORM OF NOTICE OF INTENDED MARRIAGE  
To 
The Marriage Officer,  
for ...……………….  
We hereby give you notice that a marriage under the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 is intended to be 
solemnized between us within three months from the date hereof . 
Name and father ’s 
name  Condition  Occupation  Date of birth  Dwelling 
place  Permanent 
dwelling place  
and present  
dwelling place 
if not 
permanent  Length of 
residence in 
the present 
dwelling 
place  
A.B. Unmarried  
         Widower  
         Divorcee  
       
C.D. Unmarried  
         Widow  
         Divorcee        
 
Witness our hands, this ……………… d ay of ………………….. 19.... ..................................  
Sd. A.B.  
Sd. C.D.12 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 12)  
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM  
I, A.B. , hereby declare as follows: — 
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower or a divorcee,  as the case may be).  
2. I have completed ……………………… years of age.  
3. I am not related to C.D. (the bride) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
4. I am a citizen of ....…………………………  
(to be filled up)  
5. I am aware that, if any statement in this decl aration is false, I am liable to imprisonment and       
also to fine.  
Sd. A.B. (the bridegroom) . 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE  
I, C.D. , hereby declare as follows: — 
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widow er, or a divorcee, as the case may be). 
2. I have completed ....... years of age.  
3. I am not related to A.B. (the bridegroom) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
4. I am a citizen of...............................................  
(to be filled up)  
5. I am aware that, if any stat ement in this declaration is false, I am liable to imprisonment and        
also to fine.  
Sd. C.D. (the bride) . 
Signed in our presence by the above named A.B. and C.D. So far as we are aware, there is no lawful 
impediment to the marriage.  
Sd. G.H.  
Sd. I.J.                                 
Sd. K.L.                                     Three witnesses.  
                                                     (Countersigned) E.F.  
                                              Marriage Officer  
Dated the ……………………....... day of …………………………..... 19… ………………..  
  
 
 
 
 13 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 14)  
FORM OF CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE  
I, E.F., hereby certify that on the ……………………… day of …………… 19................... A.B. and 
C.D …………………. *appeared before me and that the declaration  required by 
section……………………………  of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, was du ly made, and that a marriage 
under that Act was solemnized between them in my presence and in the presence of three witnesses who 
have signed hereunder.  
Sd. E.F.  
             Marriage  Officer,    
Sd. A.B. (bridegroom)    
Sd. CD. (bride)   
Sd. G.H.  
Sd. I.J.                   Three witnesses.  
Sd. K.L.  
Dated the ….…...... ...............  day of … ……….. …. 19... .........................  
________________________________________________________________________________  
*Herein give particulars of the parties.  
   To be entered. 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library Act, 1969--------------------------
1 
 THE KHUDA BAKHSH ORIENTAL PUBLIC LIBRARY ACT, 1969  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library as an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE KHUDA  BAKHSH  ORIENTAL  PUBLIC  LIBRARY  BOARD  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Board.  
5. Composition of Board.  
6. Term of office and fresh nomination in certain cases.  
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts  
8. Duty of Government nominating persons, etc.  
9. Meetings of Board.  
10. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes.  
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board.  
12. Staff of Board . 
13. Transfer of service of existing employees to Board.  
14. Location of librar y. 
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY, LIABILITIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD  
15. Property and liabilities of Board . 
16. Duties of Board.  
17. Powers of Board . 
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS  
18. Grants by Central Government to Board.  
19. Fund of Board.  
20. Budget . 
21. Accounts and audit.  
22. Returns and reports . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Board.  
24. Delegation of powers and duties.  
25. Officers and employees of Board to be public servants.  
26. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
27. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
28. Power of Board to make regulations.  2 
 THE KHUDA BAKHSH OR IENTAL PUBLIC LIBRARY ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1969  
[26th December , 1969.]  
An Act to declare the Khuda Bakhsh  Oriental Public Library at Patna to be an institution of 
national importance and to provide for its administration and certain other connected matters.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Khuda Bakhsh Ori ental Public 
Library Act, 1969.  
(2) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library as an institution of national 
importance .—It is hereby declared that the Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library at Patna in the State of 
Bihar is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board” means the Board established under section 4;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Board;  
(c) “deed of trust ” means the deed of trust No. 217 executed in the office of the Deputy Registrar 
of Patna by the late Maulvi Khuda Bakhsh Khan Bahadur of Mura dpur on the 14th January, 1891;  
(d) “Fund” means the Fund referred to in section 19;  
(e) “library” means the Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library declared to be an institution of 
national importance under this Act;  
(f) “member” means a member of the B oard and includes the Chairman;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “State Government ” means the Government of Bihar.  
CHAPTER II  
THE KHUDA  BAKHSH  ORIENTAL  PUBLIC  LIBRARY  BOARD  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act, a Board to be known as the Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Public Library Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
and cont ract, and may, by that name, sue and be sued.  
5. Composition of Board. —(1) The Board shall consist of  the following persons, namely: — 
(a) the Governor of Bihar, ex officio , Chairman;  
(b) the Accountant General, Bihar, ex officio ; 
(c) a person to be nominated by the Central Government, who shall be a member of the family of 
the late Maulvi Khuda Bakhsh Khan  Bahadur of Muradpur;  
                                                           
1. 21st July, 1970, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1255 (E), dated 17th July, 1970, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,             
sec. 3( i). 3 
 (d) eight persons, four each to be nominated by the Central Government and the State 
Government, who shall, as far as possible, be persons having knowledge of, and experience in, 
matters relating to the administration of libraries;  
(e) the Director, Khuda Bakh sh Oriental Public Library, ex officio  Member -Secretary.  
(2) Every nomination under this section shall t ake effect as soon as it is notified by the Central 
Govern ment in the Official Gazette.  
6. Term of office and fresh nomination in certain cases. —(1) The terms of office of nominated 
members shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any nominated member may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the Central 
Government and to the State Government, and on such resignation being notified by the Central 
Government, in the Official Gazette  shall be dee med to have vacated his office.  
(3) A casual vacancy created by the resignation of a nominated member under sub -section ( 2) or for 
any other reason may be filled by fresh nomination by the Central Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be, and a member so nominated shall hold office for the rema ining period for which the 
member in whose place he is nominated would have held office.  
(4) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re nomination.  
(5) If any nominated member is by infirmity or otherwise rendered temporarily incapable of carrying 
out his  duties or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances not involving the vacation of his office, 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may nominate another person to act 
in his place during his absence.  
7. Vacancies, etc. , not to invalidate acts. —No act of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason 
of—  
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board, or  
(b) any defect in the nomination of a person  acting as a member thereof, or  
(c) any  irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
8. Duty of Government nominating persons, etc. —(1) Before nominating a person to be a member 
of the Board, the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall satisf y itself that 
the person will have no such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise or 
performance by him of his functions as a member, and the Central Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be, shall also satisfy itself from time to time with respect to every member nominated by 
it that he has no such interest; and any person who is or whom the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, proposes to nominate and who has consented to be, a member shall, 
whenever requested by the Central Government or the  State Government so to do, furnish to it such 
information as that Government considers necessary for the performance by it of its  duties under this   
sub-section.  
(2) A nominated member w ho is in any way, directly or indirectly, interested in a contract made or 
proposed to be made, by the Board shall, as soon as possible, after relevant circumstances have come to 
his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at a meeting of the Board and the disclosure shall be 
recorded in the minutes of the Board and the member shall not take any part after the disclosure in any 
deliberation or decision of the Board with respect to that contract.  
9. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by r egulations made 
under  this Act.  
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, any member chosen by the members present from among 
themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the Board.  4 
 (3) If any nominated member, being an officer of Government, is unable to attend any meeting of the 
Board, he may, with the previous approval of the Chairman, authorise any person in writing to do so.  
(4) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members 
present and voting and in the case of an equality of vo tes, the Chairman or, in his absence  the member 
presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.  
10. Temporary association of persons with  Board for particular purposes. —(1) The Board may 
associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes as may be provided by regulations made under 
this Act, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in performing any of its functions under  this 
Act. 
(2) A person associated with it by the Board under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall have the right 
to take part in the discussions of the Board relating to that purpose, but shall not, by virtue of this section, 
be entitled to vote.  
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board. —All orders and decisions of the 
Board shall be authenticated by t he signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by the 
Board in this behalf, and all other instruments issued by the Board shall be authenticated by the signature 
of an officer of the Board authorised in like manner in this behalf.  
12. Staff of  Board.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Board may, for the purpose 
of enabling it efficiently to perform its functions under this Act, appoint such number of officers and other  
employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The recruitment and conditions of service of such officers and employees shall be such as may be 
provided by regulations made under this Act.  
13. Transfer of service of existing employees to Board. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, 
every person employed in the library im mediately before the date of establishment of the Board shall, on 
and from such date, become an employee of the Board with such designation as the Board may determine 
and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration  and upon the 
same terms and conditions as he would have held the same on such date if the Board had not been 
established and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Board is terminated or until 
such tenure, remuneration and terms an d condition s are duly altered by the Board:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such person shall 
not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government.  
14. Location of libr ary.—The library shall be located at Patna.  
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY, LIABILITIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD  
15. Property and liabilities of Board .—(1) On the establishment of the Board — 
(i) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in, or realisable  by, the trustees of the library 
constituted by the deed of trust, in their capacity as such, shal l vest in, and be realisable by;  the 
Board; and  
(ii) all liabilities in relation to the library which are enforceable against the said trustees, shall be 
enforceable only against the Board.  
(2) All properties, which may, after the establishment of the Board, be given, bequeathed or otherwise 
transferred to the library or acquired by the Board, shall vest in the Board.  
16. Duties of Board. —(1) Subject to the pr ovisions of the deed of trust, it shall be the general duty of 
the Board to manage the library and to plan, promote, organise and implement programmes for the 
development of the library on modern scientific lines (including the microfilming of rare manuscr ipts) 
and to perform such other functions as the Central Government may, from tim e to time, assign to the 
Board.  5 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Board may 
take such steps as it thinks fit — 
(a) for p roviding for instruction and research in matters relating to libraries and for the 
advancement of learning and dissemination of  knowledge in such matters; and  
(b) to do all such other things as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under this  
Act. 
17. Powers of Board .—(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Central Government 
may think fit to impose, the Board may exercise all such powers as may be necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of carrying  out its duties under this Act.  
(2) Subject to such regulations as may be made by the Board in this behalf, the Board may from time 
to time purchase or otherwise acquire such manuscripts, books, articles or things as may, in the opinion of 
the Board, be worthy of preservation in the lib rary. 
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS  
18. Grants by Central Government to Board. —For the purpose of enabling the Board to discharge 
its functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board in each financial year such sums of money as that 
Government considers necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise.  
19. Fund of Board. —(1) The Board shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys paid by the Central Government;  
(b) such sums of money as the State Government may pay annually having regard to  its resolution 
No. V/L 4055/60 E 120, dated the 26th September, 1962;  
(c) all fees and other charges levied under this Act;  
(d) all mo neys received by the Board by way of grant, gift, donation, benefaction, bequest, 
subscrip tion, contribution or transfer;  
(e) all other moneys received by the Board in any other m anner or from any other source.  
(2) The Board may expend such sums as it thin ks fit for performing its functions under this Act and 
such sums shall be treated as expen diture payable out of the Fund.  
(3) A sum of money not exceeding such amount as may be provided by regulations made under this 
Act may be kept in current account with  any scheduled bank as defined in section 2 of the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), or any other bank approved by the Central Government in this behalf, but 
any moneys in excess of that sum shall be deposited in the Reserve Bank of India or wit h the agents of the 
Reserve Bank of India or invested in such manner as may be approved by the Central Government.  
20. Budg et.—(1) The Board shall, by such date in each year as may be specified by the Central 
Government, submit to it for approval a budget for the next financial year in the form specified by it, 
showing the estimated receipts and expenditure, and the sums which would be required from the Central 
Governm ent during that financial year.  
(2) If any sum granted by the Central Government remains w holly or partly unspent in any financial 
year, the unspent sum may be carried forward to the next financial year and taken into account in 
determining the sum to be provided by the Ce ntral Government for that year.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), no sum shall be expended by or on behalf of the 
Board, unless the expenditure is covered by provision in the budget approved by the Central Government.  
(4) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Central Government may think fit to impose, the 
Board may sanction any reappropriation from one head of expenditure to another or from a provision 
made for one purpose to that for another purpose.  6 
 21. Ac counts and audit. —(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form as may be 
specified, and in accordance with such general directions as may be iss ued by the Central Government in 
consultation wi th the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to 
the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights,  privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, 
accounts, connected  vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office  of the Board, and 
the library.  
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
22. Returns and reports .—(1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government at such time  and 
in such form and in such manner as the Central Government may direct such returns, statements and 
particulars as the Central Government m ay, from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) the Board shall, as soo n as possible after the 
commencement of each financial year, submit to the Central Government within such time as may be 
specified by the Central Government a report giving true and full account of the activities of the Board 
during the previous financial year and an account of activities likely to be undertaken durin g the current 
financial year.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Board .—(1) In the discharge of its 
functions under this Act, the Board shall be boun d by such directions on questions of policy as the Central 
Government may give to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Board shall be given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is 
given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the  Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
24. D elegation of powers and duties. —The Board may, by general or special order in writing, direct 
that all or any of the powers or duties which may be exercised or discharged b y it shall, in such 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercised or 
discharged also by any member, officer or employee of the Board specified in this behalf in the order.  
25. Officers and employees of Boar d to be public servants. —All officers and employees of the 
Board shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or 
regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
26. Protection  of action taken under the Act. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Board or any member, officer or employee of the Board for any thing which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder.  
27. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to give effect  to the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that when the Board has been established, no such rules shall be mad e without consulting 
the Board.  7 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all o r any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the members 
nominated under clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) the travelling and other allowances payable to a memb er other than the Chairman and to a 
person associated with the Board under section 10;  
(c) the disqualifications for membership of the Board and the procedure to be followed in 
removing a member who is or becomes s ubject to any disqualification;  
(d) the c onditions subject to which, and the mode in which, contracts may be entered int o by or 
on behalf of the Board;  
(e) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session  1[or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the s uccessive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, howev er, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
28. Power of Board to make regulations. —(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notifica tion in the Off icial Gazette, make regulations  not inconsistent with this 
Act and the rules made thereunder, for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to which manuscripts and books in the library may be  
used;  
(b) the manner in which, and the purposes for which, persons ma y be associated with the Board;  
(c) the time and place of meetings of the Board, the procedure to be followed in regard to the 
transaction of business at such meetings and the quorum ne cessary for the transa ction of business at a 
meeting;  
(d) the maintenance of minutes of meetings of the Board and the transmission of copies the reof to 
the Central Government;  
(e) the recruitment and conditions of service of officers and other employees of  the Board;  
(f) the persons by whom and the manner in which, payments, deposits and investments may be 
made on behalf of the Board;  
(g) the maximum amount that may be kept in the current account;  
(h) the maintenance of registers and accounts;  
(i) the c ompilation of catalogues and inventories of the manuscripts, books and other articles and 
things in the library;  
(j) the steps to be taken for the preservation of the manuscripts, books and other articles and 
things in the library;  
(k) the general manage ment of the library;  
(l) the fees and other charges to be levied for the use of manuscripts and books in the library;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1981, s. 2,  for certain words (w.e.f. 24 -12-1981).  8 
 (m) any  other matter in respect of which provision is, in the opinion of the Board, necessary for 
the performance of its functions under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend, vary or rescind any regulation which it has approved; and thereupon the regulation shall 
have effect accordingly, but without prejudice to the exercise of the powers of the Board under                   
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2).  
1[(4) Every regulation mad e under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive session s, and if, before t he expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter hav e effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 1981, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24 -12-1981).  
--------------------------The Oaths Act, 1969--------------------------
1 THE OATHS ACT, 1969  
______ __ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTION S 
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Saving of certain oaths and affirmations.  
3. Power to administer oaths . 
4. Oaths or affirmations to be made by witnesses, interpreter and jurors.  
5. Affirmation by persons desiring to affirm . 
6. Forms of oaths and affirmations . 
7. Proceedings and evidence not invalidated by omission of oath or irregularity . 
8. Persons giving evidence bound to state the truth . 
9. Repeal and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 THE OATHS ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 44 OF 1969  
[26th December , 1969.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to judicial oaths and for certain other purposes.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This  Act may be called the Oaths Act, 1969.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except  the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Saving of certain oaths and affirmations. —Nothing  in this Act shall apply to proceedings before 
courts martial or to oaths, affirmations or declarations prescribed by the Central Government with respect 
to members of the Armed Forces of the Union.  
3. Power to administer oaths. —(1) The following courts an d persons shall have power to 
administer, by themselves or, subject to the provisions of sub -section( 2) of section 6, by an officer 
empowered by them in this behalf, oaths and affirmations in discharge of the duties imposed or in 
exercise of the powers con ferred upon them by law, namely: — 
(a) all courts and persons having by law or consent of parties authority to receive evidence;  
(b) the commanding officer of any military, naval, or air force station or ship occupied by the 
Armed Forces of the Union, prov ided that the oath or affirmation is administered within the limits of 
the station.  
(2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1) or by or under any other law for the 
time being in force, any court, Judge, Magistrate or person may admin ister oaths and affirmations for the 
purpose of affidavits, if empowered in this behalf — 
(a) by the High Court, in respect of affidavits for the purpose of judicial proceedings; or  
(b) by the State Government, in respect of other affidavits.  
4. Oaths or affirmations to be made by witnesses , interpreter and jurors .—(1) Oaths or 
affirmations shall be made by th e following persons, namely :— 
(a) all witnesses, that is to say, all persons who may lawfully be examined, or give, or be required 
to give, evidence by or before any court or person having by law or consent of parties authority to 
examine such persons or to receive evidence;  
(b) interpr eters of questions put to, and evidence given by, witnesses; and  
(c) jurors:  
Provided that where the witness is a child under twelve years of age, and the court or person having 
authority to examine such witness is of opinion that, though the witness und erstands the duty of speaking 
the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation, the foregoing provisions of this 
section and the provisions of section 5 shall not apply to such witness; but in any such case the absence of 
an oath or a ffirmation shall not render inadmissible any evidence given by such witness nor affect the 
obligation of the witness to state the truth.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall render it lawful to administer, in a criminal proceeding, an oath or 
affirmation to the accused person, unless he is examined as a witness for the defence, or necessary to 
administer to the official interpreter of any court, after he has entered on the execution of the duties of his 
office, an oath or affirmation that he will faithfully d ischarge those duties.  
5. Affirmation by persons desiring to affirm. —A witness, interpreter or juror may, instead of 
making an oath, make an affirmation.  3 6. Forms of oaths and affirmations. —(1) All  oaths and affirmations made under section 4 shall be 
administered according to such one of the forms given in the Schedule as may be appropriate to the 
circumstances of the case:  
Provided that if a witness in any judicial proceeding desires to give evide nce on oath or solemn 
affirmation in any form common amongst, or held binding by, persons of the class to which he belongs, 
and not repugnant to justice or decency, and not purporting to affect any third person, the court may, if it 
thinks fit, notwit hstan ding anything hereinbefore contained, allow him to give evidence  on such oath or 
affirmation.  
(2) All such oaths and affirmations shall, in the case of all courts other than the Supreme Court and 
the High Courts, be administered by the presiding officer o f the court himself, or, in the case of a Bench 
of Judges or Magistrates, by any one of the Judges or Magistrates, as the case may be.  
7. Proceedings and evidence not invalidated by omission of oath or irregular ity.—No omission 
to take any oath or make any  affirmation, no substitution of any one for any other of them, and no 
irregularity whatever in the administration of any oath or affirmation or in the form in which it is 
administered, shall invalidate any proceeding or render inadmissible any evidence wh atever, in or in 
respect of which such omission, substitution or irregularity took place, or shall affect the obligation of a 
witness to state the truth.  
8. Persons giving evi dence bound to state the truth. —Every person  giving evidence on any subject 
befor e any court or person hereby authorised to administer oaths and affirmations shall be bound to state 
the truth on such subject.  
9. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Indian Oaths Act, 1873 (10 of 1873),  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Where, in any proceeding pending at the commencement of this Act, the parties have agreed to be 
bound by any such oath or affirmation as is specified in section 8 of the said Act, then, notwithstanding 
the repeal of the said Act, the provisions of sections 9 to 12 of the said  Act shall conti nue to apply in 
relation to such agreement as if this Act had not been passed.  
  4 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 6)  
FORMS OF OATHS OR AFFIRMATIONS  
Form No. 1 (Witnesses): — 
I do  swear in the name of God that what I sha ll state shall be the truth, the whole truth and  
solemnly affirm  
nothing but the truth.  
 
Form No. 2 (Jurors): — 
I doswear in the name of God that I will well and truly try and true deliverance make between the  
solemnly affirm  
State and the prisoner (s) at the bar, whom I shall have in charge, and a true verdict give   according to 
the evidence.  
 
Form No. 3 (Interpreters): — 
I do swear in the name of God that I will well and truly interpret and explain all questions put to 
solemnly affirm  
and evidence given by witnesses and translate correctly and accurately all documents given to me for 
translation.  
 
Form No. 4 (Affidavits): — 
I doswear in the name of God that this is my name and signature (or mark) and that th e  
solemnly  affirm 
contents of this my affidavit are true.  
 
--------------------------The President (Discharge of Functions) Act, 1969--------------------------
1 
 THE PRESIDENT (DISCHARGE OF FUNCTIONS) ACT, 1969  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Discharge of President’s functions in certain contingencies.  
 
  2 
 THE PRESIDENT (DISCHARGE OF FUNCTIONS) ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 16 OF 1969  
[28th May , 1969 .] 
An Act to provide for the discharge of the functions of the President in certain contingencies.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the President (Discharge of Functions) Act, 1969.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act “President ”, “Vice -President ” and “Second Schedule ” shall mean the 
President of India, the Vice -President of India and the Second Schedule to the Constitution respectively.  
3. Discha rge of President ’s functions in certain contingencies .—(1) In the event of the occurrence 
of vacancies in the offices of both the President and the Vice -President, by reason in each case of death, 
resignation or removal, or otherwise, the Chief Justice of India or , in his absence, the seniormost Judge of 
the Supreme Court of India available shall discharge the functions of the President until a new President 
elected in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution to fill the vacancy in the office of t he 
President enters upon his office or a new Vice -President so elected begins to act as President under  
article 65 of the Constitution, whichever is earlier.  
(2) When the Vice -President, while discharging the functions of the President, dies, resigns, or is 
removed or otherwise ceases to hold office, the Chief Justice of India or, in his absence, the seniormost 
Judge referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall discharge the said functions until the President resumes his 
duties or a new Vice -President is elected a s aforesaid, whichever is earlier.  
(3) When the Vice -President, — 
(a) while  acting as President, or  
(b) while discharging the functions of the President,   
is unable to discharge the functions of the President owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the 
Chief Justice of India or, in his absence, the seniormost Judge referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall 
discharge the said functions — 
(i) in the case referred to in clause ( a), until a new President elected as aforesaid enters upon 
his office or until the  Vice -President acting as President resumes his duties, whichever is earlier;  
(ii) in the case referred to in clause ( b), until the President resumes his duties , or the         
Vice -President resumes his duties, whichever is earlier.  
(4) The person dischar ging the functions of the President under this section shall, during, and in 
respect of , the period while he is so discharging the said functions, have all the powers and immunities of 
the President and be entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privil eges as may be determined by 
Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and 
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.  
 
 
 
--------------------------The Punjab Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969--------------------------
1 
 THE   PUNJAB LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL (ABOLITION) ACT, 1969  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Abolition of the Council . 
4. Amendment of article 168 . 
5. Amendment of Act 43 of 1950.  
6. Repeal of Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Punjab) Order, 1951 . 
7. Provision as to pending Bills . 
8. Power to adapt laws.  
9. Power to construe laws.  
 
  2 
 THE PUNJAB  LEGISLATIVE  COUNCIL ( ABOLITION ) ACT , 1969  
ACT NO. 46 OF 1969  
[27th December , 1969 .] 
An Act to provide for  the abolition of the Legislative Council of the State of Punjab and for 
matters supplemental, incidental and consequential thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called t he Punjab Legislative Council 
(Abolition) Act, 1969.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, as respects a law relating to a matter enumerated in List I 
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central Government , and as respects any other 
law, the State  Government;  
(b) “article” means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) “Council” means the Legislative Council of the State of Punjab;  
(d) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme,       
notifica tion or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or any part of the State of 
Punjab;  
(e) “Legislative Assembly ” means the Legislative Assembly of the State of Punjab.  
 3. Abolition of the Council .—(1) The Legislative Council of the State of Punjab is hereby  
abolished.  
(2) On the abolition of the Council, every member thereof shall cease to be such member.  
 4. Amendment of article 168 .—In sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of Article 168, the word “Punjab” 
shall be omitted . 
5. Amendment of Act 43 of 1950 .—In the Representation of the People Act, 1950, — 
(a) in the Third Schedule, entry No. 7 relating to Punjab shall be omitted;  
(b) in the Fourth Schedule, the heading “Punjab” and the entries there under  shall be omitted;  
 6. Repeal of Delimitation of Council Constituencie s (Punjab) Order, 1951 .—The 
Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Punjab) Order, 1951, is hereby repealed.  
 7. Provision as to pending Bills .—(1) A Bill pending in the Council immediately before the 
commencement of this Act which has not been passed by the Legislative Assembly shall lapse on the 
abolition of the Council.  
(2) A Bill pending in the Council immediately before the commencement of this Act which has 
been passed by the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse on the abolition of the  Council, but on such 
abolition shall be deemed to have been passed before such commencement by both Houses of the 
Legislature of the State of Punjab in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.  
(3) If a Bill which having been passed by  the Legislative Assembly is, before the commencement 
of this Act, either rejected by the Council or passed by the Council with amendments, the Legislative 
Assembly may, after such commencement, pass the Bill again with or without such amendments, if 
                                                           
1. 7th January, 1970, vide notification No. G.S.R. 72, dated 7 th January, 1970, Gazette  of India, Extraordinary,                 
Part  II, sec. 3(i). 3 
 any, as have been made by the Council and the Bill so passed shall be deemed to be a Bill introduced 
in and passed by the Legislative Assembly after the commencement of this Act.  
8. Power to adapt laws .—The appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year 
from the commencement of this Act, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of any law 
made before such commencement, whether by way of repeal or amendment as may be necessary or 
expedient in consequence of the abolition of the Council un der section 3, and thereupon every such 
law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made.  
9. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 
been made under section 8 for the adaptation or m odification of the law made before the 
commencement of this Act, any Court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to enforce such 
law may construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or 
proper on account of th e abolition of the Council , in regard to the matter before the Court, tribunal or 
authority.  
 
 
--------------------------The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969--------------------------
1 
 THE REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS ACT, 1969  
________  
ARRA NGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions and interpretation.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION ESTABLISHMENT  
3. Registrar -General, India . 
4. Chief Registrar.  
5. Registration divisions.  
6. District Registrar . 
7. Registrars.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS  
8. Persons required to  register births and deaths.  
9. Special provisions regarding births and deaths in a plantation.  
10. Duty of certain persons to notify births and deaths and to certify cause of death.  
11. Informant to sign the register.  
12. Extracts of registration entries to be given to informant.  
13. Delayed registration of births and deaths.  
14. Registration of name of child.  
15. Correction or cancellation of en try in the register of births and deaths.  
CHAPTER IV  
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND STATISTICS  
16. Registrars to keep registers in the prescribed form.  
17. Search of births and deaths register  
18. Inspection of registration offices.  
19. Registrars to send periodical returns to the Chief Registrar for compilation.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Special provision as to registration of births and deaths of citizens outside India.  
21. Power of Registrar to obtain information regarding birth or death.  
22. Power s to give directions . 
23. Penalties.  
24. Power to compound offences.  
25. Sanction for prosecution.  
26. Registrars and Sub -Registrars to be deemed public servants.  
27. Delegation of powers.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29. Act not to be in derogation of Act 6 of 1886.  
30. Power to make rules.  
31. Repeal and saving.  
32. Power to remove difficulty.  
 
  3 
 THE REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS ACT, 1969  
ACT NO. 18 OF 1969  
[31st May , 1969.]  
An Act to provide for the regulation of registration of births and deaths and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Registration of Births 
and Deaths Act, 1969.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  
the Official Gazette, appoint:  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 1970, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1718, dated 22 nd,  November, Gazette of India, Extraordinary , Part II, sec. 3( i) 
in the following areas  of the State of Jammu and Kashmir :— 
   the area comprised within the jurisdiction of the Police Station of Ramnagar in Udhampur district.  
the area comprised within the jurisdiction of  the Police Station of Kupwara in Baramulla district.  
the area comprised within the limits of the Municipalities o f  Jammu and Srinagar.  
the area comprised within the limits of Town Area Committees of Anantnag, Kathua and Leh.  
1st  May, 1974 vide notification No. G.S.R. 379, dated 22 -3-1974  in the Union territory of Mizoram.  
1st January, 1971 vide notification No G.S .R. 1927, dated 21 -11-1970, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i) in 
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu . 
  1st January, 1971  vide notification No. G.S.R. 2027, dated 24 -11-1970, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( i) in the  Unio n 
territory of Manipur . 
1st April, 1974,  vide notification No. G.S.R. 106, dated 16 -1-1971,  see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( i) in the Union territory 
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands .  
1st October, 1971, in the whole of the State of Nagaland vide notification No. G.S.R. 1324, dated 30 -8-1971, see Gazette of 
India, Part II,  sec. 3( i), dated 11 -9-1971 . 
1st July, 1972, in the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh vide notification No. G.S.R. 552, dated 11 -4-1972, see Gazette of 
India, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
 1st April, 1972, in the whole of State of Tripura vide notification No. G.S.R. 202(E), dated 17 -3-1972, see Gaze tte of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
1st December, 1972  vide Notification No. G.S.R. 463(E), dated 21 -11-1972, see Gazette of In dia, Extraordinary, Part II,             
sec. 3( i)  also in the area comprised within the limits of cantonments of Barrackpore, Labong and Jalapahar in the State of 
West Bengal  
1st July, 1970, vide notification No. G.S.R. 973, dated 26th June, 1972, extended to the Union territory of Delhi.  
   1st April, 1970, vide notification No. G.S.R. 514, dated 21st March, 1970, Gazette of India, sec. 3( i), in the a reas of the State of 
Assam except: — 
(i) the district of United  Khasi & Jaintia  Hills excluding the areas comprised within the limits of:  
(a) Municipality of Shillong  
(b) Contonment of Shillong  
(ii) the entire district of Garo Hills  
(iii) the entire district of United Mikir and North Cachar Hills  
(iv) the entire district of Mizo  Hills.  
In the  State of West Bengal except:  
(i) The area comprised within the limits of Corporation of Calcutta;  
(ii) the area comprised within the limits of Howrah Municipality;  
(iii) Fort Villiam; and  
(iv) the ar ea comprised , within the limits of cantonments of Barrackpore, Labong and Jalapahar.  
1st April, 1970, vide notification No. G.S.R. 461, dated 7 th March, 1970, see Gazette of India, sec. 3( i), in the States  and the  
Union territories:  
STATES  
1. Andhra Pradesh     8. Mysore  
2. Bihar      9. Orissa  
3. Gujrat                                                                  10. Punjab  
4.  Haryana     11. Rajasthan      
  5. Kerala      12. Tamil Nadu  
6. Madhya Pradesh     13. Uttar Pradesh.  
7.  Maharashtra  
UNION TERRITORIES.  
1. Chandigar h 
2. Dadra and Nagar Haveli  
3. Himachal Pradesh  
4. Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands.  4 
 Provided that different dates may be appointed for different parts of a State.   
2. Defin itions and interpretation .—(1) In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “birth” means live -birth or still -birth;  
(b) “death” means the permanent disappearance of all evidence of life at any time af ter live -birth 
has taken place;  
(c) “foetal  death” means absence of all evidence of life prior to the complete expulsion or 
extraction from its mother of a product of conception irrespectiv e of the duration of pregnancy;  
(d) “live-birth” means the complete expulsion or extraction from its mother of  a product of 
conception, irrespective of the duration of pregnancy, which, after such expulsion or extraction, 
breathes or show any other evidence of life, and each product of such birth is consider ed live -born;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, m eans the Administrator thereof;  
(g) “still-birth” means foetal death where a product of conception has attained at least the 
prescribed period of gestation.  
(2) Any reference i n this Act to any law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION  ESTABLISHMENT  
3. Registrar -General, India .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint a person to be known a s the Registrar -General, India.  
(2) The Central Government may also appoint such other officers with such designations as it thinks 
fit for the purpose of discha rging  under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar -General, such 
functions of the Registrar -General under this Act as he may, from time to tim e, authorise them to 
discharge.  
(3) The Registrar -General may issue general directions regarding regis tration of births and deaths in 
the territories to which this Act extends, and shall take steps to co -ordinate and unify the activities of 
Chief Registrars in the matter of registration of births and deaths and submit to the Central Government 
an annual re port on the working of this Act in the said territories.  
4. Chief Registrar .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
a Chief Registrar for the State.  
(2) The State Government may also appoint such other officers with such designations as it thinks fit 
for the purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction of the Chief Registrar, such of his 
functions as he may, from time to tim e, authorise them to discharge.  
(3) The Chief Registrar shall be the chief e xecutive authority in the State for carrying into execution 
the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made thereunder subject to the directions, if any,  given 
by the State Government.  
(4) The Chief Registrar shall take steps, by the issue of suit able instructions or otherwise, to                 
co-ordinate, unity and supervise the work of registration in the State for securing an efficient system of 
registration and shall prepare and submit to the State Government, in such manner and at such inte rvals as 
may be prescribed, a report on the working of this Act in the State along with the statistical report to in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 19.  
5. Registration divisions. —The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
divide the ter ritory within the State into such registration divisions as it may think fit and prescribe 
different rules for diff erent registration divisions.  
6. District Registrar .—(1) The State Government may appoint a District Registrar for each revenue 
district and  such number of Additional District Registrars as it thinks fit who shall, subject to the general 
control and direction of the District Registrar, discharge such functions of the District Registrar as the 
District Registrar may, from time to tim e, authoris e them to discharge.  5 
 (2) The District Registrar shall superintend, subject to the direction of the Chief Registrar, the 
registration of births and deaths in the district and shall be responsible for carrying into execution in the 
district the provisions of  this Act and the orders of the Chief Registrar issued from time to time for the 
purposes of this Act.  
7. Registrars. —(1) The State Government may appoint a Registrar for each local area comprising the 
area within the jurisdiction of a municipality, pancha yat or other local authority or any other area or a 
combinat ion of any two or more of them:  
Provided that the State Government may appoint in the case of a municipality, panchayat, or other 
local authority, any officer or other employee thereo f as a Regist rar. 
(2) Every Registrar shall, without fee or reward, enter in the register maintained for the purpose all 
information given to him under section 8 or section 9 and shall also take steps to inform himself carefully 
of every birth and of every death which takes place in his jurisdiction and to ascertain and register the 
particu lars required to be registered.  
(3) Every Registrar shall have an office in the local area for which he is appointed.  
(4) Every Registrar shall attend his office for the purpose of re gistering births and deaths on such days 
and at such hours as the Chief Registrar may direct and shall cause to be placed in some conspicuous 
place on or near the outer door of the office of the Registrar a board bearing, in the local language, his 
name wi th the addition of Registrar of Births and Deaths for the local area for which he is appointed, and 
the da ys and hours of his attendance.  
(5) The Registrar may, with the prior approval of the Chief Registrar, appoint Sub -Registrars and 
assign to them any o r all of his powers and duties in relation to specified a reas within his jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS  
8. Persons required to register births and deaths. —(1) It shall be the duty of the persons specified 
below to give or cause  to be given, either orally or in writing, according to the best of their knowledge 
and belief, within such time as may be prescribed, information to the Registrar of the several particulars 
required to be entered in the forms prescribed by the State Go vernment under sub -section ( 1) of             
section 16, — 
(a) in respect of births and deaths in a house, whether residential or non -residential, not being any 
place referred to in clauses ( b) to ( e) the head of the house or, in case more than one household live in 
the house, the head of the household, the head being the person, who is so recognised by the house or 
the household, and if he is not present in the house at any time during the period with in which the 
birth or death has to be reported, the nearest relative of the head present in the house, and in the 
absence of any such person, the oldest adult male person present therein during the said period;  
(b) in respect of births and deaths in a hospital, health centre, maternity or nursing home or other 
like institution, the medical officer in charge or any person au thorised by him in this behalf;  
(c) in respect of births and deaths i n a jail, the jailor in charge;  
(d) in respect of births and deaths in a choultry, chattram, hostel, dharmasala, boarding -house, 
lodging -house, tavern, barrack, toddy shop or place of public resort , the person in charge thereof;  
(e) in respect of any new -born child or dead body f ound deserted in a public place, the headman 
or other corresponding officer of the village in the case of a village and the officer in charge of the 
local police station elsewhere:  
Provided that any person who finds such child or dead body, or in whose cha rge such child or 
dead body may be placed, shall notify such fact to the headman or officer afo resaid;  
(f) in any other place, su ch person as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State Government, having regard to 
the conditions obtaining in a registration division, may by order require that for such period as may be 
specified in the order, any person specified by the State Government by designation in this behalf, shall 
give or cause to be given information rega rding births and deaths in a house referred to in clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 1) instead of the pers ons specified in that clause.  6 
 9. Special provision  regarding births and deaths in a plantation .—In the case of births and deaths 
in a plantation, the superi ntendent of the plantation shall give or cause to be given to the Registrar the 
inform ation referred to in section 8:  
Provided that the persons referred to in clauses ( a) to ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 8 shall furnish 
the necessary particulars to the  superintendent of the plantation.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “plantation ” means any land not less than four hectares 
in extent which is being prepared for the production of, or actually produces, tea, coffee, pepper, rubber, 
cardamom, ci nchona or such other products as the State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify and the expression “superintendent of the plantation ” means the person having the charge 
or supervision of the labourers and work in the plantation,  whether called a manager, superintendent or by 
any other name.  
10. Duty of certain persons to notify births and deaths and to certify cause of death. —(1) It shall 
be the duty of — 
(i) the midwife or any other medical or health  attendant at a birth or death,  
(ii) the keeper or the owner of a place set apart for the disposal of dead bodies or any person 
required by a local authority to be present at such place,  or 
(iii) any other person whom the State Government may specify in th is behalf by his designation,  
to notify every birth or death or both at which he or she attended or was present, or which occurred in 
such areas as may be prescribed, to the Registrar within such time and in such manner as  may be 
prescribed.  
(2) In any area, the State Government, having regard to the facilities available therein in this behalf, 
may require that a certificate as to the cause of death shall be obtained by the Registrar from such person 
and in such form as may  be prescribed.  
(3) Where the S tate Government has required under sub -section ( 2) that a certificate as to the cause of 
death shall be obtained, in the event of the death of any person who, during his last illness, was attended 
by a medical practitioner, the medical practitioner shall, after the death of that person, forthwith, issue 
without charging any fee, to the person required under this Act to give information concerning the death, 
a certificate in the prescribed form stating to the best of his knowledge and belief the cause of dea th; and 
the certificate shall be received and delivered by such person to the Registrar at the time of giving 
information concerning the d eath as required by this Act.  
11. Informant to sign the register .—Every person who has orally given to the Registrar any 
information required under this Act shall write in the  register maintained in this be half, his name, 
description and place of abode, and, if he cannot write, shall put his thumb mark in the register against his 
name, description and place of abode, the  particulars being in such a case entered by the Registrar.  
12. Extracts of registration entries to be given to informant .—The Registrar shall, as soon as the 
registration of a birth or death has been completed, give, free of charge, to the person who give s 
information under section 8 or section 9 an d extract of the prescribed particulars under his hand from the 
register relating to such birth or death.  
13. Delayed registration of births and deaths. —(1) Any birth or death of which information is 
given to th e Registrar after the expiry of the period specified therefor, but withi n thirty days of its 
occurrence , shall be registered on payment of such  late fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any birth or death of which delayed information is given to the Registrar after thirty days but 
within one year of its occurrence shall be registered only with the written permission of the prescribed 
authority and on payment of the prescribed fee and th e production of an affidavit made before a notary 
public or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government.  
(3) Any birth or death which has not been registered within one year of its occurrence, shall be 
registered only on an order ma de by a magistrate of the first class or a Presidency Magistrate after 
varifying the correctness of the birth or death and on  payment of the prescribed fee.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to any action that may be taken again st a 
person for failure on his part to register any birth or death within the time specified therefor and any such 
birth or death may be registered during the pendency of any such action.  7 
 14. Registration of name of child. —Where the birth of any child has been registered without a 
name, the parent or guardian of such child shall within the prescribed period give information regarding 
the name of the child to the Registrar either orally or in writing and thereupon the Registrar shall enter 
such name in the r egister and initial and date the entry.  
15. Correction or cancellation of entry in the register of births and deaths .—If it is proved to the 
satisfaction of the Registrar that any entry of a birth or death in any register kept by him under this Act is 
erroneous in form or substance, or has been fraudulently or improperly made, he may, subject to such 
rules as may be made by the State Government with respect to the conditions on which and the 
circumstances in which such entries may be corrected or cancelled,  correct the error or cancel the entry  
by suitable entry in the margin, without any alteration of the original entry, and shall sign the marginal 
entry and add thereto the date of the correction or cancellation.  
CHAPTER IV  
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND STATI STICS  
16. Registrars to keep registers in the prescribed form. -—(1) Every Registrar shall keep in the 
prescribed form a register of births and deaths for the registration area or any part thereof in relation to 
which he exercises jurisdiction.  
(2) The Chief Registrar shall cause to be printed and supplied a sufficient number of register books 
for making entries of births and deaths according to such forms and instructions as may, from time to 
time, be prescribed; and a copy of such forms in the local la nguage shall be posted in some conspicuous 
place on or near the outer door of the office of every Registrar.  
17. Search of births and deaths register .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the State 
Government, including rules relating to the pay ment of fees and postal charges, any perso n may— 
(a) cause a search to be made by the Registrar for any entry in a reg ister of births and deaths; and  
(b) obtain an extract from such register relating to any birth or death:  
Provided that no extract relating  to any death, issued to any person, shall disclose the particulars 
regarding the cause of de ath as entered in the register.  
(2) All extracts given under this section shall be certified by the Registrar or any other officer 
authorised  by the State Government to give such extracts as provided in section 76 of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), and shall be admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving the birth or death to 
which the entry relates.  
18. Insp ection of registrat ion offices. —The registration offices shall be inspected and the registers 
kept therein shall be examined in such manner and by such authority as may be specified by the District 
Registrar.  
19. Registrars to send periodical returns to the Chief Registrar f or compilation .—(1) Every 
Registrar shall send to the Chief Registrar or to any officer specified by him, at such intervals and in such 
form as may be prescribed , a return regarding the entries of births and deaths in the register kept by such 
Registrar.  
(2) The Chief Registrar shall cause the information in the returns furnished by the Registrars to be 
compiled and shall publish for the information of the public a statistical report on the registered births and 
deaths during the year at such intervals and in such form as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Special provision as to registration of births and deaths of citizens outside India .—(1) The 
Registrar -General shall, subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, 
cause to be registered in formation as to births and deaths of citizens of India outside India received by 
him under the rules relating to the regi stration of such citizens at Indian Consulates made under the 
Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955), and every such registration shall also be deemed to have been duly  
made under this Act.  
(2) In the case of any child born outs ide India in respect of whom in formation has not been received 
as provided in sub -section ( 1), if the parents of the child return to India with a view to settling therein, 8 
 they may, at any time within sixty days from the date of the arrival of the child in India, get the birth of 
the chi ld registered under this Act in the same manner as if the child was born in India and the provisions 
of section 13 shall apply to the birth of such child after the expiry of the period of sixty days aforesaid.  
21. Power of Registrar to obtain information r egarding birth or death. —The Registrar may either 
orally or in writing require any person to furnish any information within his knowledge in connection 
with a birth or death in the locality within which such person resides and that person shall be bound to  
comply with such requisition.  
22. Power s to give directions. —The Central Government may give such directions to any State 
Government as may appear to be necessary for carrying into execution in the State any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule or  order made thereunder.  
23. Penalties. —(1) Any person who — 
(a) fails without reasonable cause to give any information which it is his duty to give under any of 
the pro visions of sections 8 and 9; or  
(b) gives or causes to be given, for the purpose of being inserted in any register of births and 
deaths, any information which he knows or believes to be false regarding any of the particulars 
required to be known and registered; or  
(c) refuses to write his name, description and place of abode or to put his thumb mark in the 
register as required by section 11,  
shall be punishable with fine wh ich may extend to fifty rupees.  
(2) Any Registrar or Sub -Registrar who neglects or refuses, without reasonable cause, to register any 
birth or death occurring in his jurisdiction or to submit any returns as required by sub -section ( 1) of 
section 19 shall be punishable with fine wh ich may extend to fifty rupees.  
(3) Any medical practitioner who neglects or refuses to issue  a certificate under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 10 and any person who neglects or refuses to deliver such certificate shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees.  
(4) Any person who, without reasonable cause, contravenes any provision of  this Act for the 
contravention of which no penalty is provided for in this section shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to ten rupees.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), an 
offence under t his section shall be tried summarily by a magistrate.  
24. Power to compound offences. —(1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any officer 
authorised  by the Chief Registrar by a general or special order in this behalf may, either before or after the 
institution of criminal proceedings under this Act, accept fr om the person who has committed  or is 
reasonably suspected of having committed an offence unde r this Act, by way of composition of such 
offence a sum of mo ney not exceeding fifty rupees.  
(2) On the payment of such sum of money, such person shall be discharged and no further 
proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.  
25. Sanc tion for prosecution. —No prosecution for an offence punishable under this Act shall be 
instituted except by an officer authorised by the Chief Registrar by general or special order in this behalf.  
26. Registrars and Sub -Registrars to be deemed public serva nts.—All Registrars and                     
Sub-Registrars shall, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
27. Delegation of powers. —The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act (except the power to make rules under section 30) or 
the rules made thereunder  shall, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be 
exercisable, also by such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in 
the direction.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Government, the Registrar -General, any Registrar, or any person exercising any 
power or performing any duty under this Act for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of this Act or any  rule or order made thereunder.  9 
 (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or likely 
to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance , of this Act or 
any rule or order made thereunder.  
29. Act not to be in derogation of Act 6 of 1886 .—Nothing in this Act shall be construed to be in 
derogation of the provisions of the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886.  
30. Power to make r ules.—(1) The State Government may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisi on, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the forms of registers of births and deaths requ ired to be kept under this Act;  
(b) the period within which and the form and the manner in which information should be given to  
the registrar under section 8;  
(c) the perio d within which and the manner in which births and deaths shall be notified under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(d) the person from whom and the form in which a certificate as to cause of death shall be 
obtained;  
(e) the particulars of whi ch extract  may be given under section 12;  
(f) the authority which may grant permission for registration of a birth or death under                       
sub-section ( 2) of section 13;  
(g) the fees payable for registration made under section 13;  
(h) the submission of reports by the Chief Registrar under sub -section ( 4) of section 4;  
(i) the search of birth and death registers and the fees payable for such search and for the grant of 
extracts from the registers;  
(j) the forms in which and the intervals at  which the returns and the statistical report under     
section 19 sh all be furnished and published;  
(k) the custody, production and transfer of the registers and ot her records kept by Registrars;  
(l) the correction of errors and the cancellation of entries in the register of births and deaths;  
(m) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the Stat e 
Legislature.]  
31. Repeal and sa ving.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 29, as from the coming into force of 
this Act in any State or part thereof, so much of any law in force therein as relates to the matters covered 
by this Act shall stand repeal ed in such State or part, as the  case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any instruction or 
direction issued, any regulation or rule or order made) under any such law shall, in so far as such thing or 
action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
provisions aforesaid, as if they were in force when such thing was done or such action was taken, and 
shall continue in force accordingly until supersede d by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
32. Power to remove difficulty. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect in a State to the provisions 
of this Act in their application to any area, the State Government may, with the approval of the C entral 
Government, by order make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act as appears to the State Government to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section in relation to any area in a State after the 
expiration of two years from the date on which this Act comes into force in that area.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and  the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Union Territories (Separation of Judicial and Executive Functions) Act, 1969--------------------------
 
1 
 
 THE UNION TERRITORIES (SEPARATION  OF JUDICIAL  
AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS) ACT,  1969  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definition . 
3. Amendments to Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 . 
4. Amendments not to ren der invalid notifications, etc., before commencement of Act.  
5. Functions exercisable by Judicial and Executive Magistrates . 
6. Repeal of laws in transferred areas in Himachal Pradesh . 
7. Saving . 
8. Power to remove difficulties.  
9. Power of Legislative Assembly of Union territory to amend this Act.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
   
2 
 
 THE UNION TERRITORIES ( SEPARATION  OF JUDICIAL  
AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS) ACT,  1969  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1969  
[31st May , 1969 .] 
An Act to provide for the separation of judicial a nd executive functions in Union Territories.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1.  Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Union territories 
(Separation of Judicial and Executive Functions) Act,  1969.  
(2) It extends to all Union territories except the Union territory of Chandigarh.  
(3) It shall come into force in a Union territory to which it extends on such date1 as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gaze tte, appoint in respect the reof: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different areas in a Union territory and any  
reference to the commencement of this Act in relation to a Union territory or  an area therein  shall  mean 
the date on which it comes into force in that Union territory or area . 
 2.  Definition .—In sections  3 to 9, “Union territory ” means any Union territory  other  than the Union 
territory of Chandigarh.  
3.  Amendments to Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. —For the purpose of separation of judicial 
and execut ive functions, the Code of Criminal Procedure,  18982 (5 of 1898), shall in its application to a 
Union territory, be amended in the manner and to the extent specified in the Schedule.  
4.  Amendments not to render invalid notifications, etc. before commencement of Act .—The 
provisions of this Act which amend the Code of Criminal Procedure,  18982 (5 of 1898), so as to alter the 
manner in which, the authority by which, or the law under o r in accordance with which, any powers  are 
exercisable,  shall not render invalid any notification,  order, commitment, attachment, bye-law, rule or 
regulation duly made or issued or anything duly done before the commencement of this Act, and any such 
notification,  order, commitment, attachment, bye -law, rule or regulation  or thing may be revoked, varied 
or undone in the like manner, to the like extent and in the like circumstances , as if it had been duly made, 
issued or done after the commencement of this Act by the competent authority and in accordance with the 
provisions  then applicable to such case.  
5.  Functions exercisable by Judicial and Executive Magistrates. —Where under any law the 
functions exercisable by a Magistrate relate to matters which involve the app recia tion or sifting of 
evidence or the formulation of any decision which exposes any person to any punishment, or penalty, or 
detention in custody pending investigation, inquiry or trial or would have the effect of sending  him for 
trial before any Court, such functions  shall,  subject to the provisions of this Act  and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure,  18982 (5 of 1898)  as amended by this Act, be exercisable by a Judicial Magistrate and where   
                                                           
1. 2nd October,  1969, vide notification No. S.O. 3836, dated 17th September, 1969 in respect of the Union territory of Delhi .  
   1st March, 1970, vide notification No S.O. 384, Dated  29 January, 1970  in respect of Union territory of Laccadiv e, Minicoy 
and Amindive Islands.  
2. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).   
3 
 
 such functions relate to matters which are administrative or executive in nature, such as the grant of a 
licence, the suspen sion or cancellation of a licence, sanctioning a prosecution, or withdrawing from a 
prosecution, they  shall,  subject as aforesaid, be exercisable by an Executive Magistrate.  
6.  Repeal of laws in transferred areas in Himachal Pradesh .—On the commencement of this    
Act in the transferred areas in the Union territory of  Himachal Pradesh, the Punjab Separation of       
Judicial and Executive Functions Act,  1964 (Punjab Act 25 of 1964)  and the Code of Criminal 
Procedure , 18981 (5 of 1898) , as in force immediately before such commencement in the said areas  shall 
stand repealed except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such repeal under the said 
Punjab Act or under the provisions of the laws amended by the said Punjab Act an d section  6 of the 
General Clauses Act,  1897 (10 of 1897) , shall apply upon such repeal as if such repeal were a repeal of an 
enactment by a Central Act; and on such commencement, the said Code as amended by this Act  shall 
extend to, and come into force in , the said areas and the provisions of the laws (other than the said Code) 
amended by the said Punjab Act shall have effect in the said areas as if such provisions had not been 
amended by the said Punjab Act.  
Explanation. —In this section, “transferred area s” means the  territories added to the Union territory 
of Himachal Pradesh by  sub-section ( 1) of section  5 of the Punjab Reorgani sation  Act, 1966  (31 of 1966) , 
except the territories comprised in the districts of  Lahaul and Spiti.  
7.  Saving. —(1) Save as provided in this section, nothing in this Act  shall be deemed to affect — 
(a) the validity, invalidity, effect or consequence of anything done or suffered to be done before 
the commencement of this Act;  
(b) any right, privilege obligation or liability alrea dy acquired, accrued or incurred before such 
commencement;  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or inflicted in respect of any act before such 
commencement;  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of such right, privilege , obligation, 
liability, penal ity, forfeiture or punishment,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed in accordance with the provisions of this Act and 
the Code of Criminal Procedure,18981 (5 of 1898) , as amended by this Act.  
(2) All legal proceedings pending before a Magistrate or Court immediately before the 
commencement of this Act  shall, if such Magistrate or Court ceases to have jurisdic tion in respect of such 
proceedings under the provisions of the C ode of Criminal Procedure,  1898 (5 of 1898)  as amended by this 
Act, stand on such commencement transferred to the Magistrate or Court having jurisdiction under the 
provisions of the Code of C riminal Procedure,  18981 (5 of 1898) , as amended by this Act and  shall be 
heard and disposed of by such Magistrate or Court and such Magistrate or Court  shall have all the powers 
and jurisdiction in respect thereof as if they had been originally instituted  before such Magistrate or in 
such Court, including the power of the succeeding Magistrate under section  350 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure,  18981 (5 of 1898) . 
8.  Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government, in consultation with the  High Court having jurisdiction in relation to the 
Union territory concerned, may, by  order, do anything (including the specification of the appropriate 
                                                           
1. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).   
4 
 
 Magistrate, whether judicial or  executive, having jurisdiction under any law) not inconsistent with such 
provisions for the pur pose of removing the difficulty : 
Provided that no such  order  shall be made after the expiration of three years from the commencement 
of this Act.  
Explanation. — In this section, “High Court ” shall have the same  meaning as in clause ( i) of            
sub-section ( 1) of section  4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1898  (5 of 1898) . 
(2) Every  order made under  sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made before 
each House of Parliament.  
9.  Power of Legislative Assembly of Union territory to amend this Act .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section  21 of the Government  of Union Territories Act,  1963 (20 of 1963), the 
Legislative Assembly of a Union territory may by law amend this Act in its appl ication to that Union 
territory.  
   
5 
 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3 ) 
AMENDMENTS  TO  THE   CODE  OF CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE,  1898  
(5 OF 1898)  
1.  For section  6, the following  sections shall  be substituted,  namely:— 
“6.  Classes of Criminal Courts. —Besides   the  High   Court   and  the  Courts   constituted  under   
any  law  other   than  this  Code   for  the  time  being   in  force,   there   shall   to  be two classes   of  
Criminal   Courts,   namely :— 
I. Courts  of Session.  
II. Courts  of Magistrates . 
A1.—Classes  of Magistrates  
6A. Classes of Magistrates. —There  shall  be the following  classes of Magistrates,  namely:—               
I. Judicial Magistrates:  
(1)  Chief  Judicial  Magistrate  
(2)  Judicial  Magistrates  of the first class . 
(3)  Judicial  Magistrates  of the second  class . 
II. Executive  Magistrates : 
(1)  District  Magistrates . 
(2)  Sub-divisional  Magistrates . 
(3)  Executive  Magistrates of  the first class. 
(4)  Executive  Magistrates  of the second  class . 
(5) Special  Executive  Magistrates .”. 
2.  In  section   7,  for  sub-sections   (2)  and  (3),  the  following   sub-sections   shall   be        
substituted,   namely :— 
“(2)  The  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,   may  alter  the  limits,   or  
the  number,   of  such  divisions   and  districts . 
(3)  The  sessions   divisions   and  districts   existing   in  any  Union   territory   immediately  before   
the  commencement   of  the  Union   Territories   (Separation   of  Judicial   and  Executi ve  Functions)   
Act,  1969   in  that  Union   territory   shall   be  sessions   divisions   and  districts   respectively,   unless   
and  until  they  are  altered   as  provided   in  sub-section   (2).”. 
3.  In section  9,— 
(i)  in  sub-section   (1)  after  the  words   “sessions   division,   and”,  the  words   “,  in  
consultation   with  the  High   Court, ”  shall   be  inserted ; 
(ii)  in  sub-section   (2)  after  the  words   “State   Government ”,  the  words   “,  in  consultation   
with  the  High   Court,”  shall   be  inserted   ; 
(iii)  in  sub-section   (3),  after  the  words   “may  also”,  the  words  “, in  consultation   with  the  
“High   Court, ”  shall  be inserte d ; and 
(iv)  in  sub-section   (4),  after  the  words   “State   Government ”,  wherever   they  occur,   the  
words   “in  consultation   with  the  High   Court, ”  shall   be  inserted .  
6 
 
 4.  In section  10,— 
(i)  for  the  marginal  heading,   the  following   marginal   heading   shall   be substituted,   
namely:— 
“District  Marginal and Chief  Judicial  Magistrate .”; 
(ii)  in  sub-section   (1),  for  the  words   “a  Magistrate ”,  the  words   “an  Executive   Magistrate ”  
shall   be  substituted  ; 
(iii)  in  sub-section   (2),  for  the  words   “any  Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”,  the  words   “any  
Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted   and  after  that  sub-section   as  so  
amended,   the  following   sub-sections   shall   be  inserted,   namely:— 
“(2A)  In  every   district   the  State   Government   shall,   in  consultation   with  the  High   
Court,   invest   a  judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   with  the  powers   of  a  Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate   under   this  Code   or  any  other   law  for  the  time  being   in  force . 
(2B)  The  State   Government   may,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,  appoint   any  
Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   to  be  an  Additional   Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   and  
such  Additional   Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   shall   have  all  or  any  of  the  powers   of  a  Chief   
Judicial   Magistrate   referred   to  in  sub-section   (2A)  as  the  State   Government   may,   in  
consultation   with  the  High   Court,  direct .”; 
(iv)  for  sub-section   (3),  the  following   sub-section   shall   be  substituted,   namely :—  
“(3)  For  the  purposes   of  section   88,  sub-section   (6C),  section   406B   and  section   528,    
sub-sections   (2B)  and  (3),  such  Additional   District   Magistrate   shall   be  deemed   to  be  
subordinate   to  the  District   Magistrate;   and  for  the  purposes   of  section   88,  sub-section   (6C),  
section   192,  sub-section   (1),  section   406B   and  section   528,  sub-sections   (2)  and  (2A),  such  
Additional   Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   shall   be  deemed   to  be  subordinate   to  the  Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate .”. 
5.  For section  12, the following  section  shall be  substituted,  namely :— 
“12.  Executive Magistrates and Chief Judicial Magistrates. —(1)  The  State   Government   
may  appoint   as  many   persons   as  it  thinks   fit,  besides   the  District   Magistrate,   to  be  
Executive   Magistrates   of  the  first  or  second   class   in  any  district,   and  the  State   Government   
or  the  District   Magistrate,   subject   to  the  control   of  the  State   Government,   may,   from   time  to  
time,   define   local   areas   within   which   such  persons   may  exercise   all  or  any  of  the  powers   
with  which   they  may,   respectively,   be  invested   under   this  Code . 
(2)  The  State   Government,   in consultation   with  the  High   Court,   may  confer   on  any  
person   who  is  a  civil  Judge   or  a  member   of  the  Judicial   Service   of  a  Union   territory   or  a  
group   of  such  territories,   the  powers   of  any  class   of  Judicial   Magistrates   in  any  district;   and  
the  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,   or  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   
subject   to  the  control   of  the  High   Court,   may,   from   time  to  time,   define   local   areas   within   
which   he  may  exercise   all  or  any  of  the  powers  with  which   he  may  be  invested   under   this  
Code . 
(3)  The  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,   may,   for  such  period   not  
exceeding   three   years   from   the  commencement   of  the  Union   Territories   (Separation   of  
Judicial   and  Executive   Functions)   Act,  1969,   as  it  may  think   fit,  appoint   as  many   persons,   
who  are  members   of  a  civil  service   in  any  Union   territory   or  in  any  State   and  who  are  or  
have   been   exercising   the  powers   of  a  Magistrate   in  such  territory   or  state  at  or  before   the  
commencement   of  the  said  Act,  as  may  be  considered   necessary   to  be  Judicial   Magistrates   
in  any  district;   and  the  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High  Court,   may  define   
local   areas   within   which   such  persons   may  exercise   all  or  any  of  the  powers   with  which   
they  may,   respectively,   be  invested   under   this  Code .  
7 
 
 (4)  Except   as  otherwise   provided   by  any  such  definition   as  is  referred   to  in                   
sub-section s  (1),  (2)  or  (3),  the  jurisdiction   and  powers   of  such  persons   shall   extend   
throughout   such  district .”. 
6.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   13,  for  the  word   “Magistrate ”,  the  words                    
“Executive   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
7.  For section 14,  the following section  shall be substituted,  namely:— 
“14. Special Executive Magistrates. —The  State   Government   may  appoint                
Executive   Magistrates   for  particular   areas   or  for  the  performance   of  particular   functions   and  
confer   on  them   such  powers   as  it  deems   fit. Such   Magistrate s  shall   be  called   Special   
Executive  Magistrates   and  shall   be  appointed   for  such  term  as  the  State   Government   may,   
by  general   or  Special   order,   direct .”. 
8.  For  sub-section   (1)  of  section   15,  the  following   sub-section   shall  be  substituted,   namely :— 
“Benches of Judicial Magistrate. —(1) The  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  
High   Court,   may  direct   any  two  or  more   Judicial   Magistrates   in  any  place   in  a  Union   
territory   to  sit  together   as  a  Bench   and  may  by  order   invest   such  Bench   with  any  of  the  
powers   conferred   or  conferable   by  or  under   this  Code   on  a  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  
or  second   class,   and  direct   it  to  exercise   such  powers   in  such  cases,   or,  such  classes   of  
cases   only  and  within   such  local   limits   as  the  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  
High   Court,   thinks   fit.”. 
9.  In section 16,— 
(i)  for  the  words   “The  State   Government   may,   or,  subject   to  the  control   of  the  State   
Government,   the  District   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “The  High   Court,   subject   to  the  approval   of  
the  State   Government, ”  shall   be  substituted;   and 
(ii)  for  the  words   “Magistrate ’  Benches ”,  the  words   “Judicial   Magistrate s’  Benches ”  shall   
be  substituted . 
10.  For section 17, the  following  sections  shall be substituted,  namely :— 
“17.    Subordination of Judicial Magistrates and Benches to Chief Judicial Magistrates and 
of Chief Judicial Magistrates and Assistant Sessions Judges to Sessions Judge. —(1)  All  
Judicial   Magistrates   appointed   under   sub-sections   (2)  and  (3)  of  section   12  and  all  Benches   
constituted   under   section   15,  shall,   subject   to  the  control   of  the  Sessions   Judge,   be  
subordinate   to  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   and  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   may,   from   
time  to  time,   make   rules   or  give  special   orders   consistent   with  this  Code   as  to  the  
distributions   of  business   among   such  Magistrates  and  Benches . 
(2)  All  Chief   Judicial   Magistrates   shall   be  subordinate   to  the  Sessions   Judge . 
(3)  All  Assistant   Sessions   Judge   shall   be  subordinate   to  the  Sessions   Judge   in  whose   
Court   they  exercise   jurisdiction,   and  the  sessions   Judge   may,   from   time  to  time,   make   rules   
consistent   with  this  Code   as  to  the  distribution   of  business   among   such                        
Assistant   Sessions   Judges . 
(4)  The  Sessions   Judge   may  also,  when   he  himself   is  unavoidably   absent   or  incapable   of  
acting ,  make   provision   for  the  disposal   of  any  urgent   application   by  an  Additional   or  
Assistant   Sessions   Judge,   or,  if  there   be  no  Additional   or  Assistant   Sessions   Judge,  by  the  
Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   and  such  Judge   or  Magistrate   shall   have   jurisdiction   to  deal  with  
any  such  application . 
17A.   Subordination of Executive Magistrates. —(1)  All  Executive   Magistrates   appointed   
under   sub-section   (1)  of  section   12,  section   13  and  section   14  shall   be  subordinate to  the  District   
Magistrate   and  every   Executive   Magistrate   (other   than  a  Sub-divisional   Magistrate)   exercising   
powers   in  a  sub-division   shall   also  be  subordinate   to  the  Sub-divisional   Magistrate,   subject,   
however,   to  the  general   control   of  the  District   Magistrate .  
8 
 
 (2)  The  District   Magistrate  may,   from   time  to  time,   make   rules   or  give  special   orders   
consistent   with  this  Code   as  to  the  distribution   of  business   among   Executive   Magistrates   
subordinate   to  him  and  as  to  allocation   of  business   to  an  Additional   District   Magistrate . 
17B.   Courts inferior to High Court and Court of Session. —Courts   of  Session   and  Courts   of  
Judicial   and  Executive   Magistrates   shall   be  Criminal   Courts   inferior   to  the  High   Court   and  
Courts   of  Judicial   and  Executive   Magistrates   shall   be  Criminal   Courts   inferior   to  the  Court   of  
Session .”. 
11.  For  sub-section   (1)  of  section   29,  the  following   sub-section   shall   be  substituted,   
namely :— 
“(1)  Subject   to  the  other   provisions   of  this  Code,   any  offence   under   any  other   law  shall,   
when   any  Court   in  mentioned   in the  this  behalf   in  such  law,  be  tried  by  such  Court : 
Provided   that  if  the  Court   so  mentioned   is  a  Court   specified   in  column   (1)  of  the  Table   
below,   such  offence   shall  be  tried  by  the  Court   of  the  Judicial   Magistrate   specified   against   it  
in  column   (2), thereof : 
TABLE  
Name of court specified  in the la w Court by which triable  
(1) (2) 
1. District Magistrat e 
2.  Magistrate of the first class  
3. Sub-divisional Magistrate  
4. Magistrate of the second  class  
5. Magistrate of the third class  
6. Magistrate (except where it occurs in any     
expression mentioned above).  Chief Judicial Magistrate.  
Judicial Magistrate of the first class.  
Judicial Magistrate of the first class.  
Judicial Magistrate of the second 
class.  
 
Judicial Magist rate.”. 
12.  In  section   29B,   for  the  words   “a  District   Magistrate   or  a  Chief   Presidency   Magistrate,   or  
by  any  Magistrate   specially   empowered   by  the  State   Government ”,  the  words  “a  Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate   or  any  other   Judicial   Magistrate   specially   empowered   by  the  State   Govern ment   in  
consultation   with  the  High   Court ”  shall   be  substituted . 
13.  For section  30, the following section  shall be substituted,  namely :— 
“30.   Offences punishable with imprisonment not exc luding seven years. —Notwithstanding   
anything   contained   in  section   28  or  section   29,  the  State   Government , in  consultation   with  the  
High   Court   may  invest   any  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  any  other   Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  
first  class   with  power   to  try  as  a  Judicial   Magistrate   all  offences   not  punishable   with  death   or  
with  imprisonment   for  life  or  with  imprisonment   for  a  term  exceeding   seven   years : 
Provided   that  no  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   shall  be  
invested   with  such  powers   unless   he  has  for  not  less  than  ten  years,   exercised   as  a  Magistrate   
powers   not  inferior   to  those   of  a  Magistrate   of  the  first  class : 
Provided   further   that  if  any  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   has,  prior   to  his  
appointment   as  such  Magistrate,   exercised   the  powers   of  an  Assistant   Session s  Judge,   he  may  be  
invested   with  the  powers   under   this  section   notwithstanding   the  fact  that  he  has  not  exerci sed  
the  powers   of  Magistrate   of  the  first  class   for  not  less  than  ten  years .”.  
9 
 
 14.  In section  32,— 
(a)  in  the  marginal   heading,   for  the  word   “Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Judicial   Magistrate ”  
shall   be  substituted;  
(b)  in the sub-section   (1),— 
(i)  in  the  opening   sentence,   before   the  word   “Magistrate s”, the  word   “Judicial ”  shall   
be  inserted  ; 
(ii)  in  clause   (a),  for  the  words   “Courts   of  Presidency   Magistrates  and of  Magistrates   
of  the  first  class ”, the words “Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class”   and  in        
clause   (b),  for  the  words   “Courts   of  Magistrates ”,  the  words   “Courts   of  Judicial   
Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(iii) clause  (c)  shall   be omitted ; 
(c)  in  sub-section   (2),  for  the  words   “any  Magistrate ”,  the words any Judicial Magistrates” 
shall   be  substituted . 
15.  In section  33, in sub-section  (1),— 
(i)  in  the  marginal   heading,   for  the  word   “Magistrate s”,  the  words   “Judicial   Magistrates ”  
shall   be  substituted  ; 
(ii)  in  the  opening   paragraph,   for  the  words   “any  Magistrate   the  words   “any  Judicial   
Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(iii)  in  the  proviso,   in  clause   (b),  for  the  words   “by  a  Magistrate ”,  the  words   “ by  a  
Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
16.  In  the  marginal   heading   of  section   34,  for  the  word   “District ”,  the  word   “Judicial ”  shall   
be  substituted . 
17.  In  section   36,  after  the  words   “District   Magistrates ”,  the  words   “Chief   Judicial   
Magistrates ”,  shall   be  inserted;   and  for  the  words   “Magistrate   of  the  first,  second   and  third   
classes ”,  the  words   “Judicial   and  Executive   Magistrates   of  the  first  and  second   classes ”  shall   be  
substituted . 
18.  For  sections   37  and  38,  the  following   sections   shall   be  substi tuted,   namel y:— 
“37. Additional  powers conferable on Magistrates. —In addition  to the  ordinary  powers,— 
 (i) the  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High  Court,   may  invest   any  
Judicial   Magistrate   with  any  of  the  Powers   specified   in  Part  IA  of  Schedule   IV; 
(ii) a  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   may  invest   any  Judicial   Magistrate   within  his local   
jurisdiction   with  the  powers   specified   in  Part  IB  of  Schedule   IV;  
(iii)  the  State   Government   may  invest   any  Executive   Magistrate   with  any  of  the  
powers   specified   in  Part  IIA  of  Schedule   IV;  and 
(iv)  a  District   Magistrate   may  invest   any  Executive   Magistrate   within   his  local   
jurisdiction   with  the  powers   specified   in  Part  IIB  of  Schedule   IV. 
38.   Exercise of powers under section 37 by Chief Judicial Magistrate or District Magistrate to 
be subject to control of High Court or State Government .—The  power   conferred   on  the  Chief   
Judicial   Magistrate   under   clause   (ii)  of  section   37  shall   be  exercised   subject   to  the  control   of  
the  High   Court   and  the  power   conferred   on  the  District   Magistrate   under   clause   (iv)  of  that  
section   shall   be  exercised   subject   to  the  control   of  the  State   Government . 
   
10 
 
 38A.  Power on Judicial Magistrates to be conferred i n consultation with High                
Court.—Whenever   under   any  provisions   of  this  Code   or  of  any  other   law  for  the  time  being   in  
force   relating   to  any  of  the  matters   specified   in  Lists   II  and  III  of  the  Seventh   Schedule   to  the  
Constitution,   any  judicial   powers   are  to  be  conferred  on  a  Sessions   Judge,   or  an  Additional   or  
Assistant   Sessions   Judge   or  a  Chief   Judicial Magistrate   or  any  other   Judicial   Magistrate   or  any  
such  Magistrate   is  to  be  specially   empowered   to  exercise   such  powers   the  orders   conferring   such  
powers   or  empowering   the  exercise   of  such  powers   shall   be  made   by  the  State   Government   in  
consultation   with  the  High   Court   notwithst anding   that  such  provision   may  not  expressly   so  
provide . 
Explanation  —For  the  purposes   of  this  section,   the  question   whether   any   powers   are  judicial   
shall   be  decided   by  the  State   Government   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court  and  such  decision   
shall   be  final”. 
19.   In  section   39,  to  sub  section   (1),  the  following   provi so  shall   be  added,   namely :— 
“Provided   that  in  the  case  of  Judicial   Magistrate,   the  State   Government   shall   confer   such  
powers   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court ”. 
20.  To section  40, the following  provis o shall  be added,  namely :— 
“Provided   that  in  the  case  of  Judicial   Magistrates   no  such  direction   shall   be  issued   
except   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court .”. 
21.  In section  41,— 
(i)  to  sub-section   (1),  the  following   proviso  shall   be  added,   namely :— 
“Provided   that  the  State   Government   shall   not  withdraw   any  power   conferred   on  the  
Judicial   Magistrate   except   in  the  consultation   with  the  High   Court .”; 
(ii)  for  sub-section   (2),  the  following   sub-section   shall  be  substituted,   namely :— 
“(2)  Any  powers   conferred   by  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  the  District   Magistrate   
may be withdrawn  by him.”. 
22.  In section  57,— 
(i)  in  sub-section   (2),  for  the  words   “a  Magistrate ”,  the  words   “a  Judicial   Magistrate   
having   jurisdiction ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(ii)  in  sub-  section   (3),  for  the  word   “Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   
be  substituted . 
23.  In  section   63,  for  the  word   “Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Magistrate   having   jurisdiction ”  shall   
be  substituted . 
24.  For  Sub-section   (1)  of  section   78,  the  following   sub-section   shall  be  substituted,   
namely :— 
“(1)  A  District   Magistrate   or  a  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  any  other   Judicial   Magistrate   
of  the  first  class   or  a  Sub-divisional   Magistrate   may  direct  a  warrant   to  any  landholder,   
farmer   or  manager   of  land  within   the  area  of  his  jurisdiction   for  the  arrest   of  an  escaped   
convict,   proclaimed   offender   or  person   who  has  been   accused   of  a  non-bailable   offence,   and  
who  has  eluded   pursuit .”. 
25.  In section  88,— 
(a)  in  sub-section   (2)  after  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “or  Chief   Judicial 
Magistrate ”  shall   be  inserted;   
11 
 
 (b)  in  sub-section   (6B)  after  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “or  Chief   Judicial 
Magistrate ”  shall   be  inserted;   and 
(c)  for  the  proviso   to  sub-section   (6C),  the  following   proviso   shall  be  substituted,   
namely :— 
“Provided   that  if  it  is  preferred   or  made   in  the  Court   of  a  District   Magistrate   or  
Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   he  may  make   it  over  for  dispos al  to  any  Magistrate   
subordinate   to  him,  an  such  Magistrate   shall   have  all  the  powers   and  jurisdiction   in  
respect   of  such  claim   or  objection   as  if  the  order   of  attachment   had  been   issued   by  such  
Magistrate   and  the  claim   or  objection   had  been   originally   preferred   or  made   before   him.”. 
26.  In  section   95,  after  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  wherever   they  occur   the  words   
“Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”,  shall   be  inserted . 
27.  In  sub-section   (2)  of  section   96,  after  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “or  
Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  inserted . 
28.  In  section   98,  after  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  wherever   they  occur   the  words   
“Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”,  shall   be  inserted . 
29.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   106,  for  the  words   “Court   of  a  Presidency   Magistrate ,  a  
District   Magistrate,   a  Sub-divisional   Magistrate   or  a  Magistrate ”,  the  words                                         
“Court   of  a  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  any  other   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
30. In sections 107, 108 and 109, for  the words  “Magistrate  of  the  first  class ”  and  in  the      
section   110  for  the  words   “a  Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”,  the  words   “an  Executive   Magistrate   
of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
31.  In section  124,— 
(i)  for  the  words   “Chief   Presidency ”,  whenever   they  occur,   the  words   “Chief   Judicial ”  
shall   be  substituted;  
(ii)  in  sub-section   (1),  for  the  words   “under   this  Chapter ”,  the  words   and  figures   “under   
section   118  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  under   section   106”  shall  be  substituted;   and 
(iii)  in  sub-section   (2),  for  the  words   “under   this  Chapter ”,  the  words   and  figures   “under   
section   106  or,  as  the  case  may  be,  under   section   118,”  shall   be  substituted .   
32.  For section  125, the following  section  shall be  substituted,  namely :— 
“125. Power of Chief Magistrate to cancel any bond for keeping the peace and of District 
Magistrate to cancel any Bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour. —The  Chief   
Judicial   Magistrate   may,   at  any  time,   for  sufficient   reasons   to  be  recorded   in  writing,   cancel   
any  bond   for  keeping   the  peace   executed   under   section   106  and  the  District   Magistrate   may  
at  any  time  likewise   cancel   any  bond   for  keeping   the  peace   or  for  good   behaviour   executed   
under   section   118  by  order   of  any  court   in  his  district   not  superior   to  his  Court .”. 
33.  In section  126,— 
(i)  in  sub-section   (1),  for  the  words   “to  a  Presidency   Magistrate,   District   Magistrate,       
Sub-divisional   Magistrate   or  Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”,  the  words   and  figures   “to  the  
Court   by  which   an  order   to  give  security   was  made   under   section   106  or  section   118”  shall   
be  substituted   and  for  the  word   “his”,  the  word   “its”  shall   be  substituted;   and 
(ii)  for  sub-section   (2),  the  following   sub-section   shall  be  substituted,   namely :— 
“(2)  On  such  application   being   made,   the  Court   shall   issue   summons   or  warrant ,  as  
it  thinks   fit,  requiring   the  person   for  whom   such  surety   is  bound   to  appear   or  to  be  
brought   before   it.”.  
12 
 
 34.  In  section s  127,  128,  129  and  132,  for  the  word   “Magistrate ”,  the  words              
“Executive   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;   in  section s  130  and  131,  for  the  words                        
“a  Magistrate ”  the  words “an  Executive   Magistrate ”  and  in  section   131, for   the  words   “no  
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “no  Executive   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
35.  In section  133,— 
(i)  in  the  opening   paragraph   of  sub-section   (1)  and  in  sub-section   (2),  for  the  words   “a  
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “an  Executive   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;   and 
(ii) in the closing  paragraph   of  sub-section   (1), for  the  words  “Magistrate  of the first or second 
class ”, the words  “Executive  Magistrate ” shall  be substituted . 
36. In section 143, for the words “any other Magistrate ”, the words “any other Executive Magistrate ” 
shall be substituted.  
37.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   144,  for  the  words   and  brackets   “any  other   Magistrate       
(not  being   a  Magistrate   of  the  third   class) ”,  the  words   “any  other   Executive   Magistrate ”  shall   be  
substituted . 
38.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   145  and  sub-section   (1)  of  section   147,  for  the  word s  
“Magistrate   of  the  first class ”, the  words   “Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall                  
be  substituted . 
39.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   155,  the  words   “having   power   to  try  such  case  or  commit   
the  same   for  trial”  shall   be  inserted   at  the  end. 
40.  For  sub-section   (1)  of  section   164,  the  following   sub-sections   shall   be                         
substituted,   namely:— 
“(1)  Any  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   or  any  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   
class   specially   empowered   in  this  behalf   by  the  State   Government   in  consultation   with  the  
High   Court,   may  record  any  statement   or  confession   made   to  him  in  the  course   of  an  
investigation   under   this  Chapter   or  under   any  other   law  for  the  time  being   in  force   or  at  
any time afterwards   before   the  commencement   of  the  inquiry   or  trial. 
(1A)  Any  Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   or  of  the  second   class   (not  being   a  
police   officer )  may  be  specially   empowered   by  the  State   Government   to  record   such  
statements   or  confessions   if  that  Government   for  reasons   to  be  recorded   in  writing   considers   
it  necessary   so  to  do.”. 
41.  In section  167,— 
(i)  for  the  proviso   to  sub-section   (2),  the  following   proviso   shall   be  substituted,   
namely:— 
“Provided   that  no  Executive   Magistrate   of  the  secon d  class   not  it  specially     
empowered   in  this  behalf   by  the  State   Government ,  and  no  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  
second   class   not  specially   empowered   in  the  behalf   by  the  State   Government   to  
consultation   with  the  High   Cour t,  shall   authorise   detention   in  the  custody   of  the  police .”;  
and 
(ii)  for  sub-section   (4),  the  following   sub-section,   shall   be  substituted,   namely:— 
“(4)  if  such  order   is  given   by  an  Executive   Magistrate   other   than  the                        
District   Magistrate   or  Sub-divisional   Magistrate   he  shall   forward   a  copy   of  his  order,   
with  his  reasons   for  making   it,  to  the  magistrate   to  whom   he  is  immediately   subordinate   
and  if  such  order   is  given   by  a  Judicial   Magistrate   other   than  the  Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate,   he  shall   forward   a  copy   of  his  order,  with  his  reasons   for  making   it,  to  the  
Chief   Judicial   Magistrate .”.  
13 
 
  
42.  In  sub-section   (3)  of  section   170,  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate   or  Sub-divisional   
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
43.  In  sub-section   (5)  of  section   174,  for  the  words   “Magistrate   of  the  first  class,   and  any  
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class,   and  any  other   Executive   
Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
44.  Section   176A   which   applies   only  to  the  Union   territory   of  the  Laccadive,   Minicoy   and  
Amindevi   Islands   shall   be  omitted . 
45.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   186,  for  the  words   “a  Presidency   Magistrate,   a  District   
Magistrate,   a  Sub-divisional   Magistrate,   or,  if  he  is  specially   empowered   in  this  behalf   by  the  
State   Government,   a  Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”,  the  words   “a  District   Magistrate,   a               
sub-divisional   Magistrate,   or,  if  he  is  specially   empowered   in  this  behalf   by  the  State   
Government,   an  Executive   magistrate   of  the  first  class,   or  if  he  is  specially   empowered   in  this  
behalf   by  the  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,   a  Judicial   Magistrate   of  
the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
46.  In  sub-sectio n  (1)  of  section   187,  for  the  words   “a  presidency   Magistrate   or                       
District   Magistrate,   such  Magistrate   shall   send  the  person   arrested   to  the  District   to                   
Sub-divisional   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “a  District   Magistrate   or  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   such  
Magistrate,   or  as  the  case  may  be,  to  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
47.  In section  190,— 
(i)  in  sub-section   (1),  for  the  words   “any  Presidency   Magistrate,   District   Magistrate   or  
Sub-divisional   Magistrate,   and  any  other   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “ any  Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate,   and  any  other   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(ii)  in  sub-section   (2),  for  the  words   “The  State   Government,   or  the  District   Magistrate   
subject   to  the  general   or  special   orders   of  the  State   Government,   may  empower   any  
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “The  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,  or  the  
Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   subject   to  the  general   or  special   orders   of  the  High   Court,   may  
empower   any  other   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;   and 
(iii)  in  sub-section   (3),  for  the  words   “State   Government   may  empower   any  Magistrate ”  
the  words   “State   Government,   in  consultati on  with  the  High   Court,   may  empower   any  
Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
48.  In section  192,— 
(i)  in  sub-section   (1),  for  the  words   “Any  Chief   Presidency   Magistrate,   District   
Magistrate   or  Sub-divisional   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Any  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  
substituted;   and 
(ii)  in  sub-section   (2),  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
49.  In  sub-section   (2)  of  section   193,  for  the  words   “the  State   Government ”,  the  words    “the  
State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court ”,  shall   be  substituted . 
50.  In  section   196B,   for  the  words   “Chief   Presidency   Magistrate ”, the  words   “Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
51.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   206,  for  the  word s  and  brackets   “Any  Presidency   
Magistrate,   District   Magistrate,   Sub-divisional   Magistrate,  Magistrate   of  the  first  class,   or  any  
Magistrate   (not  being   a  Magistrate   of  the  third   class)   empowered   in  this  behalf   by  the  State   
Government ”, the  words   “Any  Chief   Judicial Magistrate   or  a  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class      
14 
 
 or  any  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   class   empowered   this  behalf   by  the  State   Government,   
in  consultation   with  the  High   Court ,” shall  be  substituted . 
52.  In  section   249,  for  the  words   “a  Presidency   Magistrate   a  Magistrate   of  the  first  class,   
or, with  the  previous   sanction   of  the  District   Magistrate,   any  other   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “a  
Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class,   or,  with  the  previous   sanction   of  the  Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate,   any  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
53.  In  sub-section   (3)  of  section   250,  the  words   “or  third ”  shall   be  omitted . 
54.  In  the  opening   paragraph   of  sub-section   (1) of  section   260,  for  clauses ( a), (b) and  (c), the  
following   clauses   shall   be  substitute d,  namely :— 
“(a) the Chief  Judicial  Magistrate,  
(b)  any  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   specifically   empowered   in  this  behalf   by  the  
State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,   and 
(c)  any  Bench   of  Judicial   Magistrates   invested   with  the  powers   of  a  Judicial   Magistrate   
of  the  first  class   and  specifically   empowered   in  this  behalf   by  the  State   Government,   in  
consu ltation   with  the  High   Court .”. 
55.  In section  261,— 
(i)  in  the  marginal   heading,   for  the  words   “Bench   of  Magistrates ”,  the  words   “Bench   of  
Judicial   Magistrates ”  shall  be  substituted;  
(ii)  in  the  opening   paragraph,   for  the  words   “State   Government   may  confer   on  any  Bench 
 of  Magistrate s invested with the powers of a Magistrate   of  the  second   or  third   class ”,  the  words   
“State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,   may  confer   on  the  Bench   of  
Judicial   Magistrates   invested   with  the  powers   of  a  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   class ”  
shall   be  substituted . 
56.  In  section   263, for  the  words   “Bench  of  Magistrates ”,  the  words   “Bench   of  Judicial   
Magistrates ”  and  for  the  words   “the  State   Government ”,  the  words   “the High   Court ”  shall   be  
substituted . 
57.  In  sub-section   (2)  of  section   265,  for  the  words   “The  State   Government   may  authorises   
any  Bench   of  Magistrates ”,  the  words   “The  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   
Court,   may  authorise  any  Bench   of  Judicial   Magistrates ”  shall   be  substituted . 
58.  In  sub-sections  (1) and  (2)  of  section   269,  after  the  words   “State   Government ”,  the  words   
“in  consultation   with  the  High   Court ”  shall   inserted . 
59.  In section  337, in sub-section  (1),— 
(i)  in  the  opening   paragraph,   for  the  words   “a  Presidency   Magistrate,   a  Sub-divisional   
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(ii)  for  the  proviso,   the  following   proviso   shall  be  substitute d,  namely :— 
“Provided   that  where   the  offence   is  under   inquiry   or  trial,  no  Magistrate   of  the  first  
class   other   than  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   shall   exercise   the  power   hereby   conferred   
unless   he  is  the  Magistrate   making   the  inquiry   or  holding   the  trial,  and,  where   the  
offences   is  under   investigation,   no  Magistrate   of  the  first  class   other   than  the                    
District   Magistrate   or  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   shall   exercise   the  power   unless   he  is  
the  Judicial   Magistrate   having   jurisdiction   in  a  place   where   the  offence   might   be  inquired   
into  or  tried  and  the  sanction   of  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   has  been   obtained   to  the  
exercise   thereof .”.  
15 
 
 60.  In  section   338,  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Chief   Judicial   Magistrate s  
shall   be  substituted . 
61.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   346,  after  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “or  
the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   as  the  case  may  be,”  shall   be  inserted . 
62.  In section  349,— 
(i)  in sub-section   (1),— 
(a)  for  the  words   “a  Magistrate   of  the  second   or  third   class ”,  the  words                          
“a  judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   class ”  shall   be  substituted;   and 
(b)  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate   or  Sub-divisional   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Chief   
Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;   and 
(ii)  in  sub-section   (1A),  for  the  words   “District  Magistrate   or  Sub-divisional   Magistrate ”,  
the  words   “Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
63.  For section 373,  the following section  shall be substituted,  namely :— 
“373.   Court of Session  to send copy of  finding and sentence to District Magistrate and  
Chief Judicial Magistrate .—In  cases   tried  by  the  Court   of  Session,   the  Court   shall   forward   a  
copy   of  its  finding   and  sentence   (if  any)  to  the  District   Magistrate   and  the  Chief   Judicial   
Magis trate  within   the  local   limits   of  whose   jurisdiction   the  trial  was  held.”. 
64.  In  section   380,  for  the  words   “Magistrate   of  the  first  class   or  a  Sub-divisional   
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
65.  For section 406A, the following  sections shall be substituted, namely :— 
“406A .  Appeal from order refusing to accept or rejecting a surety. —Any  person   aggrieved   
by  an  order   refusing   to  accept   or  rejecting   a  surety   under   section   122  may  appeal   against   
such  order,— 
(a)  if  made   by  the  District   Magistrate   or  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   to  the  Court  
of  session;  
(b)  if  made   by  an  Executive   Magistrate   other   than  the  District   Magistrate,   to  the  
District   Magistrate;   and 
(c)  if  made   by  an  Judicial   magistrate   other   than  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   to  the  
Chief   Judicial   Magistrate . 
406B . Transfer of appeal to Additional District Magistrate to the Additional  Chief Judicial 
Magistrate .—The District Magistrate or the Chief Judicial Magistrate may transfer any appeal 
presented to him under section 406A to an Additional District Magistrate or to the Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, as the case may be, and such Additional District Magistrate or Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate may hear and dispose of the appeal .”. 
66.   In  section   407  which   applies   only  to  the  Union   territory   of  the  Laccadive,   Minicoy   and  
Amindivi   Islands ,— 
(i)  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  wherever   they  occur,   the  words   “Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(ii)  in  sub-section   (1)  for  the  words,   “Magi strate   of  the  second   or  third   class ”,  the  words   
“Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   class ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(iii)  in  sub-section   (2)  for  the  words,   “Magistrate   of  the first class ”,  the  words   “Judicial   
Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
   
16 
 
 67.  In section  408,— 
(i)  as  it  applies   to  any  Union   territory   other   than  the  Union   territory   of  the  Laccadive,   
Minicoy  and  Amindivi   Islands,   for  the  words   and  figures   “a  District   Magistrate   or  any  other   
Magistrate,   or  any  person   sentenced   unde r  section   349  or  in  respect   of  whom   an  order   has  
been   made   or  a  sentence   has  been   made or sentence has been passed   under   section   380  by  any  
Magistrate ”,  the  words   and  figures   “or  a  Judicial   Magistrate   or  any  person   sente nced   under   
section   349  or  in  respect   of whom   an  order   has  been  made or a sentence has been   passed   
under   section   380  by  a  Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted ; 
(ii) as  it  applies   to  the  Union  territory   of  the  Laccadive,   Minicoy   and  Amindivi   Islands,   
for  the  words   and  figures   “a  District   Magistrate   or  other   Magistrate  of the first class ,  or  any  
person   sentenced   under   section   349  or  in  respect   of  whom   an  order   has  been   made   or  a  
sentence   has  been   passed   under   section   380  by  any  Magistrate ”,  the  words   and  figures   “or  a  
Judicial   Magistrate  of the first class   or  any  person   sentenced  under   section   349  in  respect   
whom   an  order   has  been   passed   under   section   380  by  a  Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  
substituted . 
68.   In section  409,— 
(a)  as  it  applies   to  any  Union   territory   of  the  Laccadive,   Minicoy   and  Amindivi   Islands,   
in  the  proviso,   for  the  words   “State   Government ”,  the  words   “State   Government ,  in  
consultation   with  the  High   Court, ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(b)  it  applies   to  any  Union   territory   other   than  the  Union   territory   of  the  Laccadive,   
Minicoy   and  Amindivi   Islands,— 
(i)  in  the  proviso   to  sub-section   (1),  the  words   “or  third ”  shall   be  omitted;   and 
(ii)  in  sub-section   (2),  for  the  words   “State   Government ”,  the  words                         
“State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court, ”  shall   be  substituted . 
69.  In  section   412,  for  the  words   “Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”,  the  words   “Judicial   
Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
70.  In  section   413,  for  the  words   “or  District   Magistrate   or  other   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “or  
Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  other   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
71.  In  sub-section   (1) of section 425 ,  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  wherever   they  occur,   
the  word s “Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ” shall  be substituted,   and  the  words  “and  a  copy   thereof   shall   
be forwarded   to  the  District   Magist rate” shall   be inserted   at the end. 
72.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   428,  for  the  word   “Magistrate ”,  wherever   it  occurs,   the  
words   “Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
73.  For section  435, the following  section  shall be substituted,  namely :— 
“435.    Power to call for records of inferior Courts.—(1)  The  High   Court   or  any  Sessions   
Judge   may  call  for  and  examine   the  record   of  any  proceeding   before   any  inferior   Criminal   
Court   situate   within   the  local   limits   of  its  or  his  jurisdiction   and  any  Chief   Judicial   
Magistrat e  may  call  for  and  examine   the  record   of any proceedings before any Judicial 
Magistrate under his Jurisdiction for  the  purpose   of  satisfying   itself   or  himself   as  to  the  
correctness,   legality   or  propriety   of  any  finding,   sentence   or  order   recorded   or  passed,   and  as  
to  the  regularity   of  any  proceedings   of  such  inferior   Court   or  such  Magistrate,   as  the  case  
may  be,  and  may,   when   calling   for  such  record,   direct   that  the  execution   of  any  sentence   or  
order   be  suspended   and,  if  the  accused   is  in  confinement,   that  he  be  released   on  bail  or  on  
his  own  bond   pending   the  examination   of  the  record . 
(2)  The  District   Magistrate   or  any  Sub-divisional   Magistrate   empowered   by  the  State   
Government   in  this  behalf,   may  call  for  and  examine   the  record   of  any  proceeding   before   
any  Subordinate   Executive   Magistrate   for  the  purpose   of  satisfying   himself   as  to  the   
17 
 
 correctness,   legality   or  propriety   of  any  order   recorded   or  passed,   and  as  to  the  regularity   of  
any  proceedings   of  such  Subordinate   Magistrate   and  may,   when   calling   for  such  record,   
direct   that  the  execution   of  any  order   be  suspended   and,  if  the  person   is  in  confinement,   
that  he  be  released   on  bail  or  on  his  own  bond   pending   the  examination   of  the  record . 
(3)  If  any  Sub-divisional   Magistrate   acting   under   sub-section   (2)  consider s  that  any  such  
proceeding  or order is illegal or improper or that any such proceeding  is  irregular,   he  shall   
forward   the  record,   with  such  remarks   thereon   as  he  thinks   fit  to  the  District   Magistrate . 
(4)  The  High   Court   may  call  for  and  examine  the  record   of  any  proceeding   under   
section   118,  122,  143,  144  or  145,  notwithstanding   the  fact  that  such  proceeding   was  before   
an  Executive   Magistrate . 
(5)  If  an  application   in  respect   of  any  proceeding   before   any  Judicial   Magistrate   other   
than  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   has  been   made   under   sub-section   (1)  either   to  the  Sessions   
Judge   or  the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate,   no  further   application   shall   be  entertained   by  the  
other   of  them  and  if  an  application   in  respect   of  any  proceeding   before   any  Executive   
Magistrate   has  been   made   to  the  Sessions   Judge   under   sub-section   (1)  or  to  the  District   
Magistrate   under   sub-section   (2),  no  further   application   shall   be  entertained   by  the  other   of  
them .”. 
74.  Section  436 shall  be re-numbered  as sub-section  (1) thereof  and— 
(i)  in sub-section   (1)  as  so  re-numbered — 
(a)  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  wherever   they  occur,   the  words   “Chief   
Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(b)  in  the  proviso,   for  the  word   “section ”,  the  word   “sub-section ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(ii)  after  sub-section   (1)  as  so  re-numbered,   the  following   sub-section   shall   be  inserte d,  
namely:— 
“(2)  On  examining   any  record   under   section   435  or  otherwise,   the  District   Magistrate   
may  direct   any  Sub-divisional   Magistrate   by  himself   or  by  way  any  other   Magistrate   
subordinate   to  him  to  make,   and  the  Sub-divisional   Magistrate   may  himself   make   or  
direct   any  Subordinate   Magistrate   to  make   further   inquiry   into  any  proceeding   in  which   
an  order   of  release   or  discharge   has  been   made   under   section   119: 
Provided   that  no  District   Magistrate   shall   make   any  direction   under   this  sub-section   
for  further   inquiry   into  the  case  of  any  person   who  has  been   released   or  discharge   
unless   such  person   has  had  an  opportunity   of  showing   cause  why  such  direction   should   
not  be  made .”. 
75.  In  section  437, for  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  wherever   they  occur,   the  words    
“Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
76.  In section  438,— 
(i) in  sub-section   (1),  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate ”,  the  words                              
“Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;   and 
(ii)  after  sub-section   (2),  the  following   sub-section   shall   be  inserted,   namely:— 
“(3)  The  District   Magistrate,   on  examining   under   section   435  or  otherwise   the  record   
of  any  proceeding, — 
(a)  shall,   if  such  proceeding   is  in  respect   of  an  order   under                                      
section s  118,  122, 143,  144  or  145  and  if  he  thinks   that  the  order   made   in  such  
proceeding   should   be  reversed   or  altered,   report   for  the  orders   of  the  High   Court   the  
result   of  such  examination;   
18 
 
 (b)  may,   if  such  proceeding   is  in  respect   of  an  order   made   under   any  other   
section,   exercise,   subject   to  the  provisions   of  sub-section   (2)  of  section   436,  any  of  
the  powers   conferred   on  a  Court   of  appeal   by  section s  423,  426,  427  and  428.”. 
77.  In  sub-section   (3)  of  section   439,  for  the  words   “a  Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”,  the  
words   “a  judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
78.  In  section   479,  for  the  words   “Presidency   Magistrate,   District   Magistrate   or  other   
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  any  other   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  
substituted . 
79.  In  sub-section   (1)  of  section   488,  for  the  words   “District   Magistrate,  a  Presidency   
Magistrate,   a  Sub-divisional   Magistrate   or  a  Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  
any  other   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
80.  In  sub-section   (2)  of  section   512,  for  the  words   “any  Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”,  the  
words   “any  judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
81.  For section  515, the following  section shall be  substituted  namely :— 
“515. Appeal from and revision of, order s under section 514 .—All orders  under              
section 514 shall  be appealable ,— 
(i) to  the  District   Magistrate,   if  passed   by  an  Executive   Magistrate,   and 
(ii) to  the  Chief   Magistrate,   if  passed   by  an  Judicial   Magistrate,  
or  if  not  so  appealed,   may  be  raised   by  the  District   Magistrate   or,  as  the  case  may  be, by  
the  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”. 
82.   In section  524,— 
(i)  in  sub-section   (1)  for  the  words   “a  Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”,  the  words   “an  
Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted;   and 
(ii)  in  sub-section   (2)  for  the  words   “to  the  Court   to  which   appeals   against   sentences   of  
the  Court   passing   such  order   would   lie”,  the  words   “to  the  Sessions   Judge ”  shall   be  
substituted . 
83.  In section  528,— 
(i)  in sub-section  (2),— 
(a)  for  the  marginal   heading,   the  following   marginal   heading   shall   be  substituted,   
namely :— 
“Chief  Judicial  Magistrate may  withdraw or  refer  cases”; and 
(b)  for  the  words   “Any  Chief   Presidency   Magistrate,   District   Magistrate   or                   
Sub-divisional   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “The  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be            
substituted;   and 
(ii)  after  sub-section   (2),  the  following   sub-sections   shall   be  inserted,   namely:— 
“(2A)  Power to authorise Chief Judicial Magistrate to withdraw classes of cases .—The  
State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   Court,   may  authorise   the                           
Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   to  withdraw   from   any  Magistrate   subordinate   to  him  either   such  
classes   of  cases   as  he  thinks   proper,  or  particular   classes   of  cases . 
  
19 
 
  
 
“(2B)  District Magistrate may withdraw or refer cases. —Any  District   Magistrate   may  
withdraw   any  case  from   or  recall   any  case  which   he  has  made   over  to,  any  Magistrate   
subordinate   to  him  and  may  inquire   into  such  case himself,   or  refer   it  for  inquiry   to  any  
other   such  Magis trate  competent   to  inquire   into  the  same .”. 
84.  In  sub-section   (2)  of  section   559,  the  words   “the  Chief   Presidency   Magistrate   in  a  
Presidency -town,   and  the  District   Magistrate   outside   such  towns ”,  the  words   “the  Chief   Judicial   
Magistrate   in  the  case  of  Judicial   Magistrates   and  the  District   Magistrate   in  the  case  of  
Executive   Magistrates ”  shall   be  substituted . 
85.  In  section   561,  for  the  words   “a  Chief   Presidency   Magistrate   or  District   Magistrate ”,  
wherever   they  occur,   the  words   “a  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted . 
86.  In the proviso  to sub-section ( 1) of section  562,— 
(i)  for  the  words   “Magistrate   of  the  third   class,   or  a  Magistrate   of  the  second   class   not  
specially   empowered   by  the  State   Government ”,  the  words   “Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   
class   not  specially   empowered   by  the  State   Government   in  consultation   with  the  High   
Court ,”  shall   be substituted;   and 
(ii)  for  the  words   “Magistrate   of  the  first  class   or  the  Sub-divisional   Magistrate ”,  the  
words   “Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class ”  shall   be  substituted . 
87.  In section  565,— 
(i)  in  sub-section   (1),  for  the  words   “Presidency   Magistrate,   District   Magistrate,              
Sub-divisional   Magistrate   or  Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  any  other   
Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(ii)  in  sub-section   (3)  after  the  words   “State   Government ”,  the  words   “in  consultation   
with  the  High   Court ”,  shall   be  inserted  ;  and 
(iii)  in  sub-section   (5),  for  the  words   “Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   
be  substituted . 
88.  In Schedule  II, in column  8,— 
(i)  for  the  word   “Magistrate ”,  wherever   it  occurs   except   in  the  expression   “Presidency   
Magistrate ”,  the  words   “Judicial   Magistrate ”,  and  for  the  words   “Any  Magistrate ”,  wherever   
they  occur,   the  words   “Any  Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted;  
(ii)  for  the  entry   against   section   124A,   the  following   entry   shall   be  substituted,   namely :— 
“Court   of  session,   Chief   Judicial   Magistrate   or  any  other   Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  
first  class   specially   empowered   by  the  State   Government,   in  consultation   with  the  High   
Court,   in  that  behalf .”;  and 
(iii)  in  the  entry   relating   to  section   376,  for  the  words   “Chief   Presidency   Magistrate   
or  District   Magistrate ”,  the  words   “or  Chief   Judicial   Magistrate ”  shall   be  substituted .  
20 
 
 89.  For  Schedule s  III  and  IV,  the  following   Schedules   shall   be  substituted,   namel y:— 
“SCHEDULE III  
(See section 36)  
ORDINARY POWER OF STATE MAGISTRATES  
I. Ordinary powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the second class.  
 (1)  Power   to  arrest   or  direct   the  arrest   of,  and  to  commit   to  custody   a  person   committing   
an  offence   in  his  presence,   section   64. 
(2)  Power   to  arrest   or  direct   the  arrest   his  presence   of,  an  offender,   section   65. 
(3)  Power   to  endorse   a  warrant,   or  to  order   the  removal   of  an  accused   person   arrested   under   
a  warrant,   section s  83, 84  and  86. 
(4)  Power   to  issue   proclamations   in  cases   judicially   before   him,  section   87. 
(5)  Power   to  attach   and  sell  property   to  dispose   of  claims   or  objections   to  attached   property,   
section   88. 
(6)  Power  to restore attached  property,  section  89. 
(7)  Power   to  require   search   to  be  made   for  letters   and  telegrams,   section   95. 
(8)  Power to  issue search  warrant,  section  96. 
(9)  Power   to  endorse   a  warrant   and  order   delivery   of  thing   found,   section   99. 
(10)  Power   to  order  the  police   to  investigate   an  offence   in  cases  in  which   the  Magistrate   has  
jurisdiction   to  try  or  commit   for  trial,  section   155. 
(11)  Power   to  authorise   detention,   not  been   detention   in  the  custody   of  the  police,   of  a  
person   during   a  police   investigation,   section   167. 
(12)  Power   to  postpone   issue   of  process   and  to  inquire   into  a  case  or  direct   investigation,   
section   202. 
(13)  Power  to detain  an offender  found  in Court, section  351. 
(14)  Power   to  issue   commission   for  examination   of  witness,   sections   503,  506. 
(15)  Power   to  recover   forfeited   bond   for  appearance   before   the  Magistrate   Court, section   514,  
and  to  require   fresh   security,   section   514A . 
(16)  Power   to  make   order   as  to  custody   and  disposal   of  property   pending   inquiry   or  trial,  
section   516A . 
(17)  Power   to  make   Order   as  to  dispose   of  property,   section   517. 
(18)  Power   to  sell  property   of  a  suspe cted  character,   section   525. 
(19)  Power   to  require   affidavit   in  support   of  application,   section   539A . 
(20)  Power  to make  local  inspection,  section  539B . 
II.—Ordinary  powers  of a Judicial  Magistrate  of the first class  
(1)  The  Ordinary   powers   of  a  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   class . 
(2)  Power  to direct  warrant  to landholders,  section  78. 
(3)  Power   to  issue   search   warrant,   otherwise   than  in  due  course   of  an  inquiry,   section   98. 
(4)  Power   to  issue   search   warrant   for  discovery   of  persons   wrongfully   confined,  section   100. 
(5)  Power  to require execution  of a bond,  section  106.  
21 
 
 (6)  Power to discharge  sureties, section  126A . 
(7)  Power   to  record   statements   and  confessions   during   a  police   investigation,   section   164. 
(8)  Power   to  authorise   detention   of  a  person   in  the  custody   of  the  police  during a police   
investigation,   section   167. 
(9)  Power to  commit  for trial, section  206. 
(10)  Power  to stop proceedings  when no  complainant,  section  249. 
(11)  Power   to  tender   pardon   to  accomplice   during   inquiry   into  case  by  himself,               
section   337. 
(12)  Power   to  make   orders   of  maintenance,   sections   488  and  489. 
(13)  Power   to  recall   case  made   over  by  him  to  another   Magistrate,   section   528  (4). 
(14)  Power   to  make   order   as  to  first  offenders,   section   562. 
(15)  Power  to order  released convicts  to notify residence,  section  565. 
III-Ordinary  powers  of a Chief  Judicial  Magistrate  
(1)  The  Ordinary   powers   of  a  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class . 
(2)  Power  to try juvenile  offenders,  section  29B. 
(3)  Power   to  require   delivery   of  letters,   telegrams,   etc.,  section   95. 
(4)  Power   to  issue   search   warrants   for  documents   in  custody   of  postal   or  telegraph   
authorities,   section   96. 
(5)  Power   to  release   person   imprisoned   for  failure   to  give  security   under                            
section  106, section  124. 
(6)  Power   to  cancel   any  bond   for  keeping   the  peace   under   section   106,  section   125. 
(7)  Power   to  order   police   investigation   into  a  cognizable   case,   section   156. 
(8)  Power   to  issue   process   for  a  person   within   local   jurisdiction   who  has  committed   an  
offence   outside   the  local   jurisdiction,   section   186. 
(9)  Power  to entertain  complaints,  section  190. 
(10)  Power  to receive  police  reports,  section  190. 
(11) Power  to entertain cases  without  complaint, section  190. 
(12)  Power   to  transfer   cases   to  a  Subordinate   Magistrate ,  section   192. 
(13)  Power   to  order   preliminary   investigation   by  a  police   officer   not  below   the  rank  of  an  
Inspector   in  certain   cases,   section   196B . 
(14)  Power  to try summarily, section  260. 
(15)  Power   to  tender   pardon   to  accomplice   at  any  stage   of  a  case,   section   337. 
(16)  Power   to  pass  sentence   on  proceedings   recorded   by  a  Subordinate   Magistrate,          
section   349. 
(17)  Power   to  hear  appeals   from   orders   of  Judicial   Magistrate   refusing   to  accept   or  rejecting   
sureties,   section   406A . 
(18)  Power  to call for records,  section  435. 
(19)  Power  to order  inquiry , section  436.  
22 
 
 (20)  Power  to order  commitment,  section  437. 
(21)  Power  to report  case to  High Court, section  438. 
(22)  Power   to  hear  appeals   from   or  revise   orders   passed   under   section   514,  section   515. 
(23)  Power   to  withdraw   cases   and  to  try  or  refer   them   for  trial,  section   528. 
IV.— Ordinary   powers   of  an  Executive   Magistrate   of  the  second   class. 
(1)  Power   to  arrest   or  direct   the  arrest   of  ,  and  to  commit   to  custody,   a  person   committing   
an  offence   in  his  presence,   section   64. 
(2)  Power   to  arrest,   or  direct   the  arrest   in  his  presence   of,  an  offender,   section   65. 
(3)  Power   to  endorse   a  warrant,   or  to  order   the  removal   of  an  accused   person   arrested   under   
a  warrant,   sections   83,  84,  86. 
(4)  Power to issue  proclamations,  section  87. 
(5)  Power to attach  and sell  property, section  88. 
(6)  Power  to restore  attached  property , section  89. 
(7)  Power   to  require   search   to  be  made   for  letters   and  telegrams,  section   95. 
(8)  Power  to issue  search  warrants  section  96. 
(9)  Power   to  endorse   a  search   warrant   and  order   delivery   of  thing  found,   section   99. 
(10)  Power  to command  unlawful  assembly  to disperse , section  127. 
(11)  Power   to  use  civil  force   to  disperse   unlawful   assembly,   section   128. 
(12)  Power   to  require   military   force   to  be  used  to  dispers e  unlawful   assembly,                
section   130. 
(13)  Power   to  authorise   detention   not  being   detention   in  the  custody   of  the  police,   of  a  
person   during   a  police   investigation,   section   167. 
(14)  Power  to take evidence  on commission , section  503. 
(15)  Power   to  recover   forfeited   bond   for  appearance   before   Magistrate ’s  Court,  section   514 
and to require fresh security, section 514A.  
(16)  Power   to  make   order   as  to  disposal   of  property,   section   517. 
(17)  Power   to  sell  property   of  a  suspected   character,   section   525. 
V.—Ordinary  powers  of an Executive  Magistrate  of the first class . 
(1)  The  ordinary   powers   of  an  Executive   Magistrate   of  the  second   class . 
(2)  Power   to  issue   search   warrant   otherwise   than  in  course   of  an  inquiry,   section   98. 
(3)  Power   to  issue   search   warrant   for  discovery   of  persons   wrongfully   confined,                    
section   100. 
(4)  Power   to  require   security   to  keep   the  peace,   section   107. 
(5)  Power to  requi re security for  good  behaviour,  section  109. 
(6)  Power  to discharge  sureties,  section  126A . 
(7)  Power   to  make   orders   as  to  local   nuisances,   section   133. 
(8)  Power   to  make   orders,   etc.,  in  possession   cases,   sections   145,  146  and  147.  
23 
 
 (9)  Power   to  authorise   detention   of  a  person   in  custody   of  the  police   during   a  police   
investigation,   section   167. 
(10)  Power  to hold inquests,  section  174. 
VI.—Ordinary  powers  of a Sub-divisional  Magistrate  
(1)  The  ordinary   powers   of  an  Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class . 
(2)  Power  to direct  warra nts to landholders,  section  78. 
(3)  Power to  require security  for good behaviour,  section  110. 
(4)  Power to makes orders prohibiting  repeti tions  of nuisances,  section  143. 
(5)  Power  to make  orders section  144. 
(6)  Power   to  deput e  Subordinate   Executive   Magistrate   to  make   local   inquiry,   section   148. 
(7)  Power   to  issue   process   for  person   within   local   jurisdiction   who  has  committed   an  offence   
outside   the  local   jurisdiction,   section   186. 
(8)  Power   to  sell  property   alleged   or  suspected   to  have   been   stolen,   etc.,  section   524. 
VII.—Ordinary  powers  of District  Magistrate  
(1) The ordinary  powers  of a sub-divisional  Magistrate . 
(2)  Power  to require  delivery  letters , telegrams , etc., section  95. 
(3)  Power   to  issue   search   warrants   for  documents   in  custody   of  postal   or  
telegraph  authorities,   section   96. 
(4)  Power   to  require   security   for  a  good   behaviour,   section   108. 
(5)  Power   to  discharge   persons   bound   to  keep   the  peace   or  to  be  of  good   behaviour   under   
section   118,  section   124. 
(6)  Power   to  cancel   bond   for  keeping   the  peace   or  to  be  of  good   behaviour   under            
section   118,  section   125. 
(7)  Power   to  order   preliminary   investigation   by  police   officer   not  below   the  rank  of  
Inspector   in  certain   cases,   section   196B . 
(8)  Power   to  tender   pardon   to  accomplice   at  the  stage   of  investigation,   section   337. 
(9)  Power   to  hear  appeals   from   orders   of  Executive   Magistrate   refusing   to  accept   or  
rejecting   sureties,   section   406A . 
(10)  Power  to call for and examine  records , section  435(2). 
(11)  Power   to  direct   Executive   Magistrate   to  make   further   inquiry   into  proceedings,   etc.,  
section   436 (2). 
(12)  Power to  report  cases  to High  Court,  section  438(3). 
(13)  Power   to  appoint   person   to  be  Public   Prosecutor   in  particular   case,   section   492(2). 
(14)  Power   to  hear  appears   from   or  revise   orders   passed   under   section   514,  section   515. 
(15)  Power  to compel  restoration of  abducted  female,  section  552. 
 
 
  
24 
 
 SCHEDULE  IV 
(See sections 37 and 38)  
ADDITIONAL POWER WITH WHICH STATE MAGISTRATES MAY BE INVESTED  
PART I  
A.—BY THE STATE GOVERNMENT IN CONSULTATION WITH THE HIGH COURT  
Powers   with  which   a  Judicial   Magistrates   of  the  first  class  may  be  invested 
(1)  Power  to try juvenile  offenders,  section  29B. 
(2)  Power   to  issue   process   for  person   within   local   jurisdiction   who  has  committed   an  offence   
outside   the  local   jurisdiction,   section   186. 
(3)  Power   to  take  cognizance   of  offen der  upon   complaint,   section   190. 
(4)  Power  to take cognizance  of offences  upon  police  reports , section  190. 
(5)  Power  to take cognizance  of offences  without  complaint , section  190. 
(6)  Power  to try summarily,  section  260. 
(7)  Power  to  try  cases   under   section   124A   of  the  Indian   Penal   Code . 
Powers   with  which   a  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   class   may  be  invested  
(1)  Power to  try juvenile  offenders,  section  29B. 
(2)  Power   to  record   statements   an  confessions   during   in  a  police   investigation,   section   164. 
(3)  Power   to  authorise   detention   of  a person  in  the  custody   of  the  police  during   a  police   
investigation,   section   167. 
(4)  Power   to  take  cognizance   of  offences   upon   complaint,   section   190. 
(5)  Power   to  take  cognizance   of  offences   upon  police   reports,   section   90. 
(6)  Power   to  take  cognizance   of  offences   without   complaint,   section   190. 
(7)  Power to  commit for  trial, section  206. 
(8)  Power   to  make   orders   as  to  first  offenders,   section   562. 
B.—BY THE CHIEF JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE  
Powers   with  which   any  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  second   class   may  be  invested  
(1)  Power   to  take  cognizance   of  offences   upon   complaint,   section   190. 
(2) Power   to  take  cognizance   of  offences   upon   police   reports,   section   190. 
(3)  Power  to transfer  cases,  section  192 (2). 
Powers   with  which   any  Judicial   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   may  be  invested  
(1)  Power   to  take  cognizance   of  offences   upon   complaint,   section   190. 
(2) Power   to  take  cognizance   of  offences   upon   police   reports,   section   190. 
 
 
 
  
25 
 
 PART II  
A—BY STATE GOVERNMENT  
Powers  with which a Sub-divisional  Magistrate  may be invested  
Power   to  call  for  records   of  inferior   courts   and  to  forward   them   to  the  District   Magistrate,   
sub-sections   (2)  and  (3)  of  section   435. 
Power s  with  which  an  Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   may  be  invested  
(1)  Power   to  require   security   of  good   behaviour   in  the  case  of  sedition,   section   108. 
(2)  Power   to  require   security   for  a  good   behaviour,   section   110. 
(3)  Power   to  make   orders   prohibiting   repetitions   of  nuisances,   section   143. 
(4)  Power to make  order  under section  144. 
(5)  Power   to  record   statements   and  confessions   during   a  police   investigation,   section   164. 
(6)  Power   to  issue   process   for  person   within   local   jurisdiction   who  has  committed   an  offence   
outside   the  local   jurisdiction,   section   186. 
(7)  Power   to  sell  property   alleged   or  suspected   to  have   been   stolen,   etc., section   524. 
Power s  with  which   an  Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   may  be  invested  
(1)  Power   to  make   orders   prohibiting   repetitions   of  nuisances,   section   143. 
(2)  Powe r to make  order  under  section  144. 
(3)  Power   to  record   statements   and  confessions   during   a  police   investigation,   section   164. 
(4)  Power   to  authorise   detention,   of a person   in  the  custody   of  the  police during   a  police   
investigation,   section   167. 
(5)  Power to  hold inquests, section  174. 
B.—BY THE  DISTRICT  MAGISTRATE  
Power s  with  which   any  Executive   Magistrate   of  the  first  class   may  be  invested  
(1)  Power   to  make   orders   prohibiting   repetitions   of  nuisances,   section   143. 
(2)  Power  to make  order  under  section  144. 
Power s  with  which   any  Executive   Magistrate   of  the Second class   may  be  invested  
(1)  Power   to  make   orders   prohibiting   repetitions   of  nuisances,   section   143. 
(2)  Power to  make order  under  section  144. 
(3) Power  to hold inquests,  section  174.”. 
 
