--------------------------The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970--------------------------
1 
 THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND  
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT,  1970  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINAR  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement  
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKING SOF EXISTING BANKS AND SHARE CAPITALS OF THE  
CORRESPONDING NEW BANKS  
3. Establishment of corresponding new banks and business thereof . 
3A. Trust not to be entered on the register.  
3B.  Register of beneficial owners . 
4. Undertaking of existing banks to vest in corresponding new banks . 
5. General effect of vesting.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION  
6. Payment of compensation . 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF CORRESPONDING NEW BANKS  
7. Head office and management . 
8. Corresponding new banks to be guided by the directions of the Central Government . 
9. Power of Central Government to make scheme . 
9A. Power of Reserve Bank to appoint additional director . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
10. Closure of accounts and disposal of profits . 
10A.  Annual general meeting . 
10B. Transfer of unpaid or unclaimed  dividend to Unpaid Dividend Account . 
11. Corresponding new bank deemed to be an Indian company . 
12. Removal of Chairman from office . 
12A. Bonus . 
13. Custodian to be public servant . 
14. Certain defects not to invalidate acts or proceedings . 
15. Indemnity . 
16A.  Arrangement with corresponding new bank on appointment of directors to prevail.  
16. References to existing banks on and from the commencement of this Act.  
17. Dissolution.  
18A. Supersession of Board in certain cases . 
18. Power to make regulations . 2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Amendment of certain enactments . 
20. Repeal and savings . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND  
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT,  1970  
ACT NO. 5 OF 1970  
[31st March , 1970.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of certain banking 
companies, having regard to their size, resources, coverage and organisation, in order to 
control the heights of the economy and to meet progressively, and serve better, the needs of 
development of the econom y in conformity with national policy and objectives and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Trans fer of Undertakings) Act, 1970.  
(2) The provisions of this Act (except section 21,  which shall come into force on the appointed day) 
shall be deemed to have come into force  on the 19th  day of July, 1969.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 14th day of February, 1970, being the day on which the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1970 ( Ord. 3 of 1970), was 
promul gated;  
(b) “banking company ” does not include a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of 
the C ompanies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(c) “commencement of this Act ” means the 19th day of July, 1969;  
(d) “corresponding  new bank ”, in relation to an existing bank, means the body corporate specified 
against such bank in column 2 of the First Schedule;  
(e) “Custodian ” means the person who becomes, or is appointe d, a Custodian under section 7;  
(f) “existing bank ” means a ban king company specified in column 1 of the First Schedule, being a 
compa ny the deposits of which, as shown in the return as on the last Friday of June, 1969, furnished 
to the Reserve Bank under section 27 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), we re not 
less than rupees fifty cr ores;  
1[(fa) “prescribed ” means prescribed by re gulations made under this Act;]  
(g) “Schedule ” means a Schedule to this Act;  
(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Banking Regulation  
Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act;  
1[(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined either in this Act or in the Ba nking 
Regulation Act ,1949 (10 of 1949)  but defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)  shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to th em in the Companies Act, 1956.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  4 
 CHAPTER II  
1[TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKING SOF EXISTING BANKS AND SHARE CAPITALS OF THE  
CORRESPONDING NEW BANKS ] 
3. Establishment of corresponding new banks and business thereof .—(1) On the commencement 
of this Act, there shall be constituted such corresponding new banks as are specified in the First Schedule.  
(2) The paid -up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall, until 
any provisi on is made in this behalf in any scheme made under section 9, be equal to the paid -up capital 
of the existing bank in relation to which it  is the corresponding new bank.  
2[3[(2A) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorised  capital of every corresponding new bank 
shall be three thousand crores of rupees divided into three hundred crores of fully paid -up shares of ten 
rupees each:  
Provided that the corresponding new bank may reduce the nominal or face value of the shares, and  
divide the authorised capital into such denomination as it may decide with the prior approval of the 
Reserve Bank:  
Provided further that the Central Government may in consultation with the Reserve Bank and by 
notification in the Official Gazette increase or reduce the authorised capital as it deems fit so however that 
the shares in all cases shall be fully paid -up shares.]  
(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the paid up capital of every 
corresponding new bank constituted under sub -section ( 1) may fro m time to time be increased by — 
(a) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding new bank may, after consultation 
with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, transfer from the 
reserve fund established by such bank to such paid -up capital;  
(b) such amounts as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, 
contribute to such paid up capital;  
4[(c) such amounts as the Board of Directors of the corresponding new bank may, after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, raise 
whether by public issue  5[or rights issue or by issue of bonus shares] or preferential allotment or 
private placement, of equity shares or prefere nce shares in accordance with the procedure as may be 
prescribed, so, however, that  the Central Government shall, at all times hold not less than fifty -one 
per cent. of the paid -up capital consisting of equity shares of each corresponding new bank:  
Provide d that the issue of preference shares shall be in accordance with the guidelines framed by 
the Reserve Bank specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue of each class of such 
preference shares (whether perpetual or irredeemable or redeema ble) and the terms and conditions 
subject to which, each class of preference shares may be issued.]  
6[(2BB) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) the paid -up capital of a corresponding 
new bank constituted under sub -section ( 1) may, from time to time and before any paid -up capital 
is 7[raised by public  issue 5[or rights issue or by issue of bonus shares]  or preferential allotment or private 
placement] under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2B), be reduced by — 
(a) the Central Government, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, by cancelling any paid -up 
capital which is lost, or  is unrepresented by available assets;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 3, for the heading (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -sections ( 2A) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
3. Subs. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 15, for sub -section ( 2A) (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 2, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
5. Ins. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 15 (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
6. Ins. by Act 8 of 1995, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -1-1995).  
7. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 2, for “raised by public issue” (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  5 
 (b) the Board of Directors, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous 
sanction of the Central Gove rnment, by paying off any paid -up capital which is in excess of the wants 
of the corresponding new bank:  
Provided  that in a case where such capital is lost, or is unrepresented by available assets because of 
amalgamation of another correspo nding new bank or a corresponding new bank as defined in clause ( d) of 
section 2 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition  and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 19 80 (40 of 19 80) 
with the corresponding new bank, such reduction may be done, either prospectively or  retrospectively, but 
not from a date earlier than the date of such amalgamation.  
(2BBA )(a) A corresponding new bank may , from time to time and after any paid -up capital has 
been  1[raised by public issue  2[or rights issue or  by issue of bonus shares]  or pr eferential allotment or 
private placement]  under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2B), by resolution passed at an annual general meeting 
of the  shareholders  entitled to vote, voting in person, or, where proxies are allowed, by proxy, and the 
votes cast in favour  of the resolution are not less than three times the number of the votes , if any, cast 
against the resolution by the shareholders so entitled and voting, reduce its paid -up capital in any way.  
(b) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , the pai d-up capital may be reduced  
by— 
(i) extinguishing or reducing the liability on any of its shares in respect of share capital not  
paid-up; 
(ii) either with or without extinguishing or reduci ng liability on any of its paid -up shares, 
cancelling any  paid-up capital which is lost, or is unr epresented by available assets; or 
(iii) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its paid -up shares, paying 
off any paid -up share capital  which is in excess of the wants of the corresponding new bank.  
(2BBB ) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2BB) or sub -section ( 2BBA ), the  
paid-up capital of a corresponding new bank shall not be reduced at any time so as to render it below 
twenty -five per cent . of the paid -up ca pital of that bank as on the date of commencement of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Amendment Act, 1995  (8 of 19 95).] 
(2C) The entire paid -up capital of a corresponding new bank, except the paid -up capital  1[raised from 
public by public issue  2[or rights issue or by issue of bonus shares]  or preferential allotment or private 
placement] under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2B), shall stand vested in , and allotted to , the Central 
Government.  
(2D) The shares o f every corresponding new bank  not held by the Central Government shall be freely 
transferable:  
Provided that no individual or company resident outside India or any company incorporated under 
any law not in force in India or any branch of such company, whether res ident outside India or not, shall 
at any time hold or acquire by transfer or otherwise shares of the corresponding new bank so that such 
investment in aggregate exceed the percentage, not being more than  twenty  per cent. of the paid -up 
capital, as may be s pecified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause , “company ” means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of  individuals.  
(2E) No shareholder of the corresponding new bank, other than the Central Government, shall be 
entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of  any shares held by him in excess of  3[ten per cent.] of the 
total voting rights of all the shareholders of the corresponding new bank.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 2, for “raised by public issue” (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 15 (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
3. Subs. by s.15, ibid., for “one per cent.” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  6 
 1[Provided that the shareholder holding any preference share capital in the corresponding new bank 
shall, in  respect  of such  capital, have a right to vote only on resolutions placed before such  
corresponding  new bank which directly affects the rights attached to his preference shares:  
Provided  further  that 2[no preference shareholder, other than the Central Government, shall be entitled 
to exercise voting rights in respect of preference shares held by him in excess of ten per cent.] of the total 
voting rights of all t he shareholders holding preference share capital only.]  
(2F) Every corresponding new bank shall keep at its head office a register, in one or more books, of 
the shareholder s (in this Act referred to as the register) and shall enter therein the following pa rticulars: — 
(i) the names, addresses and occupations, if any, of the shareholders and a statement of the shares 
held by each shareholder, distinguishing each share by its denoting number;  
(ii) the date on which each person is so entered as a shareholder;  
(iii) the date on which any person ceases to be a shareholder; and  
(iv) such other p articulars as may be prescribed : 
3[Provided  that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the shares held with a depository.]  
(2G) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2F), it shall be lawful for every 
corresponding new bank to keep the register in  computer  floppies or diskettes subject to such s afeguards 
as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872 ) a copy of, or 
extract from, the register, certified to be a true copy under the hand of an officer of the corresponding new 
bank authorised in this behalf by it, shall, in all legal proceedings, be admissible in evidence. ] 
(4) Every corresponding new ban k shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common 
seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and to 
contract, and may sue and be sued in its name.  
(5) Every corresponding new bank shall carry on and transact the business of banking as defined in 
clause ( b) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) and may engage in  4[one or 
more of the other forms of business] specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act . 
(6) Every corresponding new bank shall establish a reserve fund to which shall be transferred the 
share premiums and the balance, if any, standing to the credit of the reserve fund of the existing bank in 
relation to which it is the corresponding new ban k, and such further sums, if any, as may be transferred in 
accordance with the provisions of section 17 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949).  
5[(7) (i) The corresponding new bank shall, if so required by the Reserve Bank, act as agent of the 
Reserve Bank at all  places  in India where it has a branch, for — 
(a) paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money, bullion and securities on behalf of any 
Government in India; and  
(b) undertaking  and transacting any other business which the Reserve Bank may from time to 
time entrust to it.  
(ii) The terms and conditions on which any such agency business shall be carried on by the 
corresponding new bank on behalf of the Reserve Bank shall be such as  may be agreed upon.  
(iii) If no agreement can be reached on any matter referred to in clause ( ii), or if a dispute arises 
between the corresponding new bank and the Reserve Bank as to the interpretation of any agreement 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 16 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 65, for “one or more forms of business” (w.e.f.15 -2-1984).  
5. Ins. by s. 65, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  7 
 between them, the matter shall be r eferred to the Central Government and the decision of the Central 
Government thereon shall be final.  
(iv) The corresponding new bank may transact any business or perform any functions entrusted to it 
under clause ( i), by itself or through any agent approve d by the Reserve Bank.]  
1[3A. Trust not to be entered on the register .—Notwithstanding anything contained in  
sub-section ( 2F) of section 3, no notice of any trust, express, implied or constructive, shall be entered on 
the register, or be receivable, by the corresponding new bank: ] 
2[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a depository in respect of shares held by it as a 
registered owner on behalf of the beneficial owners.]  
3[3B. Register of beneficial owners .—The register of beneficial owner s maintained by a depository 
under section 11 of the Depositories Act, 1996  (22 of 1996) , shall be deemed to be a register of 
shareholders for the purpose of this Act.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of section 3, section 3A and this section , the expressions “beneficial 
owner ”, “depository ” and “registered owner ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
clause s (a), (e) and ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996  (22 of 1996) .] 
4. Undertaking of existing banks to v est in corresponding new banks .—On the commencement of 
this Act, the undertaking of every existing bank shall be transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
corresponding new bank.  
5. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertaking of each existing bank shall be deemed to include 
all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, cash 
balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising o ut of, such property 
as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the ownership, possession, power or control 
of the existing bank in relation to the undertaking, whether within or without India, and all books of 
account , registers, records a nd all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be 
deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the 
existing bank in relation to the undertaking.  
(2) If, according to the laws o f any country outside India, the provisions of this Act by themselves are 
not effective to transfer or vest any asset or liability situated in that country which forms part of the 
undertaking of an existing bank to, or in, the corresponding new bank, the a ffairs of the existing bank in 
relation to such asset or liability shall, on and from the commencement of this Act, stand entrusted to the 
chief executive officer for the time being of the corresponding new bankand the chief executive officer 
may exercise all powers and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the existing bank 
for the purpose of effectively transferring such assets an d discharging such liabilities.  
(3) The chief executive officer of the corresponding new bank shall, in ex ercise of the powers 
conferred on him by sub -section ( 2), take all such steps as may be required by the laws of any such 
country outside India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, and may either himself or 
through any person authorised by  him in this behalf realise any asset and discharge any liability of the 
existing bank.  
(4) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers 
of attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments o f whatever nature subsisting or having 
effect immediately before the commencement of this Act and to which the existing bank is a party or 
which are in favour of the existing bank shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the 
correspondi ng new bank, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in the place of 
the existing bank the corresponding new bank had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in 
favour  of the corresponding new bank.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 17 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  
3. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  8 
 (5) If, on the appoin ted day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
business of the undertaking which has been transferred under section 4, is pending by or against the 
existing bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason 
of the transfer of the undertaking of the existing bank or of anything contained in this Ac t but the suit, 
appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or agai nst the corresponding 
new bank.  
(6) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as applying to the assets, rights, powers, authorities and 
privileges and property, movable and immovable, cash balances and investments in any country outside 
India (and other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property) and borrowings, liabilities and 
obligations of whatever kind subsisting at the commencement of this Act, of any existing bank operating 
in that country if, under the laws in force in that country, it is not permissible for a banking company, 
owned or controlled by Government, to carry on  the business of banking there.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION  
6. Payment of compensation .—(1) Every existing bank shall be given by the Central Government 
such compensation in respect of the transfer, under section 4, to the corresponding new bank of the 
undertaking of the existing bank as is specified against each su ch bank in the Second Schedule.  
(2) The amount of compensation referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be given to every existing  bank, 
at its option, — 
(a) in case (to be paid by cheque drawn on the Reserve Bank) in three equal annual instalments, 
the amount of each instalment carrying interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum from t he 
commencement of this Act, or  
(b) in saleab le or otherwise transferable promissory notes or stock certificates of the Central 
Government issued and repayable at pa r, and maturing at the end of — 
(i) ten years from the commencement of this Act and carrying interest from such 
commencement at the rate of four and  a half per cent. per annum, or  
(ii) thirty years from the commencement of this Act and carrying interest from such 
commencement at the rate of five and  a half per cent. per annum, or  
(c) partly in cash (to be paid by cheque  drawn on the Reserve Bank) and partly in such number of 
securities specified in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii), or both, of clause ( b), as may be requi red by 
the existing bank, or  
(d) partly in such number of securities specified in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b) and partly in such 
number of securities specified in sub -clause ( ii) of that clause, as may be  required by the existing 
bank.  
(3) The first of the three equal annual instalments referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall be 
paid, and the  securities referred to in clause ( b) of that sub -section shall be issued, within sixty days from 
the date of receipt by the Central Government of the option referred to in that sub -section, or where no 
such option has been exercised, from the latest date before which such optio n ought to have been 
exercised.  
(4) The option referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be exercised by every existing bank before the 
expiry of a period of three months from the appointed day (or within such further time, not exceeding 
three months, as the Central Government may, on the application of the existing bank, allow) and the 
option so exercised shall be final and shall not be altered or rescind ed after it has been exercised.  
(5) Any existing bank which omits or fails to exercis e the option referred to in sub -section ( 2), within 
the time specified in sub -section ( 4), shall be deemed to have opted for payment in securities specified in 
sub-clause ( i) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any existing bank may, before the expiry of 
three months from the appointed day (or within such further time, not exceeding three months, as the 9 
 Central Government may, on the application of the existin g bank, allow) make an application in writing to 
the Central Government for an interim payment of an amount equal to seventy -five per cent. of the 
amount of the paid -up capital of such bank, as on the commencement of this Act, indicating therein 
whether th e payment is desired in cash or in securities specified in  sub-section ( 2), or in both.  
(7) The Central Government shall, within sixty days from the receipt of the application referred to in 
sub-section ( 6), make the interim payment to the existing bank in  accordance with the option indicated in 
such application.  
(8) The interim payment made  to an existing bank under sub -section ( 7) shall be set off against the 
total amount of compensation payable to such existing bank under this Act and the balance of the 
compensation remaining outstanding after such payment shall be given to the existing bank in accordance 
with the option exercised, or deemed to have been exercised, under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5), as 
the case may be:  
Provided that where any part of the interim payment is obtained by an existing bank in cash, the 
payment so obtained shall be set off, in the first instance, against the first instalment  of the cash payment 
referred in sub -section ( 2), and in case the payment so obtained exceeds the a mount of the first 
instalment, the excess amount shall be adjusted against the second instalment and the balance of such 
excess amount, if any, against the third instalment of the cash payment.  
(9) Any payment purported to have been made to an existing ban k under sub -section ( 3) of section 15 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1969 (22 of 1969), shall be 
deducted by the Central Government from the amount of the interim payment made to such existing bank 
under sub -sectio n (7), or where no such interim payment has been made, from the total amount of the 
compensation due to such existing bank, and the amount so deducted shall be paid by the Central 
Government  to the corresponding new bank.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF CORRESPONDING NEW BA NKS  
7. Head office and management .—(1) The head office of each corresponding new bank shall be at 
such place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
and, until any such place is so  specified, shall be at such place at which the head office of the existing 
bank, in relation to which it is the corresponding new bank, is on the commencement of this Act, located.  
(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs a nd business of a 
corresponding new bank shall vest in a Board of Directors which shall be entitled to exercise all such 
powers and do all such acts and things as the corresponding new bank is  authorised to exercise and do.  
(3) (a) As soon as may be after t he appointed day, the Central Government shall, in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank, constitute the first Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, consisting of not 
more than seven persons, to be appointed by the Central Government, and every dire ctor so appointed 
shall hold office until the Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank is constituted in accordance 
with t he scheme made under section 9:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary in the int erests of the 
corresponding new bank so to do, remove a person from the membership of the first Board of Directors 
and appoint  any other person in his place.  
(b) Every member of the first Board of Directors (not being an officer of the Central Government o r 
of the Reserve Bank) shall receive such remuneration as is equal to the remuneration which a member of 
the Board of Directors of the existing bank was entitled to receive immediately befor e the commencement 
of this Act.  
(4) Until the first Board of Direc tors is appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 3), 
the general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of a corresponding 
new bank shall vest in a Custodian, who shall be the chief executive officer of that bank and may exercise 
all powers and do all acts and things as may be exercised or done by that bank.  10 
 (5) The Chairman of an existing bank holding office as such immediately before the commencement 
of this Act, shall be the Custodian of the corresponding new bank and shall receive the same emoluments 
as he was receiving i mmedi ately before such commencement:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if the Chairman of an existing bank declines to become, 
or to continue to function as, a Custodian of the corresponding new bank, or, if it is of opinion that it is 
necessary in  the interests of the corresponding new bank so to do, appoint any other person as the 
Custodian of a corresponding new bank and the Custodian so appointed shall receive such emoluments as 
the Central Governm ent may specify in this behalf.  
(6) The Custodia n shall hold office during the plea sure of the Central Government.  
8. Corresponding new banks to be guided by the direct ions of the Central Government .—Every 
corresponding new bank shall, in the discharge of its functions, be guided by such directions in r egard to 
matters of policy involving public interest as the Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank, give.  
9. Power of Cen tral Government to make scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, make a scheme for carrying out the  provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the said scheme may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the capital struct ure of the corresponding new bank 1***. 
(b) the constitution of the Board of Directors, by whatever name called, of the corresponding new 
bank and all such matters in connection therewith or incidental thereto as the Central Government 
may conside r to be n ecessary or expedient;  
(c) the reconstitution of any corresponding new bank into two or more corporations, the 
amalgamation of any corresponding new bank with any other corresponding new bank or with 
another banking institution, the transfer of the whole o r any part of the undertaking of a 
2[corresponding new bank to any other corresponding new bank or banking institution] or the transfer 
of the whole or any part of the undertaking of any other banking instituti on to a corresponding new 
bank;  
3[(ca) the manner in which the excess number of directors shall retire under second proviso to 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 3);] 
(d) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary to carry out the 
provisions of this Act.  
4[(3) Every Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank constituted under any scheme made 
under sub -section ( 1), shall include — 
(a) 5[not more than four whole -time directors] to be appointed by the Central Government after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank;  
(b) one  Director who is an official of the Central Government to be nominated by the  
Central Government:  
Provided that no such Director shall be a Director of any other corresponding new bank.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “correspo nding new bank ” shall include 
a corresponding new bank within the meaning of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980);  
                                                           
1. Certain words omitted by Act 37 of 1994, s. 6 (w.e.f. 3 -4-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 31, for “corresponding new bank to any other banking institution” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16-10-2006).  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 6, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 3 -4-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 3, for “not more than two whole -time directors” (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  11 
 1[(c) one director, possessing necessary expertise and experience in matters relating to regulation 
or supervision of commercial banks, to be nominated by the Central Government on there  
commendation of the Reserve Bank;]  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this c lause, “an officer of the Reserve Bank ” includes an 
officer of the Reserve Bank who is deputed by that bank under section 54AA of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) to any institution referred to therein;  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(e) one Director, from among such of the employees of the corresponding new bank who are 
workmen under clause ( s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) , to be 
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be specified in a scheme made un der 
this section;  
(f) one Director, from among the employees of the corresponding new bank who are not workmen 
under clause( s) of section 2 of the  Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) , to be nominated by the 
Central Government after consultation with  the Reserve Bank;  
(g) one Director who has been a Chartered Accountant for not less than fifteen years to be 
nominated by the Central Government after consultation with the Reserve Bank;  
(h) subject to the provisions of clause ( i), not more than six directors to be nominated by the 
Central Government;  
3[(i) where the capital issued under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2B) of section 3 is — 
(I) not more than sixteen per cent.  of the total paid -up capital, one director;  
(II) more than sixteen per cent. but  not more than thirty -two per cent. of the total paid -up 
capital, two directors;  
(III) more than thirty -two per cent. of the total paid -up capital, three directors,  
to be elected by the shareholders, other than the Central Government, from amongst themselv es: 
Provided that on the assumption of charge after election of any such director under this clause, 
equal number of directors nominated under clause ( h) shall retire in such manner as may be specified 
in the scheme:  
Provided further that in case the numbe r of directors elected, on or before the commencement of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institutions Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2006  (45 of 2006) , in a corresponding new bank exceed the number of directors 
specifi ed in sub -clause ( I) or sub -clause ( II) or sub -clause ( III), as the case may be, such excess 
number of directors elected before such commencement shall retire in such manner as may be 
specified in the scheme and such directors shall not be entitled to clai m any compensation for the 
premature ret irement of their term of office .] 
(3A) The  directors to be nominated under clause ( h) or to be elected under clause ( i) of  
sub-section ( 3) shall — 
(A) have  special knowledge or practical experience in respect of one or more of  the following  
Matters , namely: — 
(i) agricultural and rural economy , 
(ii) banking , 
(iii) co-operation , 
(iv) economics , 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 3, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
2. Clause ( d) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  12 
 (v) finance , 
(vi) law , 
(vii) small scale industry , 
(viii) any  other matter the special knowledge of, and practical experience in, which would, in 
the opinion of the Reserve Bank, be useful to the corresponding new bank;  
(B) represent the interests of depositors; or  
(C) represent the interest of farmers, workers and artisans.  
1[(3AA) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 3A) and notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no person shall be eligible to 
be elected as director under clause  (i) of sub -section ( 3) unless he is a person having fit and proper status 
based upon track record, integrity and such other criteria as the Reserve Bank may notify from time to 
time in this regard.  
(3AB) The Reserve Bank may also specify in the notificati on issued under sub -section ( 3AA), the 
authority to determine the fit and proper status, the manner of such determination, the procedure to be 
followed for such determination and such other matters as may be considered necessary or incidental 
thereto;]  
(3B) Where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that any director of a corresponding new Bank elected 
under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 3) does not fulfil  the requirements of  2[sub-sections ( 3A) and ( 3AA)] it 
may, after giving to such director and the bank a rea sonable opportunity of being heard, by order, remove 
such director and on such removal, the Board of Directors shall co -opt any other person fulfilling the 
requirements of  2[sub-sections ( 3A) and ( 3AA)] as a director in place of the person so removed till a 
director is duly elected by the shareholders of the corresponding new bank in the next annual general 
meeting and the person so co -opted shall be deemed to have been duly elected by the shareholders of the 
corresponding new bank as a director.]  
(4) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, make a scheme to amend 
or vary any sch eme made under sub -section ( 1). 
3[(5) On and from the date of coming into operation of a scheme made under  this section with respect 
to any of the matters referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) or any matters incidental, consequent ial 
and supplemental thereto, — 
(a) the scheme shall be binding on the corresponding new bank or corporations or banking 
institutions, and also on the members, if any, the depositors, and other creditors and employees of 
each of them and on any other persons having any right or liability i n relation to any of them 
including the trustees or other persons, managing or in any other manner connected with, any 
provident fund or other fund maintained by any of them;  
(b) the properties and assets of the corresponding new bank, or as the case may b e, of the banking 
institution shall, by virtue of and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand transferred to, and vested 
in, and the liabilities of the corresponding new bank, or, as the case may be, of the banking institution 
shall, by virtue of, and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand transferred to, and become the 
liabilities of, the corporation or corporations brought into existence by reconstitution of the banking 
institution or the correspondin g new bank, as the case may be.  
Explanation  4[I].—In this section, “banking institution ” means a banking company and includes 
the State Ban k of India or a subsidiary bank ]. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “sub -section (3A)” (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act  1 of 1984, s. 66 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
4. Explanation  numbered as Explanation I  thereof by Act 66 of 1988, s. 31 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  13 
 1[Explanation II .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “corresponding new bank ” 
shall include a corresponding new bank within the meaning of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Underta kings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980) ]. 
2[(6)] Every scheme made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
3[which may be comprised in one session or in two or m ore successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the scheme or both Houses agree that the scheme should not be made, t he 
scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that scheme.  
4[9A. P ower of Reserve Bank to appoint additional director .—(1) If the Reserve Bank is of the 
opinion that in the interest of banking policy or in the public interest or in the interests of the 
corresponding new bank or its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it may, from tim e to time, by order in 
writing appoint, with effect from such date as may be specified in the order, one or more persons to hold 
office as additional directors of the corresponding new bank.  
(2) Any person appointed as an additional directo r in pursuance of this section — 
(a) shall hold office during the pleasure of the Reserve Bank and subject thereto for a period not 
exceeding three years or such further periods not exceeding three years at a time as the Reserve Bank 
may specify;  
(b) shall not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything 
done or omitted to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation 
thereto; and  
(c) shall not be required to hold qualification s hares in the corresponding new bank.  
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any proportion of the total number of directors of the corresponding 
new bank, any additional director appointed under this section shall not be taken into account.]  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANE OUS 
10. Closure of ac counts and disposal of profits .—(1) Every corresponding new bank shall cause its 
books to be closed and balance d on the 31st day of December 5[or such other date in each yea r as the 
Central Government may  by notification in the Official Gazette, specify] and shall appoint, with the 
previous approval of the Reserve Bank,  and auditors  for the audit of its accounts:  
6[Provided that with a view to facilitating the transition from one period of accounting to another 
period of accounting under this sub -section, the Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary or expedient for the closing and 
balancing of, o r for other matters relating to  the books in r espect of the concerned years.]  
(2) Every auditor of a corresponding new bank shall be a person who is qualified to act as an auditor 
of a company under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ), and shall receive such 
remuneration as th e Reserve Bank may fix in consultati on with the Central Government.  
(3) Every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance -sheet and profit and loss 
account and a list of all books kept by the corresponding new bank, and it shall be the duty  of the auditor 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 31 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
2. Sub -section ( 5) re-numbered as sub -section ( 6) thereof  by Act 1 of 1984, s. 66 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 66, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 4 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
5. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 32, for “of each year” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
6. Ins. by s. 32, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  14 
 to examine the balance -sheet and profit and loss account with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto, 
and in the performan ce of his duties, the auditor — 
(a) shall have, at all reasonable times, access to the books, accounts and other do cuments  of the 
corresponding new bank,  
(b) may, at the expense of the corresponding new bank, employ accountants or other persons to 
assist him in i nvestigating such accounts, and  
(c) may, in relation to such accounts, examine the Custodian or any officer or employee  of the 
corresponding new bank.  
(4) Every auditor of a corresponding new bank shall make a report to the Central Government upon 
the annual balance -sheet and accounts and in every such report shall state — 
(a) whether, in his opinion, the balance -sheet is a full and fair balance -sheet containing all the 
necessary particulars and is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the affairs of the 
corresponding new bank, and in case he had called fo r any explanation or information, whether it has 
been given and whether it is satisfactory;  
(b) whether or not the transactions of the corresponding new bank, which have come to his notice, 
have  been within the powers of that  bank;  
(c) whether  or not the returns received from the offices and branches of the corresponding new 
bank have been found adequat e for the purpose of his audit;  
(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance of profit or loss for the peri od 
covered by such ac count; and  
(e) any other matter which he considers should be brought to the no tice of the Central 
Government.  
1[Explanation I .—For the purposes of this Act — 
(a) the balance -sheet shall not be treated as not disclosing a true and fair view of the affairs of  
the corresponding new bank, and  
(b) the profit and loss account shall not be treated as not showing a true balance of profit or 
loss for the period covered by such account,  
merely by reason of the fact that the balance -sheet or, as the case may be, the profit and loss account 
does not disclose any matters which are by the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  
(10 of 1949) , read with the relevant provisions of this Act or any other Act , not required to be 
disclosed.  
Explanation II.—For the purpos es of this Act the accounts of the corresponding new bank shall 
not be deemed as having not been properly drawn up on the ground merely that they do not disclose 
certain mat ters if — 
(i) those matters are such as the corresponding new bank is, by virtue of any provision 
contained in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) , read with the relevant provisions of 
this Act, or any other Act , not required to disclose; and  
(ii) the provisions referred to in clause ( i) are specified in the balance -sheet and profit and 
loss account of the corresponding new bank or in the auditor ’s report. ] 
(5) The report of the auditor shall be verified, signed and transmi tted to the Central Government.  
(6) The auditor shall also forward a copy of the audit report to the corresponding ne w bank and to the 
Reserve Bank.  
(7) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets, contributions to staff 
and superannuation funds and all other matters for which provision is necessary under any law, or which 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 67 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  15 
 are usually provided for by banking companies, a corresponding new bank 1[may, out of its net profits, 
declare a dividend and retain the surplus, if any] . 
2[(7A) Every corresponding new bank shall fu rnish to the Central Government 3[and to the Reserve 
Bank ] the annual balance -sheet, the profit an d loss account, and the auditor’ s report and a report by its 
Board of directors on the working and activities of the bank during the period covered by the accounts. ] 
(8) The Central Government shall cause every auditor’s report and report on the working and 
activities of each corresponding new bank to be laid  4[as soon as may be after they are received before 
each House of Parliament  5***]. 
 2[(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Central Government may, at any time, 
appoint such number of auditors as it thinks fit to examine and report on the accounts of a corresponding 
new bank and the auditors so appointed shall have all the ri ghts, privileges and authority in relation to the 
audit of the accounts of the corresponding new bank which an auditor appointed by the corresponding 
new bank has under this section.]  
6[10A . Annual general meeting .—(1) A general meeting (in this Act referred to as an annual general 
meeting) of every corresponding new bank which has issued capital under clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 2B) of section 3 shall be held at the place of the head office of the bank in each year at such 
time as shall from time to time be specified by the Board of Directors:  
Provided  that such annual general meeting shall be held before the expiry of six weeks from the date 
on which the balance sheet, together with the profit and loss account and auditor ’s report is under  
sub-section (7A) of section 10, forwarded to the Central Government or to the Reserve Bank whichever 
date is earlier.  
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting  7[shall be entitled to discuss,  approve and 
adopt] the balance -sheet and the profit and loss account of the corresponding new bank made up to the 
previous 31st day of March, the report of the Board of Directors on the working and activities of the 
corresponding new bank for the period covered by the accounts and the auditor ’s report on the  
balance -sheet and accounts. ] 
8[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply during the period for which the Board of Directors 
of a corresponding new bank had been superseded under sub -section ( 1) of section 18A:  
Provided that the Administrator may, if he considers it appropriate in the interest of the corresponding 
new bank whose Board of Directors had been superseded, call annual general meeting in accordance with 
the provisions of this section.]  
9[10B. Transfer of unpaid or u nclaimed divi dend to Unpaid Dividend Account. —(1) Where, after 
after the commencement of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and 
Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 2006  (45 of 2006) , a dividend has been declared by a 
corresponding new bank but has not been paid or claimed within thirty days from the date of declaration, 
to, or by, any shareholder entitled to the payment of the dividend, the corresponding new bank shall, 
within seven days from the date of the expiry of such period of thirty days, transfer the total amount of 
dividend which remains unpaid or unclaimed within the said period of thirty days, to a special account to 
be called “Unpaid Dividend Account of ... (the name o f the corresponding new bank).  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, the expression “dividend which remains unpaid ” means any 
dividend the warrant in respect thereof has not been enchased  or which has otherwise not been paid or 
claimed.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 7, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 67 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 67, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
5. Certain words omitted by Act 81 of 1985, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1986).  
6. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 8 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
7. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 16-10-2006).  
8. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
9. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  16 
 (2) Where the whole or any  part of any dividend, declared by a corresponding new bank before the 
commencement of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial 
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 2006  (45 of 2006 ), remains unpaid at such commencement,  the 
corresponding new bank shall, within a period of six months from such commencement, transfer such 
unpaid amount to the account referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any money transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account of a corresponding new bank in 
pursuance of this section which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date of 
such transfer, shall be transferred by the corresponding new bank to the Investor Education and Protection 
Fund established under sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 205C of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
(4) The money transferred under sub -section ( 3) to the Investor Education and Protection Fund shall 
be utilised for the purposes and in the manner specified in section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 195 6).] 
11. Corresponding new bank deemed to be an Indian company .—For the purposes of the  
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 ), every corresponding new bank shall be deemed to be an Indian 
company and a company in which the publi c are substantially interested.  
12. R emoval of Chairman from office .—(1) Every person holding office, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, as Chairman of an existing bank shall, if he becomes Custodian of the 
corresponding new bank, be deemed, on such commencement, to have vacated office as such Chairman.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), every officer or other employee of an existing bank 
shall become, on the commencement of this Act, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the 
corresponding ne w bank and shall hold his office or service in that bank on the same terms and conditions 
and with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if 
the undertaking of the existing bank had not been transferred to and vested in the corresponding new bank 
and continue to do so unless and until his employment in the corresponding new bank is terminated or 
until his remuneration, terms or conditions are duly altered  by the corresponding new bank.  
(3) For the persons  who immediately before the commencement of this Act were the trustees for any 
pension, provident, gratuity or other like fund constituted for the officers or other employees of an 
existing bank, there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the C entral Government may, by 
general or special order, specify.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other emp loyee from an 
existing bank to a corresponding new bank shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any 
compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  
1[12A. Bonus .—(1) No officer or other employee [other than an employee within the meaning of 
clause ( 13) of section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965)] of a corresponding new bank 
shall be entitled to be paid any bonus.  
(2) No employee of a corresponding new bank, being an employee within the meaning of clause ( 13) 
of section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965  (21 of 1965) , shall be entitled to be paid any bonus except 
in accordance w ith the provisions of that Act.  
(3) The prov isions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of 
any court, tribunal or other authority and notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of 
this Act or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947),  or any other law for the time being in force 
or any practice, usage or custom or any contract, agreement, settleme nt, award or other instrument.]  
13. Obligati ons as to fidelity and secrecy .—(1) Every corresponding new bank shall observe, except 
as otherwise required by law, the practices and usages customary among bankers, and, in particular, it 
shall not divulge any information relating to or to the affairs of its constituents except in circumstances in 
which it is, in accordance with law or practi ces and usages customary among bankers, necessary or 
appropriate for the corresponding new ba nk to divulge such information.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 64 of 1984, s. 4 ( w.e.f. 11 -9-1984 ). 17 
 (2) Every director, member of a local board or a committee, or auditor, adviser, officer or other 
employee of a corresponding new b ank shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of 
fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Third Schedule . 
(3) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank shall, as soon as possible, make a declaration of 
fidelity and secrecy in the form  set out in the Third Schedule.  
1[(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (30 of 2005).]  
14. Custodian to be public servant .—Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank shall be 
deemed to be a public servant for the purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
15. Certain defects not to invalidate acts or pr oceedings .—(1) All acts done by the Custodian, 
acting in good faith, shall, notwithstanding any defect in his appointment  or in the procedure, be valid.  
(2) No act or proceeding of any Board of Directors or a local board or committee of a corresponding 
new bank shall be invalid merely on the ground of the exi stence of any vacancy in, or defect in the 
constitution of, such board or  committee, as the case may be.  
(3) All acts done by a person acting in good faith as a director or member of a local board or 
committee of a corresponding new bank shall be valid, no twithstanding that it may afterwards be 
discovered that his appointment was invalid by reason of any defect or disqualification or had terminated 
by virtue of any provision contained in any law for the time being in force:  
Provided that nothing in this sec tion shall be deemed to give validity to any act by a director or 
member of a local board or committee of a corresponding new bank after his appointment has been shown 
to the corresponding new bank to be  invalid or to have terminated.  
16. Indemnity .—(1) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank and every officer of the Central 
Government or of the Reserve Bank and every officer or other employee of a corresponding new bank, 
shall be indemnified by such bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in or in relation to the 
discharge of his duties except such as have been caused by  his own wilful act or default.  
(2) A director or member of a local board or committee of a corresponding new bank shall not be 
responsible for any loss or expense caused to such bank by the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, 
or title to, any property or security acquired or take n on behalf of the corresponding new bank, or by the 
insolvency or wrongful act of any customer or debtor, or by anything done in or in relation to the 
execution of the duties of his office, unless such loss, expense, insufficiency or deficiency was due to  any 
wilful act or default on the p art of such director or member.  
2[16A. Arrangement with corresponding new bank on appointment of directors to  prevail .—(1) 
Where any arrangement entered into by a corresponding new bank with a company provides for the 
appointment by the corresponding new bank of one or more directors of such company, such provision 
and any appointment of directors made in pursuance thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act,  1956 (1 of 1956), or in any other law for the 
time being in force or in the memorandum, articles of association or any other instrument relating to the 
Company, and any provision regarding share qualification, age limit, number of directorships, removal 
from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any such law or instrument aforesaid, shall 
not apply to any director appointed by the corresponding new bank in pursuance o f the arrangement as 
aforesaid.  
(2) Any director appoin ted as aforesai d shall — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the corresponding new bank and may be removed or 
substituted by any person by order in writing  of the corresponding new bank;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2005, s. 34 and Sch. (w.e.f. 14 -12-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 68 (w.e.f. 15-2-1984).  18 
 (b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director o r anything in relation 
thereto;  
(c) not  be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of direct ors liable to such retirement.]  
17. References to existing banks on and fro m the commencement of this Act .—Any reference to 
any existing bank in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or other instrument shall, in so far as 
it relates to the undertaking which has been transferred by section 4, be construed as a reference  to the 
corresponding new bank.  
18. Dissolution .—No provision of law rela ting to winding up of corporations shall apply to a 
corresponding new bank and no corresponding new bank shall be placed in liquidation save by order of 
the Central Government and i n such manner as it may direct.  
1[18A. Supersession of Board in certain cases .—(1) Where the Central Government, on the 
recommendation of the Reserve Bank, is satisfied that in the public interest or for preventing the affairs of 
any corresponding new bank being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the deposito rs or 
the corresponding new bank or for securing the proper management of any corresponding new bank, it is 
necessary so to do, the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, 
supersede the Board of Directors of such correspond ing new bank for a period not exceeding six months 
as may be specified in the order:  
Provided that the period of supersession of the Board of Directors may be extended from time to time, 
so, however, that the total period shall not exceed twelve months.  
(2) The Central Government may, on supersession of the Board of Directors of the corresponding 
new bank under sub -section ( 1), appoint, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, for such period as it may 
determine, an Administrator (not being an officer of the Central Government or a State Government) who 
has experience in law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy.  
(3) The Central Government may issue such directions to the Administrator as it may deem 
appropriate and the Administrator shall be bound to fo llow such directions.  
(4) Upon making the order of supersession of the Board of Directors of the corresponding new bank, 
notwithstanding a nything contained in this Act, — 
(a) the chairman, managing directors and other directors shall, as from the date of su persession, 
vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force, be exercised and discharged by or on behalf of the Board of 
Directors of such  corresponding new bank, or by a resolution passed in general meeting of such 
corresponding new bank, shall, until the Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank is 
reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by the Administrator appointed by the Cen tral Government 
under sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that the power exercised by the Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding that such 
power is exercisable by a resolution passed in the general meeting of the corresponding new bank.  
(5) The Central Governm ent may constitute, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, a committee of 
three or more persons who have experience in law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy to assist 
the Administrator in the discharge of his duties.  
(6) The committee shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure as may be 
specified by the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  19 
 (7) The salary and allowances payable to the Administrator and the members of the committee 
constituted under sub -section ( 5) by the Central Governm ent shall be such as may be specified by the 
Central Government and be payable by the concerned corresponding new bank.  
(8) On and before the expiration of two months before expiry of the period of supersession of the 
Board of Directors as specified in the  order issued under sub -section ( 1), the Administrator of the 
corresponding new bank, shall call the general meeting of the corresponding new bank to elect new 
directors and reconstitute its Board of Directors.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any  other law or in any contract, the memorandum or 
articles of association, no person shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or termination of 
his office.  
(10) The Administrator appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall vacate office immediately after the 
Board of Directors of the corresponding new bank has been reconstituted.]  
19. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank may, 
after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sancti on of the Central Government, 1[by 
notification in the Official Gazette,]  make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or 
any scheme made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is expedient for the purpose 
of givin g effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the regulations may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the powers, functions and duties of local boards and restrictions, conditions or limitations, if 
any, subject to which they may be exercised or performed, the formation and constitution of local 
committees and committees of local board (including the number of members of any such 
committee), the powers, functions and duties of such committees, the holding of meetings of local 
committees and committees , of local boards and t he conduct of business thereat;  
(b) the manner in which the business of the local boards shall be transacted and the procedur e in 
conn ection therewith;  
2[(ba) the nature of shares of the corresponding new bank, the manner in which and the 
conditions subject to which  shares may be held and transferred and generally all matters relating to 
the rig hts and duties of shareholders;  
(bb) the ma intenance of register, and the particulars to be entered in the register in add ition to 
those specified in sub -section ( 2F) of section 3, the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of 
register on computer floppies  or diskettes, inspection and closure  of the register and all othe r matters 
connected there with:  
(bc) the manner in which general meetings shall be conven ed, the procedure to be followed 
thereat and the manner in which voting rights may be exercised;  
(bd) the holding of meetings of shareholders and the bus iness to be transacted thereat;  
(be) the manner in which notices may be served on behalf of the corresponding new bank upon  
shareholders or other persons;  
(bf) the manner in which the directors nominated under clause ( h) of sub -section (3) of section 9 
shall retire;]  
(c) the delegation of powers and functions of the board of directors of a corresponding new bank 
to the general manager, director, officer or other employee of that bank;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 5-5-1986).  
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  20 
 (d) the conditions or limitations subject to whic h the corresponding new bank may appoint 
advisers, officers or other employees and fix their remuneration and other terms and conditions of 
service;  
(e) the duties and conduct of advisers, officers or other employees  of the corresponding new 
bank;  
(f) the establishment and maintenance of superannuation, pension, provident or other funds for 
the benefit of officers or other employees of the corresponding new bank or of the dependants of such 
officers or other employees and the granting of superannuation allo wances, annuities and pens ions 
payable out of such funds;  
(g) the conduct and defence of legal proceedings by or against the corresponding new bank and 
the manner of signing pleadings;  
(h) the provision of a seal for the corresponding new bank and the man ner and effect of its use;  
(i) the form and manner in which contracts binding on the correspo nding new bank may be 
executed;  
(j) the conditions and the requirements subject to which loans or advances may be made or bills 
may be discounted or purchased  by th e corresponding new bank;  
(k) the persons or authorities who shall administer any pension, provident or other fund 
constituted for the benefit of officers or other employees of the correspondin g new bank or their 
dependants;  
(l) the preparation and submission of statements of programmes of activities and financial 
statements of the corresponding new bank and the period for which and the time within which such 
statements and estimates are to  be prepared and submitted; and  
(m) gen erally for the efficient conduct of the affairs  of the corresponding new bank.  
(3) Until any regulation is made under sub -section ( 1), the articles of association of the existing bank 
and every regulation, rule, bye -law or order made by the existing bank s hall, if in force at the 
commencement of this Act, be deemed to be the regulations made under sub -section ( 1) and shall have 
effect accordingly and any reference therein to any authority of the existing bank shall be deemed to be a 
reference to the corresponding a uthority  of the corresponding new bank and until any such corresponding 
authority is constituted under this Act, shall be de emed to refer to the Custodian.  
1[(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made under this Act by th e Board of 
directors , of a corresponding new bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government 
shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses a gree that the regulation 
should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of a nything previous ly done under that regulation.]  
20. Amendment of cer tain enactments .—(1) In the Banking Regul ation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), — 
(a) in section 34A, in sub -section ( 3), for the words “and any subsidiary bank ”, the words, figures 
and brackets “a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) and any subsidiary bank ” shall be 
substituted;  
(b) in section 36AD, in sub -section ( 3), for the words “and any subs idiary bank ”, the words, 
figures and brackets “a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 69 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  21 
 Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970), and any subsidiary 
bank ” shall be substituted;  
(c) in section 51, for the words “or any other banking institution notified by the Central 
Government in this behalf ”, the words, figures and brackets “or any corresponding new bank 
constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transf er of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970 (5 of 1970), or any other banking institution notified by the Central Government in this 
behalf ” shall be substituted;  
(d) in the Fifth Schedule, in Part I of paragraph 1, in clause ( e), the Explanations  shall be deem ed 
never to have been inserted.  
(2) In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), in section 2, in clause ( bb), for the words “and 
any subsidiary bank ”, the words, figures and brackets “a corresponding new bank constituted under 
section 3 of the Banking Compan ies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970), 
and any subsidiary bank ” shall be substituted.  
(3) In the Banking Companies (Legal Practitioners, Clients, Accounts) Act, 1949 (46 of 1949), in 
section 2, in clause ( a), for the words “and any subsidiary bank ”, the words, figures and brackets “a 
corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970), and any subsidiary bank ” shall be substituted.  
(4) In the Deposit Insurance Corpor ation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961), — 
(a) in section 2, — 
(i) after clause ( e), the following clau se shall be inserted, namely: — 
(ee) “corresponding new bank ” means a corresponding new bank constituted under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undert akings) Act, 1970  
(5 of 1970) ; 
(ii) in clause ( g),— 
(a) for the words “or a banking company ”, the words “a corresponding new bank or a 
banking company ”, and  
(b) for the words “with a banking company ”, the words “with a corresponding new bank 
or with a banking company ”, 
shall be substituted;  
(iii) in clause ( i), after the words “banking company ”, the words “or a corresponding new 
bank ” shall be inserted;  
(b) section 13 shall be re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof and after sub -section ( 1) as so  
re-numbered, the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(2) The provisions of clauses ( a), (b), (c), (d) and ( h) of sub -section (1) shall apply to a 
corresponding new bank as they apply to a banking company. ” 
(5) In the State Agricultural Credit Corpora tions Act, 1968 (60 of 1968), — 
(a) in section 2, after clause ( i), the following clau se shall be inserted, namely: — 
(ii) “corresponding new bank ” means a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undert akings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970)';  
(b) after the words “subsidiary banks ” or “subsidiary bank ”, as the case may be, occurring in 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 5, in clause ( b) of section 9 and in the proviso to section 18, 
the words “corresponding new banks ” or “corresponding new bank ”, as the case may be, shall be 
inserted.  
21. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Ordinance, 1970 ( Ord. 3 of 1970), is hereby repealed.  22 
 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal and notwithstanding any judgment, decree or or der of any court or 
tribunal, — 
(a) any action taken, or purported to have been taken, or anything done, or purported to have been 
done, between the 19th day of July, 1969, and the 10th day of February, 1970, by any corresponding 
new bank purported to have been constituted under the Banking Companies (Acquisitio n and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1969 (8 of 1969), or the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Act, 1969 (22 of 1969), or by any person purporting to act on behalf of such bank 
and any right, obligation or liability acquir ed or incurred, between the said dates, by or on behalf of 
such corresponding new bank shall be deemed to have been taken, done, acquired or incurred under 
the provisions of this Act by or on behalf of the corresponding n ew bank constituted thereunder;  
(b) any action taken, or purported to have been taken, or anything done, or purported to have been 
done, between the 10th day of February, 1970, and the appointed day, by an existing bank or by any 
person acting on behalf of such bank, and any right, obligati on or liability acquired or incurred, 
between the said dates, by or on behalf of such existing bank shall be deemed to have been taken, 
done, acquired or incurred under the provisions of this Act by or on behalf of the corresponding n ew 
bank constituted th ereunder;  
(c) anything done or any action taken, including any order made, notification issued or directions 
given under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1970  
(3 of 1970), shall be deemed to have been done, taken , made, issued or given, as the case may be, 
under the corres ponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) Any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature instituted on or after the 19th day of July, 
1969, by or against a corresponding new bank purported to have been constituted by the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1969 (8 of 1969), or the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1969 (22 of 1969), shall not abate, be 
discontinued, or be, in a ny way, prejudicially affected by reason of the expiry of the said Ordinance or the 
invalidation of the said Act, as the case may be, but such suit, appeal or other proceeding may be  
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the corresponding new b ank as if such suit, appeal or 
other proceeding had been instituted by or against the corresponding new bank constituted under this Act.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 2, 3 and 4)  
Existing bank  Corresponding new bank  
Column 1  Column 2  
The Central Bank of India Limited  Central Bank of India . 
The Bank of India Limited  Bank of India.  
The Punjab National Bank Limited  Punjab National Bank  
The Bank of Baroda Limited  Bank of Baorda.  
The United Commercial Bank Limited  1[UCO Bank .] 
Canara Bank Limited  Canara Bank.  
United Bank of India Limited  United Bank of India.  
Dena Bank Limited  Dena Bank . 
Syndicate Bank Limited  Syndicate Bank . 
The Union Bank of India Limited  Union Bank of India  
Allahabad Bank Limited  Allahabad Bank  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 81 of 1985, s. 10, for “United Commercial Bank” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1985).  23 
 Existing bank  Corresponding new bank  
Column 1  Column 2  
The Indian Bank Limited  Indian Bank.  
The Bank of Maharashtra Limited  Bank of Maharashtra.  
The Indian Overseas Bank Limited  Indian Overseas Bank . 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 6)  
Name of existing bank  Amount of compensation  
(in lakhs of rupees ) 
The Central Bank of India Limited .. 1750  
The Bank of India Limited .. 1470  
The Punjab National Bank Limited ..  1020  
The Bank of Baroda Limited ..  840 
The United Commercial Bank Limited ..  830 
Canara Bank Limited ..  360 
United Bank of India Limited ..  420 
Dena Bank Limited ..  360 
Syndicate Bank Limited ..  360 
The Union Bank of India Limited ..  310 
Allahabad Bank Limited ..  310 
The Indian Bank Limited ..  230 
The Bank of Maharashtra Limited ..  230 
The Indian Overseas Bank Limited ..  250 
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 13]  
DECL ARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I,---------- , do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability execute 
and perform the duties required of me as Custodian, Director, member of Local Board, member of Local 
Committee, auditor, adviser, officer or other employe e (as the case may be) of the *  
and which properly relate to the office or position in the said*  
held by me. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the *  
or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the* ;nor will  
I allow any su ch person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or in 
possession of the*  
and relating to the business of the*  
or to the business of any person having any dealing with the*  
* Name of corresponding new bank to be filled in.  
--------------------------The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970--------------------------
1 
 THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE ADVISORY BOARDS  
3. Central Advisory Board.  
4. State Advisory Board.  
5. Power to constitute committees.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS EMPLOYING CONTRACT LABOUR  
6. Appointment of registering officers.  
7. Registration of certain establishments.  
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases.  
9. Effect of non -registration.  
10. Prohibition of employment of contract labour.  
CHAPTER IV  
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS  
11. Appointment of licensing officers.  
12. Licensing of contractors.  
13. Grant of licences.  
14. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.  
15. Appeal.  
CHAPTER V  
WELFARE AND HEALTH OF CONTRACT LABOUR  
16. Canteens.  
17. Rest -rooms.  
18. Other facilities.  
19. First -aid facilities.  
20. Liability of principal employer in certain cases.  
21. Respon sibility for payment of wages.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDUR E 
SECTIONS  
22. Obstructions.  
23. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of contract labour.  
24. Other offences.  
25. Offences by companies.  
26. Cognizance of offences.  
27. Limitation of prosecutions.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Inspecting staff.  
29. Registers and other records to be maintained.  
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act.  
31. Power to exempt in special cases.  
32. Protection of action taken  under this Act.  
33. Power to give directions.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Power to make rules.  
  3 
  
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1970  
[5th September, 1970.]  
An Act to regulate the employment of contract l abour in certain establishments and to provide 
for its abolition in certain circumstances and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the Contract 
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
(4) It applies — 
(a) to every establishment in which twenty or more workmen are employed or were employed on 
any day of the preceding twelve months as c ontract labour;  
(b) to every contractor who employ ees or who employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months twenty or more workmen:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less than two months ’ notice of its 
intention so to do, b y notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any 
establishment or contractor employing such number of workmen less than twenty as may be specified in 
the notification.  
(5) (a) It shall not apply to establishments in which wor k only of an intermittent or casual nature is 
performed.  
(b) If a question arises whether work performed in an establishment is of an intermittent or casual 
nature, the appropriate Government shall decide that question after consultation with Central Board  or, as 
the case may be, a State Board, and its decision shall be final.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, work performed in an establishment shall not be 
deemed to be of an intermittent nature — 
(i) if it was performed for more than one hundred and twenty days in the preceding twelve 
months, or  
(ii) if it is of a seasonal character and is performed for more than sixty days in a year.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to an establishment in respect of which the appropriate Government under the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), is the Central Government, th e Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in which that other 
establishment is situate;]  
                                                           
1. 10th February, 1971 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 190 , dated 1 st February, 1971, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 14 of 1986, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 28 -1-1986).  4 
 (b) a workman shall be deemed to be employed as “contract labour ” in or in connection with the 
work of an establishment when he is hired in or in connection with such work by or through a 
contractor, with or without the knowledge of the principal employer;  
(c) “contractor ”, in relation to an establishment, means a perso n who undertakes to produce a 
given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of goods of articles of manufacture to 
such establishment, through contract labour or who supplies contract labour for any work of the 
establishment  and includes a s ub-contractor;  
(d) “controlled industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been declared 
by any Central Act to be expedient in the public interest;  
(e) “establishment ” means — 
(i) any office or department of the Government or a local authority, or  
(ii) any place where any industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation is carried on;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “principal employer ” means— 
(i) in relation to any office or department of the Government or a local authority, the head of 
that office or department or such other officer as the Government or the local authority, as the 
case may be, may specify in this behalf,  
(ii) in a factory, the owner  or occupier of the factory and where a person has been named as 
the manager of the factory under the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) , the person so named,  
(iii) in a mine, the owner or agent of the mine and where a person has been named as the 
manager of  the mine, the person so named,  
(iv) in any other establishment, any person responsible for the supervision an d control of the 
establishment.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of sub -clause ( iii) of this clause, the expressions “mine ”, “owner ” and 
“agent ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clause ( j), clause ( l) and clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of th e Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(h) “wages ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( vi) of section 2 of the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936);  
(i) “workman ” means any person employed in or in connection with the work of any 
establishment to do any skilled, semi -skilled or un -skilled manual, supervisory, technical or clerical 
work for hire or reward, whether  the terms of employment be express or implied, but does not include 
any such person — 
(A) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  
(B) who, being employed in a superviory capacity draws wages exceeding five hundred 
rupees per m ensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by 
reason of the powers vested in him, functions ma inly of a managerial nature; or  
(C) who is an out -worker, that is to say, a person to whom any articles or materials are giv en 
out by or on behalf of the principal employer to be made up, cleaned, washed, altered, 
ornamented, finished, repaired, adapted or otherwise processed for sale for the purposes of the 
trade or business of the principal employer and the process is to be c arried out either in the home 
of the out -worker or in some other premises, not being premises under the control and 
management of the principal employer.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, 
in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.  
  5 
 CHAPTER II  
THE ADVISORY BOARDS  
3. Central Advisory Board. —(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a 
board to be called the Central Advisory Contract Labour Board (hereinafter referred to as the Central 
Board) to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as 
may be referred to it and to carry out other functions assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The Central Board shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), ex officio ; 
(c) such number of members, not exceeding seventeen but not less than eleven, as the Central 
Government may nominate to represent that Government, the Railways, the coal industry, the mining 
industry, the contractors, the workmen and any other interests wh ich, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, ought to be represented on the Central Board.  
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in        
sub-section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed in the 
discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of the Central 
Board shal l be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the number of members nominated to represent the workmen shall not be less than the 
number of members nominated to represent the principal employers and the contractors.  
4. State Advisory Board. —(1) The State Government may constitute a board to be called the State 
Advisory Contract Labour Board (hereina fter referred to as the State Board) to advise the State 
Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be referred to it and to 
carry out other functions assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The State Board shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the State Government;  
(b) the Labour Commissioner, ex officio , or in his absence any other officer nominated by the 
State Government in that behalf;  
(c) such number of members, not exceeding eleven but not less than nine,  as the State 
Government may nominate to represent that Government, the industry, the contractors, the workmen 
and any other interests which, in the opinion of the State Government, ought to be represented on the 
State Board.  
(3) The number of persons to b e appointed as members from each of the categories specified in      
sub-section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed in the 
discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among the , members of the State 
Board shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the number of members nominated to represent the workmen shall not be less than the 
number of members nominated to represent the principal employers and the contractors.  
5. Power  to constitute committees. —(1) The Central Board or the State Board, as the case may be, 
may constitute such committees and for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit.  
(2) The committe e constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall meet at such times and p laces and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The members of a committee shall be paid such fees and allowances for attending its meetings as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided t hat no fees shall be payable to a member who is an officer of Government or of any 
corporation established by any law for the time being in force.  6 
 CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS EMPLOYING CONTRACT LABOUR  
6. Appointment of registering officers. —The appropriate Government may, by an order notified in 
the Official Gazette — 
(a) appoint such persons, being Gazetted Officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be registering 
officers for th e purposes of this Chapter; and  
(b) define  the limits, within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers conferred on him 
by or under this Act.  
7. Registration of certain establishments. —(1) Every principal employer of an establishment to 
which this Act applies shall, within such period  as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, fix in this behalf with respect to establishments generally or with respect to any class of 
them, make an application to the registering officer in the prescribed manner for regis tration of the 
establishment:  
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application for registration after expiry of 
the period fixed in this behalf, if the registering officer is sati sfied that the applicant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from making the application in time.  
(2) If the application for registration is complete in all respects, the registering officer shall register 
the establishment and issue to the principal employer of the establishment a certificate of registration 
containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases. —If the registering officer is satisfied, either on a 
reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that the registration of any establishment has been 
obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of any material fact, or that for any other reason the 
registration has become useless or ineffective and, therefore, requires to be revoked, the registering 
officer may, after giving an opportunity to the princip al employer of the establishment to be heard and 
with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, revoke the registration.  
9. Effect of non -registration. —No principal employer of an establishment, to which this Act    
applies, shall — 
(a) in the ca se of an establishment required to be registered under section 7, but which has not 
been registered within the time fixed for the purpose under that section,  
(b) in the case of an establishment the registration in respect of which has been revoked under         
section 8,  
employ contract labour in the establishment after the expiry of the period referred to in  clause ( a) or after 
the revocation of registration referred to in clause ( b), as the case may be.  
10. Prohibition of employment of contract labour. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, the appropriate Government may, after consultation with the Central Board or, as the case may 
be, a State Board, prohibit, by notification in the Official Gazette, employment of contract labour in any 
process, operation or other work in any establishment.  
(2) Before issuing any notification under sub -section ( 1) in relation to an establishment, the 
appropriate Government shall have regard to the conditions of work and benefits provided for the contract 
labour in that establishment and other relevant factors, such as — 
(a) whether the process, operation or other work is incidental to, or necessary for the industry, 
trade, business, manufacture or occupation that is carried on in the establishment ; 
(b) whethe r it is of perennial nature, that is to say, it is of sufficient duration having regard to the 
nature of industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation carried on in that establishment;  
(c) whether it is done ordinarily through , regular workmen in th at establishment or an 
establishment similar thereto;  7 
 (d) whether it is sufficient to employ considerable number of whole  time workmen.  
Explanation. —If a question arises whether any process or operation or other work is of perennial 
nature, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon shall be final.  
CHAPTER IV  
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS  
11. Appointment of licensing officers. —The appropriate Government may, by an order notified in 
the Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons, being Gazetted Officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be licensing 
officers for th e purposes of this Chapter; and  
(b) define the limits, within which  a licensing officer shall exercise the powers conferred on 
licensing officers by or under this Act.  
12. Licensing of contractors .—(1) With effect from such date as the appropriate Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, no contractor to whom this Act applies, shall undertake or 
execute any work through contract labour except under and in accordance with a lice nce issued in that 
behalf by the licensing officer.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a l icence under sub -section ( 1) may contain such conditions 
including, in particular, conditions as to hours of work, fixation of wages and other essential ameni ties in 
respect of contract labour as the appropriate Government may deem fit to impose in accordance with the 
rules, if any, made under section 35 and shall be issued on payment of such fees and on the deposit of 
such sum, if any, as security for the due performance of the conditions as may be prescribed.  
13. Grant of licences. —(1) Every application for the grant of a licence under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 12 shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the particulars regarding the location of  
the establishment, the nature of process, operation or work for which contract labour is to be employed 
and such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) The licensing officer may make such investigation in respect of the application received under 
sub-section ( 1) and in making any such investigation the licensing officer shall follow such procedure as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) A licence granted under this Chapter shall be valid for the period specified therein and may be 
renewed from time to time for such  period and on payment of such fees and on such conditions as may be 
prescribed.  
14. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences. —(1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, 
either on a reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that — 
(a) a licence granted under section 12 has been obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of 
any material fact, or  
(b) the holder of a licence has, without reasonable cause , failed to comply with the conditions 
subject to which the licence has been granted or  has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the licence may be liable under this 
Act, the lice nsing officer may, after giving  the holder of the licence  an opportunity of showing cause, 
revoke or suspend the licence or forfeit the sum, if any, or any portion thereof deposited as security for 
the due performance of the conditions subject to which the licence has been granted.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may vary or amend a 
licence granted under section 12.  
15. Appeal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 7, section 8, section 12 or 
section 14 may, within thirt y days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an 
appeal to an appellate officer who shall be a person nominated in this behalf by the appropriate 
Government:  8 
 Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the ex piry of the said period of thirty 
days, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate officer shall, after giving the appellant 
an op portunity of being heard , dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
CHAPTER V  
WELFARE AND HEALTH OF CONTRACT LABOUR  
16. Canteens. —(1) The appropriate Government may make rules requiring that in every 
establishment — 
(a) to which this Act applies,  
(b) wherein work requiring employment of contract labour is likely to continue for such period as 
may be prescribed, and  
(c) wherein contract labour numbering one hundred or more is ordinarily employed by a 
contractor,  
one or more canteens shall be provide d and maintained by the contractor for the use of such contract 
labour.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for — 
(a) the date by which the canteens shall be provided;  
(b) the number of canteens that shall be provided, and the standards in respect of construction, 
accommodation, furniture and other  equipment of the canteens; and  
(c) the foodstuffs which may be served therein and the charges which may be made therefor.  
17. Rest -rooms.—(1) In every place where in contract labour is required to halt at night in connection 
with the work of an establishment — 
(a) to which this Act applies, and  
(b) in which work requiring employment of contract labour is likely to continue for such period as 
may be prescribed,  
there shall be provided and maintained by the contractor for the use of the contract labour such number of 
rest-rooms or such other suitable alternative accommodation within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) The rest -rooms or the alternative accommodatio n to be provided under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
sufficiently lighted and ventilated and shall be maintained in a clean and comfortable condition.  
18. Other facilities. —It shall be the duty of every contractor employing contract labour in connection 
with th e work of an establishment to which this Act applies, to provide and maintain — 
(a) a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water for the contract labour at convenient places;  
(b) a sufficient number of latrines and urinals of the prescribed types so situ ated as to be 
convenient and accessible to the contract l abour in the establishment; and  
(c) washing facilities.  
19. First -aid facilities. —There shall be provided and maintained by the contractor so as to be readily 
accessible during all working hours a fi rst-aid box equipped with the prescribed contents at every place 
where contract labour is employed by him.  
20. Liability of principal employer in certain cases. —(1) If any amenity required to be provided 
under section 16, section 17, section 18 or section 19 for the benefit of the contract labour employed in an 
establishment is not provided by the contractor within the time prescribed therefor, such amenity shall be 
provided by the principal employer within such time as may be prescribed.  9 
 (2) All expenses incurred by the principal employer in providing the amenity may be recovered by the 
principal employer from the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the contractor 
under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
21. Responsi bility for payment of wages. —(1) A contractor shall be responsible for payment of 
wages to each worker employed by him as contract labour and such wages shall be paid before the expiry 
of such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every principal employer shall  nominate a representative duly authorised by him to be present at 
the time of disbursement of wages by the contractor and it shall be the duty of such representative to 
certify the amounts paid as wages in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) It shall be  the duty of the contractor to ensure the disbursement of wages in the presence of the 
authorised representative of the principal employer.  
(4) In case the contractor fails to make payment of wages within the prescribed period or makes short 
payment, then the principal employer shall be liable to make payment of wages in full or the unpaid 
balance due, as the case may be, to the contract labour employed by the contractor and recover the 
amount so paid from the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the contractor under 
any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDUR E 
22. Obstructions. —(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his duties under this Act 
or refuses or wilfully  neglects to afford the inspector any reasonable facility for making any inspection, 
examination, inquiry or investigation authorised by or under this Act in relation to an establishment to 
which, or a contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall be punisha ble with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of an inspector any register or other 
document kept in pursuance of  this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has 
reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by an inspector 
acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
23. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of contract labour. —Whoever 
contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules made thereunder prohibiting, restricting or 
regulating the employment of contract labour, or contravenes any condition of a licence granted under this 
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months , or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention 
with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such 
contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.  
24. Other offences. —If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided, he shall be punishabl e with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
25. Offences by companies. —(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as ever y person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided t hat nothing contained in this  sub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
  10 
 (2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable t o any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager, managing agent or any other officer of the company, such director, manager, managing 
agent or such other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded again st and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of     
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
26. Cognizance of offences. —No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, the inspector and no court inferior to 
that of a Presidency Magistrate or a magistrate of the f irst class shall try any offence punishable under this 
Act. 
27. Limitation of prosecutions. —No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act unless the complaint thereof is made within three months from the date on which the alleged 
commission of the offence came to the knowledge of an inspector:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an inspector, 
complaint thereof may be made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have  
been committed.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Inspecting staff. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and define the local 
limits within which they shall exercise their powers under this Act.  
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an inspector may, within the local limits for which he is 
appointed — 
(a) enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistance (if any), being person s in the service of the 
Government or any local or other public authority as he thinks fit, any premises or place where 
contract labour is employed, for the purpose of examining any register or record or notices required to 
be kept or exhibited by or under  this Act or rules made thereunder, and require the production thereof 
for inspection;  
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any such premises or place and who, he has reasonable 
cause to believe, is a workman employed therein;  
(c) require any person giv ing out work and any workman, to give any information, which is in his 
power to give with respect to the names and addresses of the persons to, for and from whom the work 
is given out or received , and with respect to the payments to be made for the work;  
(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or portions thereof as he may 
consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been 
committed by the principal employer or contractor; and  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any person required to produce any document or thing or to give any information required by an 
inspector under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of 
section 1 75 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under sub -section ( 2) as they apply to any search or seizure made unde r the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code.  11 
 29. Registers and other records to be maintained .—(1) Every principal employer and every 
contractor shall maintain such registers and records giving such particulars of contract labour  employed, 
the nature of work performed by the contract labour, the rates of wages paid to the contract labour and 
such other particulars in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every principal employer and every contractor shall keep exhibited in such mann er as may be 
prescribed within the premises of the establishment where the contract labour is employed, notices in the 
prescribed form containing particulars about the hours of work, nature of duty and such other information 
as may be prescribed.  
30. Effec t of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act. —(1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of 
any agreement or contract of service, or in any standing ord ers applicable to the establishment whether 
made before or after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that where under any such agreement, contract of service or standing orders the contract 
labour employed in the establishment are entitled to benefits i n respect of any matter which are more 
favourable to them than those to which they would be entitled under this Act, the contract labour shall 
continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that they 
receive benefits in respect o f other matters under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any such contract labour from 
entering into an agreement with the principal employer or the contractor, as the case may be, for gran ting 
them rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them than those to which 
they would be entitled under this Act.  
31. Power to exempt in special cases. —The appropriate Government may, in the case of an 
emergency, direct, by notification in the Official Gazette, that subject to such conditions and restrictions , 
if any, and for such period or periods, as may be specified in the notification, all or any of the provisions 
of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall not appl y to any establishment or class of establishmen ts or 
any class of contractors.  
32. Protection of action taken under this Act. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against any registering officer, licensing officer or any other Gove rnment servant or against any 
member of the Central Board or the State Board, as the case may be, for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any  rule or order made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proc eeding s shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
33. Power to give directions. —The Central Government may give directions to the Government of 
any State as to the carrying into execution in the State of the provisions contained in this Act.  
34. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty.  
35. Power to make rules. —(1) The appr opriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of persons to be appointed as members representing various interests on the 
Central Board and the State Board, the term of their office and other conditions of service, the 
procedure to be followed in the discharg e of their functions and the manner of filling vacancies;  
(b) the times and places of the meetings of any committee constituted under this Act, the 
procedure to be followed at such meetings including the quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business, an d the fees and allowances that may be paid to the members of a committee;  12 
 (c) the manner in which establishments may be registered under section 7, the levy of a fee 
therefor and the form of certificate of registration;  
(d) the form of application for the grant or renewal of a licence under section 13 and the 
particulars it may contain;  
(e) the manner in which an investigation is to be made in respect of an application for the grant of 
a licence and the matters to be taken into account in granting or refusi ng a licence;  
(f) the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed under section 12 and the conditions 
subject to which the licence may be granted or renewed, the fees to be levied for the grant or renewal 
of a licence and the deposit of any sum as se curity for the performance of such conditions;  
(g) the circumstances under which licences may be varied or amended under section 14;  
(h) the form and manner in which appeals may be filed under section 15 and the procedure to be 
followed by appellate officers in disposing of the appeals;  
(i) the time within which facilities required by this Act to be provided and maintained may be so 
provided b y the contractor and in case of default on the part of the contractor, by the principal 
employer;  
(j) the number and types of canteens, rest -rooms, latrines and urinals that should be provided and 
maintained;  
(k) the type of equipment that should be provid ed in the first -aid boxes;  
(l) the period within which wages payable to contract labour should be paid by the contractor 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 21;  
(m) the form of registers and records to be maintained by principal employers and contractors;  
(n) the submission of returns, forms in which, and the authorities to which, such returns may be 
submitted;  
(o) the collection of any information or statistics in relation to contract labour; and  
(p) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed und er this Act.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in  two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which 
it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall th ereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
1[(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before the State Legislature.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11-1-2005) . 
--------------------------The Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Act, 1970--------------------------
1 
 THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL  UNIVERSITIES  ACT, 1970                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITIES  
3. Dissolution of the existing University and establishment of Haryana and Punjab Agricultural 
Universities.  
4. Incorporation.  
5. Territorial limits.  
6. Headquarters.  
7. Objects of corresponding University.  
8. Adm ission to a corresponding University.  
9. Power s of a corresponding University.  
10. Visitations.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF A CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITY  
11. Authorities and officers of a corresponding University.  
12. Chancellor.  
13. Constitution , power s and duties of the Board of a corresponding University.  
14. Powers and duties of the Board.  
15. The Vice -Chancellor.  
16. Power s and duties of the Vice -Chancellor.  
17. The Registrar.  
18. Comptroller.  
19. The Estate Officer.  
20. Director of Student Welfare.  
21. Deans of colleges.  
22. The Librarian.  
23. Academic Council.  
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
COLLEGES  
SECTIONS  
24. The colleges.  
25. Experiment Stations for research.  
26. Agricultural Extension Education.  
CHAPTER V  
SERVICES  
27. Retirement and other conditions of services.  
28. Provident fund. 
29. Appointment of salaried office rs. 
30. Temporary arrangements.  
CHAPTER VI  
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS  
31. Statutes.  
32. Statutes how made.  
33. Regulations.  
CHAPTER VII  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
34. Account s and audit.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Division of assets and liabilities.  
36. Legal proceedings.  
37. Transfer of employees.  
38. Member ship of corresponding University bodies.  
39. Annual Report.  
40. Construction of references to existing University in any document, etc.  
41. Obligations to be discharged by the Punjab Agricultural University.  
42. Proportion of cost to be borne by the Government of Himachal Pradesh.  
43. Settlement of unresolved  disputes.  
44. Power to remove difficulties.  
45. Repeals and saving.  
  3 
 THE HARYANA AND  PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL  UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970  
ACT NO. 16 OF 1970  
[2nd April, 1970 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of two independent Agricultural Universities in place of 
the Punjab Agricultural University constituted by the Punjab Agricultural University         
Act, 1961, and for matters consequential on, or connected with the  establishment of those 
independent Agricultural Universities . 
WHEREAS , for the development of agriculture in the States of Haryana and Punjab, it is expedient to 
provide for the establishment of two independent Agricultural Universities in place of the Pu njab 
Agricultural University constituted by the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961;  
AND WHEREAS , the Legislatures of the States of Haryana and Punjab have passed resolutions in terms 
of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution in relation to the  above -mentioned matter and matters 
ancillary thereto in so far as such matters are matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Haryana and Punjab 
Agricultural Universities Act, 1970.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of February, 1970.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made thereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council ” means, in relation to a corresponding University, the Academic Council 
of that University;  
(b) “agriculture ” includes the basic and applied scien ce of soil and water management, crop and 
live-stock production and management, home sciences and the betterment of rural people;  
(c) “appropriate Government ” means,— 
(i) in relation to the Haryana Agricultural University, the Government of the State of 
Haryana;  
(ii) in relation to the Punjab Agricultural University, the Government of the State of Punjab;  
(d) “Board”, in relation to a corresponding University, means the Board  of Management of that 
University;  
(e) “college” means a constituent college of a corresponding University;  
(f) “corresponding University ” means,— 
(i) in relation to the territories to which the functions of the Haryana Agricultural University 
extend, that  University;  
(ii) in relation to the territories to which the functions of the Punjab Agricultural University 
extend, that University;  
(g) “existing University ” means the Punjab Agricultural University constituted by section 3 of the 
Punjab Agricultural Un iversity Act, 1961  (Punjab Act 32 of 1961);  
(h) “library” means a library established or maintained by a corresponding University;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribed by the Statutes of a corresponding University;  4 
 (j) “Statutes” and “Regulations ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and Regulations made by a 
corresponding University under this Act;  
(k) “transferred territories ” means the territories added to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh 
by sub -section  (1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966  (31 o f 1966);  
(l) “Vice -Chancellor ” means the Vice -Chancellor of a corresponding University.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITIES  
3. Dissolution of the existing University and establishment of Haryana and Punjab Agricultural 
Universities .—As from the commencement of this Act, the existing University shall stand dissolved and 
there shall be established in its place two independent Agric ultural Universities, to be known respectively 
as the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University.  
4. Incorporation .—(1) Each of the Agricultural Universities mentioned in section 3 shall be a body 
corporate having perpetual succ ession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, and to contract, and may, by its name, sue and be sued.  
(2) Each body corporate referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall consist of the Chancellor and the          
Vice -Chancellor of  that University, the members of the Board, the Academic Council and all persons, 
who may hereafter become or be appointed as such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold 
such office or membership.  
5. Territorial limits .—(1) The Haryana Agric ultural University shall function within the territories 
of the State of Haryana and the Punjab Agricultural University shall function within such other territories 
to which the functions of the existing University extended immediately before the commencem ent of this 
Act: 
Provided that on the establishment of a University in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, the 
Punjab Agricultural University shall cease to function in the transferred territories.  
(2) Until a University is established in the Union te rritory of Himachal Pradesh, the Agricultural 
College at Palampur in the transferred territories shall, notwithstanding the dissolution of the existing 
University, continue to be a college of the Punjab Agricultural University and shall cease to be such 
college on the establishment of a University in those territories.  
(3) On the establishment of a University in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, the assets and 
liabilities of the Punjab Agricultural University pertaining to the Agricultural College at  Palampur, all 
research, training and extension centres, and any other property, of the Punjab Agricultural University 
located in the said Union territory shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, such University.  
6. Headquarters .—(1) The headquarters  of the Haryana Agricultural University shall be at Hissar, 
and the headquarters of the Punjab Agricultural University shall be at Ludhiana, or at such other place as 
the appropriate Government may direct.  
(2) Each corresponding University shall establish an office at the place at which the seat of the 
appropriate Government is located.  
7. Objects of corresponding University .—Each corresponding University shall be deemed to be 
established and incorporated for the following objects, namely: — 
(a) making  provision for imparting education in different branches of study, particularly 
agriculture, veterinary and animal science, agricultural engineering, home sciences and other allied 
sciences;  
(b) furthering the advancement of learning and prosecution of res earch, particularly in agriculture 
and other allied sciences;  
(c) undertaking the extension of such sciences to the rural people of the territories within which 
the University is required by this Act to function;  5 
 (d) such  other purposes as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct.  
8. Admission to a corresponding University .—(1) Each corresponding University shall, subject to 
the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, be open to all persons:  
Provided that nothing herein shall require any such University to admit to any course of study a 
number of students larger than the prescribed number.  
(2) The appropriate Government may direct the corresponding University to reserve in any college  
seats for women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or such educationally backward classes of citizens 
as may be specified by that Government in this behalf, and where such direction has been given, the 
corresponding University shall make the reservations  accordingly:  
Provided that no such person shall be entitled to be admitted to a corresponding University unless he 
meets the standards laid down by the corresponding University.  
9. Power s of a corresponding University .—Each  corresponding University shall have the following 
powers, namely: — 
(a) to provide for graduate and post -graduate instructions in agriculture, veterinary and animal 
sciences, agricultural engineering, home sciences and other allied sciences and in such oth er branches 
of learning as the University may deem fit;  
(b) to make provision for instructions in applied fields, research and the dissemination of the 
findings of research and technical information through an extension education programme;  
(c) to institut e degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions;  
(d) to hold examinations and to grant and confer degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions to and on persons who shall have — 
(i) pursued a prescribed course of study; or  
(ii) carried  out research in the University, or in an institution recognised in this behalf by the 
University, under the prescribed conditions;  
(e) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the prescribed manner and under the 
prescribed conditions;  
(f) to pr ovide lectures and instructions for field workers, village leaders and other persons not 
enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them when deemed desirable;  
(g) to co -operate with other Universities and authorities in su ch manner and for such purposes as 
the University may determine;  
(h) to institute teaching, research and extension education posts required by the University and to 
appoint persons to such posts;  
(i) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts an d to make appointments thereto;  
(j) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships and prizes in accordance with the Statutes;  
(k) to institute and maintain residential accommodation for students of the University;  
(l) to supervise and control the residential accommodation and to regulate the discipline of the 
students of the University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and welfare;  
(m) to institute and receive such fees and other charges as may prescribe d; and  
(n) to do all such acts and things, whether incidental to the powers aforesaid or not, as may be 
requisite in order to further the objects of the University.  
  6 
 10. Visitations .—(1) The Chancellor of a corresponding University may cause an inspection  to be 
made by such person as he may direct, of the corresponding University, its buildings, laboratories, and 
equipment and of any institution maintained by that University, and may cause an inquiry to be made in 
respect of any matter connected with the a dministration and the finances of that University.  
(2) The Chancellor of a corresponding University shall, in every case, give notice to the University of 
his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, and, on receipt of such notice, that Univ ersity 
shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to be present, and heard, at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(3) The Chancellor of a corresponding University may address the Board of the University with 
reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry with such advice as he may offer regarding the action 
to be taken.  
(4) The Board shall communicate to the Chancellor such action as it proposes to take or has taken as 
the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(5) If the Board do es not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the Chancellor, 
he may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Board, issue such 
directions as he may deem fit, and the Board shall comply with such dir ections.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF A CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITY  
11. Authorities and officers of a corresponding University .—The following shall be the authorities 
and officers of each corresponding University, namely: — 
(a) Authorities of a corresponding University — 
(i) Board;  
(ii) Academic Council;  
(iii) Board of Studies; and  
(iv) Such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the 
University.  
(b) Officers of the corresponding University — 
(i) Chancellor;  
(ii) Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) Dean of Post -Graduate Studies;  
(iv) Deans of the colleges;  
(v) Director of Research;  
(vi) Director of Agricultural Extension Education;  
(vii) Director of Students Welfare;  
(viii) Registrar;  
(ix) Comptroller;  
(x) Estate Officer;  
(xi) Librarian; and  
(xii) Such other persons in the service of the University as may be declared by the Statutes to 
be officers of the University.  7 
 12. Chancellor .—(1) The Governor of the State of Haryana shall be the Chancellor of the Haryana 
Agricultural University and the Governor of the State of Punjab shall be the Chancellor of the Punjab 
Agricultural University.  
(2) The Chancellor of a corresponding University shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of that 
University and shall, when present, presi de at a convocation of that University.  
(3) The Chancellor of a corresponding University shall have such other powers as are specified in this 
Act or as may be prescribed.  
13. Constitution , power s and duties of the Board of a corresponding University .—(1) The 
appropriate Government shall, within a period of one year from the commencement of this Act, establish 
a Board for the management of the corresponding University.  
(2) The Board of the Haryana Agricultural University shall consist of — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Chief Secretary to the Government of the State of Haryana;  
(c) the Secretaries to the Government of the State of Haryana in the Departments of — 
(i) Agriculture;  
(ii) Finance; and  
(iii) Community Development;  
(d) persons, not being  officials, appointed by the Government of the State of Haryana from 
amongst the following categories of persons, namely: — 
(i) one from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, eminent 
agricultural scientists with a background of agricul tural research or education;  
(ii) two from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, progressive 
farmers or live -stock breeders having experience of, and interest in scientific farming and live -
stock improvement;  
(iii) one from amongst pe rsons who are, in the opinion of that Government, distinguished 
industrialists, businessmen, manufacturers or live -stock breeders, associated with agricultural 
development; and  
(iv) one from amongst women who are , in the opinion of that Government, outstan ding social 
workers, preferably with a background of rural advancement.  
(3) The Board of the Punjab Agricultural University shall consist of — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Chief Secretary to the Government of the State of Punjab;  
(c) the Secretaries to the G overnment of the State of Punjab  in the Departments of — 
(i) Agriculture; and  
(ii) Finance;  
(d) the Director of Agriculture, Punjab;  
(e) the Director of Animal Husbandry, Punjab;  
(f) one nominee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Res earch;  
(g) two nominees of the Government of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh;  
  8 
 (h) persons, not being officials, appointed by the Government of the State of Punjab from 
amongst the following categories of persons, namely: — 
(i) two  from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, eminent 
agricultural scientists with a background of agricultural research or education;  
(ii) two from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, progressive 
farmers or live -stock breeders having experience of, and interest in, scientific farming and      
live-stock improvement;  
(iii) one from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, distinguished 
industrialists, businessmen, manufacturers or live -stock bre eders, associated with agricultural 
development; and  
(iv) one from amongst women who are , in the opinion of that Government, outstanding social 
workers, preferably with a background of rural advancement.  
(4) The Board of the Haryana Agricultural University  shall associate with its meeting the following 
persons as technical advisers, but the persons so associated shall not be entitled to vote at any such 
meeting.— 
(a) the Director of Agriculture, Haryana;  
(b) the Director of Animal Husbandry, Haryana; and  
(c) two officers appointed by the Board of that University from amongst the Deans or Directors of 
that University.  
(5) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than the official members, shall be three 
years:  
Provided that two members of the Boa rd, not being official members, shall retire at the end of each 
year.  
(6) The members of the Board, other than the official members, shall determine, by lots, the members 
who shall retire at the end of each year.  
(7) A member of the Board may resign his of fice by a notice in writing, addressed to the Chancellor 
of the corresponding University.  
(8) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the Board, the appropriate 
Government may fill the vacancy by appointing another person thereto in accordance with the provisions 
of this section.  
(9) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of any 
vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, such Board.  
(10) Four members of the Board, in the case of the Haryana Agricultural University, and five 
members of the Board, in the case of the Punjab Agricultural University, shall be a quorum for a meeting 
of the Board:  
Provided that if a meeting of the Board is adjourned for want of a quorum, no quorum shall be 
necessary at the next meeting for the transaction of the same business.  
(11) The Chancellor shall be the Honorary Chairman of the Board and the Vice -Chancellor, the 
Working Chairman.  
(12) The members of the Board shall not be entitled to receive any rem uneration for the performance 
of their functions under this Act except such daily and travelling allowances as may be prescribed:  
Provided that nothing herein shall affect the emoluments or other conditions of service of the       
Vice -Chancellor.  
(13) On the commencement of this Act, the members of the Board of Management of the existing 
University shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such.  9 
 14. Powers and duties of the Board .—The powers and duties of the Board shall be as follows: — 
(a) to appro ve the budget submitted by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) to hold and control the properly and funds of the University and issue any general directive on 
behalf of the University;  
(c) to accept or transfer any property on behalf of the University;  
(d) to adminis ter funds placed at the disposal of the University for specific purposes;  
(e) to invest moneys belonging to the University;  
(f) to appoint the officers, teachers and other employees of the University in the prescribed 
manner;  
(g) to direct the form and use of the common seal of the University;  
(h) to appoint such committees as it may deem necessary for its proper functioning;  
(i) to borrow money for capital improvements and make suitable arrangements for its repayment;  
(j) to appoint  the Vice -Chancellor subject to the provisions of section 15;  
(k) to meet at such times and as often as the Board may deem necessary:  
Provided that regular meetings of the Board shall be held at least once in every two months;  
(l) to regulate and determine  all matters concerning the University in accordance with this Act 
and the Statutes, and to exercise such powers and to discharge such duties as may be conferred on or 
imposed upon the Board by this Act or the Statutes.  
15. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vic e-Chancellor shall be a whole -time officer of the 
corresponding University and shall be appointed by the Board in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that where the members of the Board are not unanimous with regard to the selection of the 
person proposed to b e appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, the appointment shall be made by the Chancellor 
of the concerned corresponding University:  
Provided further that the first Vice -Chancellor of the Haryana Agricultural University shall be 
appointed by the Government of th e State of Haryana:  
Provided also that the person holding office immediately before the commencement of this Act as the 
Vice -Chancellor of the existing University shall be deemed to be the first Vice -Chancellor of the Punjab 
Agricultural University and sha ll hold such office for the unexpired portion of his term of office as the 
Vice -Chancellor of the existing University.  
(2) The term of office of the Vice -Chancellor shall be four years and he shall be eligible for              
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other condition;  of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be 
prescribed and shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
(4) When a vacancy occurs, or is likely to occur, in the office of the Vice -Chancellor b y reason of 
leave taken by the Holder of such office or any cause other than the expiry of the term of office, the 
Registrar shall report the fact forthwith to the Board, and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with 
the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(5) Until the vacancy is filled under sub -section ( 4) or until such time as the Board designates an 
acting Vice -Chancellor, the senior -most Dean, in the case of the Haryana Agricultural University, or the 
Registrar, in the case of the Punjab Agricultural  University, as the case may be, shall carry on the current 
duties of the office of the Vice -Chancellor.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor may relinquish office by resignation in writing addressed to the Board and 
ordinarily delivered to the Secretary of the Board a t least tw o months prior to the date on which  the     
Vice -Chancellor wishes to be relieved.  10 
 16. power s and duties of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal 
executive and academic officer of the corresponding University and the Chairman of the Academic 
Council and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at a convocation of the corresponding 
University and s hall confer degrees on persons entitled to receive them.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the corresponding University and 
shall be responsible for the due maintenance of discipline at that University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancel lor shall convene meetings of the Academic Council unless he temporarily 
delegates this power to some other officer of the corresponding University.  
(4) Without prejudice to the powers conferred by this Act on the appropriate Government, the        
Vice -Chancellor shall ensure the faithful observance of the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and he 
shall exercise all such powers as may be necessary in that behalf.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall be responsible for the presentation of the budget and the s tatement of 
accounts to the Board.  
(6) In any emergency, which, in the opinion of the Vice -Chancellor, requires immediate action to be 
taken, he shall take such action as he deems necessary and shall, at the earliest opportunity, report the 
action taken to the officer, authority or other body for confirmation who or which in the ordinary course 
would have dealt with the matter, but nothing in this  sub-section shall be deemed to empower the      
Vice -Chancellor to incur any expenditure not duly authorised and provided for in the budget.  
(7) Where any action by the Vice -Chancellor under sub -section ( 6) affects any person in the service 
of the corresponding University to his disadvantage, su ch action shall not be taken unless the person 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and the person against whom any 
action is proposed to be taken may prefer an appeal to the Board within thirty days of the date on which 
the action proposed to be taken against him is communicated to him.  
(8) Subject as aforesaid, the Vice -Chancellor shall give effect to the orders of the Board regarding the 
appointment, suspension and dismissal of officers, teachers and other employees of the corresponding 
University.  
(9) The Vice -Chancellor shall be responsible for the close co -ordination and integration of teaching, 
research and extension education.  
(10) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(11) The salary and allowances payable to the officers, teachers and other employees of the 
corresponding University shall be determined by the Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board.  
17. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar of a corresponding Universi ty shall be a whole -time office  of 
that University and shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor of that University with the approval of the 
Board.  
(2) The Registrar of a corresponding University shall receive such remu neration and other 
emoluments as may be prescribed and shall not, during the tenure of his office, accept any remuneration 
or emolument other than the prescribed remuneration or emolument.  
(3) The powers and duties of the Registrar of a corresponding Unive rsity shall be as follows: — 
(a) to be responsible for the custody of the records and the common seal of the University;  
(b) to be the ex officio  Secretary to the Academic Council and to the Board and to place before 
such Council and Board all such informat ion as may be necessary for the transaction of business of 
the Council or the Board, as the case may be;  
(c) to receive applications for admission into the University;  
(d) to keep a permanent record of all syllabi, curricula and informations connected ther ewith;  
(e) to make arrangements for the conduct of such examinations as may be prescribed and to be 
responsible for the due execution of all processes connected therewith;  11 
 (f) to perform such other duties as may be prescribed or required, from time to time , by the     
Vice -Chancellor.  
18. Comptroller .—(1) The Comptroller of a corresponding University shall be a whole -time officer 
of that University and shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor of that University with the approval of 
the Board.  
(2) The Comptroller shall manage the property and investments of the corresponding University and 
advise it in regard to its financial policy.  
(3) The Comptroller shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for all accounting matters of the 
corresponding Universit y including the preparation and presentation of its Budget and statement of 
accounts.  
(4) The Comptroller shall receive such remuneration as may be prescribed and shall not, during the 
tenure of his office, receive any remuneration or other emolument other  than the prescribed remuneration.  
(5) The Comptroller shall — 
(a) ensure that expenditure, not authorised in the budget, is not incurred by the corresponding 
University except by way of investment; and  
(b) disallow  any expenditure not warranted by the terms of any Statute or for which provision is 
required to be made by the Statute but has not been so made.  
(6) All moneys belonging to the corresponding University shall be kept in a Scheduled Bank 
approved by the Boa rd. 
19. The Estate Officer .—The Estate Officer of a corresponding University, who shall be appointed 
by the Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board, shall be responsible for the custody, maintenance 
and management of all the buildings, lawns, gardens and other properties of the University.  
20. Director of Student Welfare .—(1) The Director of Student Welfare of a corresponding 
University shall be a whole -time officer of that University and shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor 
with the appro val of the Board.  
(2) The Director of Student Welfare shall have the following duties, namely: — 
(a) to make arrangements for the housing of students;  
(b) to direct a programme of student -counselling;  
(c) to arrange for the employment of students in accorda nce with the plans approved by the    
Vice -Chancellor;  
(d) to supervise the extra -curricular activities of students;  
(e) to assist in the placement of graduates of the University; and  
(f) to organise  and maintain contact with the Alumni Association of the University.  
21. Deans of colleges .—(1) Each college shall have a Dean who shall be a whole -time officer and 
shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board.  
(2) The Dean shal l be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for all matters concerning his college.  
(3) The Dean shall be responsible for the organisation and the conduct of resident instruction of the 
Departments of the college.  
22. The Librarian .—(1) The Librarian of a corresponding University shall be appointed by the     
Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board and shall be in charge of the library.  
(2) The Librarian shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for all matters concerning the l ibrary.  
23. Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be in charge of the academic affairs of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, superintend, direct and control, 
and be responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, educ ation and examinations and other 12 
 matters connected with the obtaining of degrees and shall exercise such other powers and perform such 
other duties as may be prescribed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Academic Council s hall have 
power— 
(a) to advise the Vice -Chancellor on all academic matters, including the control and management 
of the libraries;  
(b) to co -opt at its meetings such Heads of Departments as it may consider necessary;  
(c) to make recommendations to the Vice -Chancellor for the institution of the Professorships, 
Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships and teacherships and other teaching posts and in 
regard to the duties and emoluments thereof;  
(d) to formulate, modify or revise schemes for the const itution or reconstitution of departments of 
teaching, research and extension;  
(e) to make regulations regarding the admission of students to the University;  
(f) to make regulations regarding examinations conducted by the University and the conditions on 
which students shall be admitted to such examinations;  
(g) to make regulations relating to courses of study leading to degrees, diplomas and certificates;  
(h) to make recommendations regarding post -graduate teaching, research and extension;  
(i) to make recommendations regarding the qualifications to be prescribed for teachers in the 
University;  
(j) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by or under the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The Academi c Council shall consist of — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Deans of the colleges of the University;  
(c) the Dean of Post -Graduate Studies;  
(d) the Director of Extension Education;  
(e) the Director of Research;  
(f) the Head of one Department from each college, to be selected by the respective college.  
(4) The term of office of the members specified in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3) shall be two years.  
CHAPTER IV  
COLLEGES  
24. The colleges .—(1) The  following colleges shall be the constituent colleges of the Haryana 
Agricultural University, namely: — 
(a) the College of Agriculture at Hissar;  
(b) the College of Veterinary Medicine at Hissar;  
(c) the College of Animal Sciences at Hissar;  
(d) the  College of Basic Sciences and the Humanities and such other colleges as may be 
established by the University after the commencement of this Act; and  
(e) such Central Government institutions of agricultural research, technical and extension 
education in th e State of Haryana as may desire to be integrated as colleges of the Haryana 
Agricultural University.  13 
 (2) The following colleges shall be the constituent colleges of the Punjab Agricultural University, 
namely:— 
(a) the College of Agriculture at Ludhiana;  
(b) the College of Agricultural Engineering at Ludhiana;  
(c) the College of Basic Sciences and the Humanities at Ludhiana;  
(d) the College of Home Sciences at Ludhiana;  
(e) the College of Veterinary Medicine at Ludhiana;  
(f) until  a University is established in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, the Agricultural 
College at Palampur;  
(g) such other colleges as may be established by the University after the commencement of this 
Act; and  
(h) such Central Government institutions of agricultural research, technical and extension 
education in the State of Punjab as may desire to be integrated as colleges of the Punjab Agricultural 
University.  
(3) (a) There shall be a Board of Studies for each college of a corresponding University an d where 
there is more than one college in a branch of learning, there may be one Board of Studies for all the 
colleges in that branch of learning.  
(b) The Deans of various colleges shall be the Chairmen of the respective Boards of Studies and the 
Heads of Departments of the colleges shall be members thereof.  
(c) Where there is a Board of Studies for more than one college in a branch of learning, the Deans 
shall act as Chairmen of the Board of Studies by rotation according to seniority for a period of one year 
each.  
(d) The Vice -Chancellor may nominate to the Board of Studies such other teachers of related subjects 
or sciences from the same or other colleges, as he may deem fit.  
(e) The duties of such Boards of Studies shall be to prescribe syllab i so as to  ensure integrated and 
well-balanced courses of study.  
(4) Every college shall comprise such Departments as may be prescribed and each Department shall 
be assigned such subjects of study as the Academic Council may deem fit.  
(5) There shall be a Head of ea ch Department who shall be responsible to the Dean, for resident 
instruction, to the Director of Research, for research, and to the Director of Extension Education, for 
extension education.  
(6) The Head of each Department shall be selected by the Vice -Chan cellor and appointed by him with 
the approval of the Board.  
(7) The duties, powers and functions of the Heads of Departments shall be such as may be prescribed.  
25. Experiment Stations for research .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statute s, 
Experiment Stations shall be established under each corresponding University, which shall be responsible 
for research, both fundamental and applied, and research activities shall be concentrated as far as possible 
at the Central Research Stations and ot her Regional Research and Testing Stations in the different        
agro-climatic zones of the State.  
(2) There shall be a Director of Research in each corresponding University, who shall be responsible 
to the Vice -Chancellor and who shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor in consultation with the Deans 
and with the approval of the Board.  
(3) The Director of Research shall be a whole -time officer trained in Agriculture and shall initiate, 
guide and co -ordinate the research programme of the corresponding U niversity and its outlying            
sub-stations.  14 
 26. Agricultural Extension Education .—(1) In relation to the territories to which the functions of a 
corresponding University extend, such University shall be responsible for — 
(a) the agricultural extensi on functions which are primarily educational in nature; and  
(b) imparting training to the future Extension Officers for the National Extension Blocks and 
instructors for the Extension Training Centres.  
(2) All Extension Specialists, in relation to any subj ect-matter, shall be the members of the staff of 
their respective subject -matter sections in each corresponding University and work in close co -ordination 
with the Departments of Agriculture, Development and Co -operatives.  
(3) The Director of Extension Edu cation shall be a whole -time officer technically trained in 
agriculture and shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor in consultation with the Deans and with the 
approval of the Board.  
(4) The Director of Extension Education shall be responsible to the Vic e-Chancellor and shall 
develop programmes for assisting farmers and housewives in applying results of scientific investigations 
to the solution of their problems.  
CHAPTER V  
SERVICES  
27. Retirement and other conditions of services .—The age of retirement and other conditions of 
service of every officer , teacher or other employee of a corresponding Univ ersity shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
28. Provident fund.—Each corresponding University shall constitute gratuity and provident fund for 
the benefit of its officers, teachers and other employees in such manner, and subject to such conditions, as 
may be prescribed.  
29. Appointment of salaried office rs.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the members of the 
technical staff of a corresponding University shall be selected by the Head of the Department in 
consultation with the members of the Department concerned, recommended by the Dean or the Director 
of Research or the Director of Extension Education, as the case may be, and appointed by the             
Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board.  
30. Temporary arrangements .—The Vice -Chancellor may, until such time as the authorities of the 
correspond ing University are duly constituted, temporarily appoint any such officer of that University as 
such University is authorised by this Act to appoint . 
CHAPTER VI  
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS  
31. Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes of a  corresponding University may 
provide for any matter and shall, in particular, provide for the following: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the University;  
(b) the election, appointment, and continuance in office of the members  of the authorities of the 
University and of the officers, teachers and other employees of the University including the filling up 
of vacancies and all other matters relating to these authorities and officers, teachers and other 
employees for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the designation, the manner of appointment, the powers, and the duties of the officers of the 
University;  
(d) the classification and the manner of appointment of teachers;  
(e) the constitution of gratuity or provid ent fund or both for the benefit of officers, teachers and 
other employees of the University;  
(f) the institution of degrees and diplomas;  15 
 (g) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(h) the establishment, amalgamation, sub -division and abolition of Department s; 
(i) the establishment, and the abolition of hostels maintained by the University;  
(j) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes;  
(k) the maintenance of a register of graduates;  
(l) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment and continuance as such;  
(m) the courses of study to be laid down for degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(n) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree, diploma or o ther courses 
and the manner in which the examinations are to be held and the eligibility for the award of degrees 
and diplomas;  
(o) the conditions of residence of the students of the University and the levy of fees for residence 
in hostels maintained by th e University;  
(p) the recognition and supervision of hostels not maintained by the University;  
(q) the number, qualifications, emoluments, and other conditions of service of officers, teachers 
and other employees of the University and the preparation and t he maintenance of record of their 
services and activities;  
(r) the fees which may be charged by the University;  
(s) the remuneration and allowances, including travelling and daily allowances, to be paid to 
persons employed on the business of University;  
(t) the conditions for the award of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes, stipends and fee 
concessions;  
(u) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
32. Statutes how made .—(1) The Statutes made by the existing University under section 30 of the 
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961  (Punjab Act 32 of 1961), and in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and 
subject to such adaptations and modifications as may be notified by the appropriate Government, be the 
first Statutes of a corresponding University.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes and may amend or repeal the 
Statutes in  the manner hereinafter provided in this section.  
(3) The Academic Council may propose to the Board the draft of Statutes and such draft shall be 
considered by the Board at its next meeting:  
Provided that the Academic Council shall not propose the draft of  any Statute or any amendment of a 
Statute affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority 
has been given an opportunity to express its opinion upon the proposal, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be co nsidered by the Board.  
(4) The Board may consider any such draft as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) and pass the proposed 
Statute or reject or return it to the  Academic Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, 
together with any amendment  which it may suggest.  
(5) (a) Any member of the Board may propose to the Board the draft of any Statute and the Board 
may either accept or reject the proposal if it relates to a matter not falling within the purview of the 
Academic Council.  
(b) In case su ch a draft relates to a matter within the purview of the Academic Council, the Board 
shall refer it for consideration to the Academic Council, which may either report to the Board that it does 
not approve the proposal, which, then, shall be deemed to have been rejected by the Board or submit the 
draft to the Board in such form as the Academic Council may approve, and the provisions of this section 16 
 shall apply in the case of the draft submitted by any member of the Board as they apply in the case of a 
draft presented to the Board by the Academic Council.  
33. Regulations .—(1) Any authority of a corresponding University may make Regulations consistent 
with this Act and the Statutes for — 
(a) laying  down the procedure to be observed at its meetings and the number of members required 
to form a quorum;  
(b) providing for all matters which by this Act and the Statutes are to be provided for by the 
Regulations; and  
(c) providing for any other matter solel y concerning the authority and not provided for by this Act 
and the Statutes.  
(2) Every authority of the corresponding University shall make Regulations providing for the giving 
of notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the  business to be transacted at 
meetings and for keeping of records of the proceedings of the meetings.  
(3) The Academic Council may, subject to the provisions of the Statutes, make Regulations providing 
for courses of study, system of examinations, and degr ees and diplomas of a corresponding University 
after receiving drafts of the same from the Board of Studies concerned.  
(4) The Academic Council may not alter a draft received from the Board of Studies, but may reject or 
return it to the Board of Studies fo r further consideration together with the suggestions of the Academic 
Council.  
(5) The Board may direct the amendment, in such manner as it may specify, of any Regulation made 
under this section or the annulment of any Regulation made under sub -section ( 1). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Regulations made by the existing 
University under section 31 of the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961  (Punjab Act 32 of 1961) and 
in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act and subject to such adaptations and modifications as may be notified by 
the appropriate Government, be the first Regulations of each corresponding University.  
CHAPTER VII  
ACCOUNT S AND AUDIT  
34. Account s and audit .—(1) Each corresponding University shall have a general fund to which 
shall be credited — 
(a) income from fees, endowments and grants and from properties of the University including 
Hostels, Experiment Stations and Farms;  
(b) contributions and grants which may be made by the appropriate Government on such 
conditions which it may impose; and  
(c) other contributions, grants, donations and benefactions.  
(2) Each corresponding University shall constitute a Finance Committee con sisting of— 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Comptroller;  
(c) a member chosen by the Board from amongst the official members;  
(d) a member chosen by the Board from amongst the non -official members.  
(3) The powers and duties of the Finance Committee of a corresponding University shall be as 
follows— 
(a) to examine the annual accounts of the University and to advise the Board thereon;  
(b) to examine the annual budget estimates and to advise the Board thereon;  17 
 (c) to review the financial position of the Univ ersity from time to time;  
(d) to make recommendations to the University on all matters relating to the finances of the 
University;  
(e) to make recommendations to the Board on all proposals involving expenditure for which no 
provision has been made in the b udget or which involves expenditure in excess of the amount 
provided in the budget.  
(4) The accounts and the balance -sheet shall be submitted by the Vice -Chancellor through the Board 
to the appropriate Government which shall cause them to be audited by the  Examiner, Local Fund 
Accounts.  
(5) The accounts, when audited, shall be printed and copies thereof together with audit report, shall be 
submitted by the Vice -Chancellor to the Board, which shall forward them to the appropriate Government 
with such comments as it may deem fit and that Government shall cause a copy of the audited accounts 
together with its comments thereon to be laid before the State Legislature.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Division of assets and liabilities .—On the commencement of  this Act, the assets and liabilities of 
the existing University shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Haryana Agricultural University 
and the Punjab Agricultural University and shall be apportioned between such Universities in accordance 
with the following principles, namely: — 
(a) (i) any asset of the existing University which is, immediately before the commencement of 
this Act, in the State of Haryana, and every right to such property, shall stand transferred to, and shall 
vest in, the Haryan a Agricultural University;  
(ii) every other asset and every right thereto shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Punjab Agricultural University;  
(b) (i) every liability of the existing University which is relatable to any unit or asset in the S tate 
of Haryana shall, if subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Act, be the liability of 
the Haryana Agricultural University;  
(ii) every other liability of the existing University, if subsisting on such commencement, shall be 
the liability  of the Punjab Agricultural University;  
(c) the cash balances (whether in the form of cash, bank or security deposits) and reserve funds 
held by the existing University, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, after 
deducting all the liabil ities of the existing University up to such commencement, be apportioned 
between the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricult ural University in the ratio        
of 40 :60; 
(d) every contract made by the existing University before the commence ment of this Act shall, if 
subsisting at such commencement, be deemed to have been made — 
(i) in the case of a contract which is relatable to any asset or unit of the existing University in 
the State of Haryana, by the Haryana Agricultural University;  
(ii) in any other case, by the Punjab Agricultural University;  
(e) every share, debenture, bond and other investment made by the existing University shall be 
valued on the basis of average market value thereof during one year immediately before the 
commencement  of this Act, and the value so determined shall be apportioned between the Haryana 
Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University in the ratio of 40:60;  
(f) every borrowing made by the existing University before the commencement of this Act  shall, 
if the liability is subsisting on such commencement, be repaid together with the interest due thereon 
by the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University in the ratio of 40:60;  18 
 (g) the Provident Fund and accruals thereto o f every officer or other employee of the existing 
University shall stand transferred to the corresponding University in which he has been posted on the 
date of the commencement of this Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “asset” shall be de emed to include all property, 
movable and immovable, rights, powers, authorities and privileges, and all other rights and interests 
arising out of such property as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the ownership, 
possession, power or control of the existing University, and all books of accounts, registers, records and 
all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all obligations 
of whatever kind then subsisting of the existing University.  
36. Legal proceedings .—If, at the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature is pending by or against the existing University, the same shall not abate, be discontinued 
or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason  of the dissolution of the existing University, but the suit, 
appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against — 
(a) the  Haryana Agricultural University, if it relates to any property or unit of the existing 
University in the State of Haryana; and  
(b) in any other case, the Punjab Agricultural University.  
37. Transfer of employees .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in section 13, all officers and other 
employees of the existing University holding office as such immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall, on such commencement, become the officers or other employees of the corresponding 
University and such officers or other employees shall be divided between those Universities in 
accordance with the following principles, namely: — 
(a) those officers or other employees of the existing University who are holding office in, or in 
connection with, any property or unit of the  existing University in the State of Haryana shall become 
the officers or other employees of the Haryana Agricultural University;  
(b) every other officer or other employee of the existing University, shall become the officer or 
other employee of the Punjab  Agricultural University.  
(2) Every officer or other employee of the existing University shall, on and from the commencement 
of this Act hold his office or service in the corresponding University on the same terms and conditions 
and with the same rights to  pension, provident fund , gratuity and other matters as would have been 
admissible to him if the existing University had not been dissolved, and continue to do so unless and until 
his employment in the corresponding University is duly terminated or until h is remuneration and terms or 
conditions of service are duly altered by the corresponding University.  
(3) For the persons who, immediately before the commencement of this Act, were the trustees for 
pension, provident, gratuity or other like fund, constitute d for the officers or other employees of the 
existing University, there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the appropriate Government may 
by general or special order, specify.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee from the 
existing University to a corresponding University shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any 
compensat ion, whether under this Act or under any other  law for the time being in force, and no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
38. Member ship of corresponding University bodies .—(1) All casual vacancies among the 
members (other than ex officio  members) of any authority or body of each corresponding University shall 
be filled, as soon as possible, by the person or body who or which appointed or nominated the member, 
whose place became vacant, and the person appointed or nom inated to a casual vacancy shall be a 
member of such authority or body for the remaining period of the term for which the person whose place 
he fills would have been a member.  
  19 
 (2) A person, who is a member of any authority of a corresponding University a s a representative of 
another body, whether of that University or not, shall retain his seat on that authority so long as he 
continues to be a member of the body by which he was appointed or nominated and thereafter till his 
successor is duly appointed or elected.  
(3) No act or proceeding of any authority or body of a corresponding University shall be invalid by 
reason merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of such authority or body.  
(4) If any question arises whether any person has been duly appointed as, or is entitled to be, a 
member of any authority of a corresponding University subordinate to the Board or whether any decision 
of the corresponding University is in accordance with this Act and the Statutes, the question shall be 
referred to the appropriate Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
39. Annual Report .—(1) The Annual Report of a corresponding University shall be prepared under 
the directions of the Vice -Chancellor and submitted to the Board at least one month before the annual 
meeting at which it is to be considered.  
(2) The Board shall, after consideration of the Annual Report, forward a copy thereof to the 
appropriate Government.  
(3) On receipt of a copy of the Annual Report referred to in sub -section (1), the appropriate 
Government shall cause a copy of such Report, together with its comments thereon, to be laid before the 
State Legislature.  
(4) Notwithstanding the dissolution of the existing University, the Annual Report of the existing 
University for the year 1969 -70 shall be prepared under the directions of the Vice -Chancellor of the 
Punjab Agricultural University and the Board of that University shall, after consideration of the Annual 
Report, forward a copy thereof to the appropriate Government.  
40. Construction of references to existing University in any document, etc. —Any reference to the 
existing University in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or other instrument shall be 
construed, — 
(a) if such reference relates to any asset or  property of the existing University in the State of 
Haryana, as a reference to the Haryana Agricultural University; and  
(b) in any other case, as a reference to the Punjab Agricultural University.  
41. Obligations to be discharged by the Punjab Agricultural University .—Any obligation 
incurred, before the commencement of this Act, by the existing University to confer any degree or other 
academic distinction on, or to issue any diploma or other certificat e to, any person or to grant any copy of 
any degree, diploma, certificate, marks -sheet or other document to any person shall, on such 
commencement, be the obligation of the Punjab Agricultural University.  
42. Proportion of cost to be borne by the Governmen t of Himachal Pradesh .—In consideration of 
the maintenance, by the Punjab Agricultural University, of a campus at Palampur, the Government of the 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall bear a portion of the cost of the Punjab Agricultural University 
and the quantum of such cost shall be determined by the Central Government having regard to the benefit 
derived by that Union territory.  
43. Settlement of unresolved  disputes .—(1) If any dispute arises by reason of the dissolution of the 
existing University, such dispute shall be resolved in the first instance by the Vice -Chancellors of the 
corresponding Universities and in the event of the failure of such Vice -Chancellors to arrive at an agreed 
solution with regard to any such dispute, the matter shall be ref erred to the Secretary to the Government 
of India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture and the decision thereon of such Secretary shall be final.  
(2) If, on the establishment of a University in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, any dispute 
arise s with regard to the transfer of assets or liabilities pertaining to the Agricultural College at Palampur 
or the research, training and extension centres, or property, of the Punjab Agricultural University located 
in the said Union territory or with regard  to the transfer of the officers or other employees of such College 
or centres to the University established in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, such dispute shall be 
resolved in the first instance by the Vice -Chancellor of the Punjab Agricultural University and the      20 
 Chief Secretary to the Government of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh and in the event of their 
failure to arrive at an agreed solution with regard to any such dispute, the matter shall be referred to the 
Secretary to the Gov ernment of India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture and the decision thereon of 
such Secretary shall be final.  
44. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President may, by order, do anything, not inconsistent with such provisions, which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry of the period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
45. Repeals and saving .—(1) The Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961  (Punjab                       
Act 32 of 1961), is hereby repealed.  
(2) The provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897), shall apply to the repeal of the said  
Act as if the said Act were a Central Act.  
(3) The Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Ordinance, 1970  (1 of 1970), is hereby 
repealed.  
(4) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to  have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIAN MEDICINE CENTRAL COUNCIL ACT, 1970                                                                                                                                  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL COUNCIL AND ITS COMMTTEES  
3. Constitution of Central Council.  
4. Mode of election.  
5. Restriction on elections and membership.  
6. Incorporation of Central Council.  
7. Term of office of President, Vice -President and members of Central Council.  
8. Meetings of  Central Council.  
9. Committees for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani.  
10. Other committees.  
11. Meetings of committees.  
12. Officers and other employees of Central Council.  
13. Vacancies in the Central Council and committees thereof not to invalidate acts, etc.  
CHAPTER IIA  
PERMISSION FOR NEW MEDICAL INSTITUTION, COURSE, ETC . 
13A. Permission for establishment of new medical college , new course of study, etc. 
13B. Non -recognition of medical qualifications in certain cases.  
13C. Time for seeking permission for certa in existing medical colleges.  
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITIONOF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS  
14. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by certain medical institutions in  India.  
15. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by certain medical institutions who se 
qualifications are not included in Second Schedule . 
16. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in countries with which 
there is a scheme of reciprocity.  
17. Rights of persons possessing qualifications included in Second, T hird and Fourth Schedules 
to be enrolled.  
18. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations.  
19. Inspectors at examinations.  
20. Visitors at examinations.  2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Withdrawal of recognition.  
22. Minimum standards of education in Indian medicine.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE CENTRAL REGISTER OF INDIAN MEDICINE  
23. The Central Register of Indian Medicine.  
24. Supply of copies of State Register of Indian Medicine.  
25. Registration in the Central Register of Indian Medicine.  
26. Professional conduct.  
27. Removal of names from the Central Register of Indian Medicine.  
28. Provisional registration for practice.  
29. Privileges of persons who are enrolled on the Central Register of Indian Medicine.  
30. Registration of additional qualifications.  
31. Persons enrolled on Central Register of Indian Medicine to notify change of place of 
residence and practice . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Information to be furnished by Central Council and publication thereof.  
33. Commission of inquiry . 
34. Protection of a ction taken in good faith.  
35. Power to make rules.  
36. Power to make regulations.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE INDIAN MEDICINE CENTRAL COUNCIL ACT, 1970 * 
ACTNO.48 OF 1970  
[21st December, 1970 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of a Central Council of Indian Medicine and the 
maintenance of a Central Register of Indian Medicine and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indian Medicine Central 
Council Act, 1970.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf for such State, and different dates may be appointed for 
different States and for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwis e requires, — 
(a) “approved institution ” means a teaching institution, health centr e or hospital recognised by a 
University or Board as an institution in which a person may undergo the training, if any, required by 
his course of study before the award of any medical qualification to him;  
(b) “Board ” means a Board, Council, Examining Body or Faculty of Indian Medicine (by 
whatever name called) constituted by the State Government under any law for the time being in force 
regulating the award of medical qualifications in, and registration of practitioners of, Indian medicine;  
(c) “Central Cou ncil” means the Central Council of Indian Medicine constituted under section 3;  
(d) “Central Register of Indian Medicine ” means the register maintained by the Central Council 
under this Act;  
(e) “Indian medicine ” means the system of Indian medicine commonly known as Ashtang 
Ayurveda, Siddha  2[or Unani Tibb] whether supplemented or not by such modern advances as the 
Central Council may declare by notification from time to time;  
3[(ea) “medical college ” means a coll ege of Indian medicine, whether known as such or by any 
other name, in which a person may undergo a course of study or training including any post -graduate 
course of study or training which will qualify him for the award of a recognised medical 
qualificati on;] 
(f) “medical institution ” means any institution within or without India which grants degrees, 
diplomas or licences in Indian medicine;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations;  
(h) “recognised medical qualification ” means any of the medical qu alifications, including post -
graduate medical qualification, of Indian medicine included in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule;  
(i) “regulation ” means a regulation made under section 36;  
                                                           
1. 15th August, 1971, vide notification No. S.O. 2994, dated 10th August, 1971, in respect of s s. 2, 13, 32 to 36 (both inclusive) in 
the whole of India and  ss. 3, 5 to 12 (both inclusive) and 14 to 16 (both inclusive) in all the States (except the State of 
Nagaland) a nd the Union territory of Delhi, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st October, 1974, videnotification No. S.O. 584(E),  dated the 1 st October, 1974 , in respect of ss. 18 to 22 (both inclusive), see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii), 
1st October, 1976, vide notification No. S.O. 626(E), dated the 10th September, 1976 , in respect of ss. 17 and 23 to 31(both 
inclusive), see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii), 
2. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 43 of 2010, s. 2 , to read as “, Un ani, Tibb or        
Sowa -Rigpa” . 
3. Ins. by Act 58 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -11-2003).  
* Subject to verification and confirmation by the administrative ministry.  4 
 (j) “State Register of Indian Medicine ” means a register or registers maintained under any law for 
the time  being in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners of Indian medicine;  
(k) “University ” means any University in India established by law and having a Faculty of Indi an 
Medicine and includes a University in India established by law in which instruction, teaching, 
training or research in Indian medicine is provided.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, 
in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL COUNCIL AND ITS COMMTTEES  
3. Constitution of Central Council .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of this Act a Central Council consisting o f the following 
members, namely :— 
(a) such number of members not exceeding five as may be determined by the Central 
Government in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule for each of the Ayurveda, 
Siddha  1[and Unani ] systems of medicine from each State in which a State Register of Indian 
Medicine is maintained, to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on that Register 
as practitioners of Ayur veda, Siddha  2[or Unani], as the case may be;  
(b) one member for each of the Ayurveda, Siddha  1[and Unani] Systems of medicine from each 
University to be elected from amongst themselves by the members of the Faculty or Department (by 
whatever name called) of the respective system of medicine of that University;  
(c) such number of members, not exceeding thirty per cent . of the total number of members 
elected under clauses ( a) and ( b), as may be nominated by the Central Government, from amongst 
persons having  special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Indian medicine : 
Provided that until members are elected under clause ( a) or clause ( b) in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder , the Central Government shall nominate such 
number of members, being persons qualified to be chosen as such under the said clause ( a) or clause ( b), 
as the case may be, as that Government thinks fit; and reference to elected members in this Act shall be 
construed as including references to members so nominated.  
(2) The President of the Central Council shall be elected by the members of the Central Council from 
amongst themselves in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) There shall be a Vice -President for ea ch of the Ayurveda, Siddha  1[and Unani] systems of 
medicine who shall be elected from amongst themselves by members representing that system of 
medicine, elected under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) or nominated under clause ( c) of that 
sub-section.  
4. Mode of election .—(1) An election under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 
shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by it in this 
behalf.  
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Central Council, it shall be referred to the 
Central Government whose decision shall be final.  
5. Restriction on elections and membership .—(1) No person shall be eligible for election to the 
Central Council unless he possesses  any of the medical qualifications included in the Second, Third or 
Fourth Schedule, is enrolled on any State Register of Indian Medicine and resides in the State concerned.  
(2) No person may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity.  
                                                           
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 43 of 2010, s. 3 , to read as “, Unani and Sowa -
Rigpa”.  
2. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by s. 3, ibid., to read as “, Unani or Sowa -Rigpa” . 
 5 
 6. Incorporation of Central Council .—The Central Council shall be a body corporate by the name 
of the Central Council of Indian Medicine having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immo vable , and to contract, and shall by the said 
name sue and be sued.  
7. Term of office of President, Vice -President and members of Central Council .—(1) The 
President, a Vice -President or a member of the Central Council shall hold office for a term of five y ears 
from the date of his election or nomination , as the case may be, or until his successor shall have been duly 
elected or nominated, whichever is longer.  
(2) An elected or nominated member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without  
excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Central Council, from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the 
Central Council or, in the case of a member elected under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3, if he 
ceases to be enrolled on the concerned St ate Register of Indian Medicine, or in the case of a member 
elected under clause ( b) of that sub -section, if he ceases to be a member of the Faculty or Department (by 
whatever name called) of Indian Medicine of the University concerned . 
(3) A casual vacancy in the Central Council shall be filled by election or nomination, as the case may 
be, and the person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the 
term for which the member whose place he takes was elected  or nominated.  
(4) Members of the Central Council shall be eligible for re -election or re -nomination.  
(5) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be 
elected or nominated at any time within three months  before the said term expires but he shall not assume 
office until the said term has expired.  
8. Meetings of Central Council .—(1) The Central Council shall meet at least once in each year at 
such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Council.  
(2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one -third of the total number of members of the Central Council 
shall form a quorum, and all the acts of the Central Council shall be decided by a majority of the members 
present and voting:  
Provided that no decision of the Central Council in relation to any Indian medicine shall be effective 
unless three members representing Ayurveda, Siddha  1[or Unani] system of medicine, as the case may be, 
are present at the meeting and support the decision.  
9. Committees for Ayurveda, Si ddha and Unani .—2[(1) The Central Council shall constitute from 
amongst its members, — 
(a) a committee for Ayurveda;  
(b) a committee for Siddha; and  
(c) a committee for Unani,  
and each such committee shall consist of members elected under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or nominated 
under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 representing the Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani systeme of 
medicine, as the case may be.]  
                                                           
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 43 of 2010, s. 4 , to read as “, Unani or Sowa -Rigpa”.  
2. Sub -section ( 1) shall stand substituted (date to be  notified)  by s. 5, ibid.,to read as under :— 
“(1) The Central Council shall constitute from amongst its members, — 
(a) a committee for Ayurveda;  
(b) a committee for Siddha;  
(c) a committee for Unani; and  
(d) a committee for Sowa -Rigpa,  
and each such committee shall consist of members elected under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or nominated under clause ( c) of        
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 representing the Ayurveda, S iddha, Unani or Sowa -Rigpa system of medicine, as the case may be. ”. 6 
 (2) The Vice -President for each of the Ayurveda, Siddha  1[and Unani] systems of medicine elected 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 shall be, respectively, the Chairman of the Committees referred to in 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to such general or special directions as the Central Council may from time to time give, 
each such committee shall be competent to deal with any matter relating to Ayurveda, Siddha  2[or Unani] 
system of medicine, as the case may be, within the competence of the Central Council.  
10. Other committees .—The Central Council may constitute from amongst i ts members such other 
committees for general or special purposes as the Central Council deems necessary to carry out the 
purposes of this Act.  
11. Meetings of committees .—(1) The committees constituted under sections 9 and 10 shall meet at 
least once in ea ch year at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Council.  
(2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one -third of the total number of members of a committee shall form 
a quorum, and all the acts of the committee shall be decided by a majority of the  members present and 
voting.  
12. Officers and other employees of Central Council .—The Central Council shall — 
(a) appoint a Registrar who shall act as Secretary and who may also, if deemed expedient, act as 
Treasurer;  
(b) employ such other persons as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act;  
(c) require and take from the Registrar, or from any other employee, such security for the due 
performance of his duties as the Central Council deems necessary; and  
(d) with the previous sanction of th e Central Government , fix the remuneration and allowances to 
be paid to the President , Vice -President and members of the Central Council and to the members of 
the committees thereof and determine the conditions of service of the employees of the Central 
Council.  
13. Vacancies in the Central Council and Committees thereof not to invalidate acts, etc. —No act 
or proceeding of the Central Council or any committee thereof shall be called in question on the ground 
merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Council or the 
committee, as the case may be . 
3[CHAPTER IIA  
PERMISSION FOR NEW MEDICAL COLL EGE , COURSE, ETC.  
13A. Permission for establishment of new medical college , new course of study, etc .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, — 
(a) no person shall establish a medical college ; or 
(b) no medical college  shall— 
(i) open a new or higher course of study or training, including a post -graduate course of study 
or training, which would enable a student of such course or training to qualify himself for the 
award of any recognised medical qualification; or  
(ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training including a post -
graduate course of study or training , 
except with the previous permission of the Central Government obtained in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.  
                                                           
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 43 of 2010, s. 3 to read as “, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa”.  
2. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by s. 5, ibid., to read as “, Unani or Sowa -Rigpa” . 
3. Subs . by Act 5 8 of 200 3, s. 3, for Chapter IIA (w.e.f. 7-11-2003). 7 
 Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “person ” includes any University or a trust, but does 
not include the Central Government.  
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, “admission capacity ”, in relation to any course of 
study or training, including post-graduate course of study or training, in a medical college , means the 
maximum number of students as may be fixed by the Central Government  from time to time for being 
admitted to such course or training.  
(2) Every person or medical college  shall, for the purpose of obtaining permission under sub -section 
(1), submit to the Central Government a scheme in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) and 
the Central Government shall refer the scheme to the Central Council for its recommend ations.  
(3) The scheme referred to in sub -section ( 2), shall be in such form and contain such particulars and 
be preferred in such manner and accompanied with such fee, as may be prescribed.  
(4) On receipt of a scheme from the Central Government under sub -section ( 2), the Central Council 
may obtain such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or the medical 
college  concerned, and thereafter, it may, — 
(a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain necessary particulars, give a reasonable 
opportunity to the person or medical college  concerned for making a written representation and it 
shall be open to such person or medical college  to rectify the defe cts, if any, specified by the Central 
Council;  
(b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors referred to in sub -section ( 8) and submit it to 
the Central Government together with its recommendations thereon within a period not exceeding six 
months f rom the date of receipt of the reference from the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may, after considering the scheme and recommendation s of the Central 
Council under sub -section ( 4) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars  as may be 
considered necessary by it from the person or medical college  concerned and having regard to the factors 
referred to in sub -section ( 8), either approve the scheme with such conditions, if any, as it may consider 
necessary or disapprove the schem e and any such approval shall c onstitute as a permission under           
sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Central Government except after giving the 
person or medical college  concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent any person or medical college  whose 
scheme has not been approved by the Central Government to submit a fresh scheme and the provision s of 
this section shall apply to such scheme as if such scheme had been submitted for the first time under sub -
section ( 2). 
(6) Where, within a period of one year from the date of submission of the scheme to the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 2), no order is communicated by the Central Government to the person or 
medical college  submitting the scheme, such scheme shall be deemed to have been approved by the 
Central Government in the form in which it was submitted, and, accordingly, the permission of the 
Central Government required under sub -section ( 1) shall also be deemed to have been granted.  
(7) In computing the time -limit specified in sub -section ( 6), the time taken by the person or medical 
college  concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing any part iculars called for by the Central Council, 
or by the Central Government , shall be excluded.  
(8) The Central Council while making its recommendations under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4) and 
the Central Government while passing an order, either approving or  disapproving the scheme under sub -
section ( 5), shall have due regard to the following factors, namely: — 
(a) whether the proposed medical college  or the existing medical college  seeking to open a new 
or higher course of study or training, would be in a position to offer the minimum standards of 
medical education as prescribed by the Central Council under section 22;  8 
 (b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical college  or the existing medical college  
seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase its admission capacity has 
adequate financial resources;  
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training, hosp ital 
or other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the medical college  or conducting the new course of 
study or training or accommodating the increased admission capacity have been provided or would be 
provided within the time -limit specified in the scheme;  
(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number of students likely to attend 
such medical college  or course of study or training or the increased admission capacity have been 
provided or would be provided within the time -limit  specified in the scheme;  
(e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to 
students likely to attend such medical college  or the course of study or training by persons having 
recognised medical qualifications;  
(f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice of Indian medicine in the college ; 
(g) any other factors as may be prescribed.  
(9) Where the Central Government passes an order either approving or disapproving a scheme under 
this section, a copy of the order shall be communicated to the person or medical college  concerned.  
13B. Non -recognition of medical qualifications in certain cases. —(1) Where any medical college  
is established without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance wi th the 
provisions of section 13 A, medical qualification granted to any student of such medical college  shall not 
be deemed to be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Where any medical college  opens a new or higher course of study or training including a post -
graduate course of study or training without the previous permission of the Central Government in 
accordance with the provisions of section 13A, medical qualification granted to any student of such 
medical college  on the basis of such study or training shall not be deemed to be a recognised medical 
qualification for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) Where any medical college  increases its admission capacity in any course of study or training 
without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 
13A, medical qualification granted to any student of such medical college  on the bas is of the increase in 
its admission capacity shall not be deemed to be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of 
this Act . 
13C. Time for seeking permission for certain existing medical colleges .—(1) If any person has 
established a medical coll ege or any medical college has opened a new or higher course of study or 
training or increased the admission capacity on or before the commencement of the Indian Medicine 
Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2003, such person or medical college, as the case ma y be, shall seek, 
within a period of three years from the said commencement, permission of the Central Government in 
accordance with the provisions of section 13A.  
(2) If any person or medical college, as the case may be, fails to seek permission under sub -section 
(1), the provisions of section 13B shall apply, so far as may be, as if permission of the Central 
Government under section 13A has been refused. ] 
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITIONOF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS  
14. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by  certain medical institutions in India .—(1) 
The medical qualifications granted by any University, Board , or other medical institution in India which 
are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications or the purposes of this 
Act. 
  9 
 (2) Any University, Board or other medical institution in India which grants a medical qualification 
not included in the Second Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have any such qualification 
recognised, and the Central Government, after con sulting the Central Council, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such 
notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Second Schedul e against 
such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted 
after a specified date.  
15. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by certain medical institutions whose 
qualifications are not incl uded in Second Schedule .—The medical qualifications included in the Third 
Schedule granted to a citizen of India before the 15th day of August, 1947, by any medical institution in 
any area which was comprised before that date within India as defined in the  Government of India Act, 
1935, shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.  
16. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in countries with 
which there is a scheme of reciprocity .—(1) The medica l qualifications granted by medical institutions 
outside India which are included in the Fourth Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central Council may enter into negotiations with the authority in any State or country outside 
India, which by the law of such State or country is entrusted with the maintenance of a Register of 
practitioners of Indian medicine, for the settling of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical 
qualifications in Indi an medicine, and in pursuance of any such scheme, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Fourth Schedule so as to include therein any medical 
qualification which the Central Council has decided should be recognised a nd any such notification may 
also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Fourth Schedule against such medical 
qualification declaring that it shall be recognised medical qualification only when granted after a specified 
date.  
17. Rights of persons possessing qualifications included in Second, Third and Fourth Schedules 
to be enrolled .—(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, any medical qualification 
included in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule shall be suffi cient qualification for enrolment on any 
State Register of Indian Medicine.  
(2) Save as provided in section 28, no person other than a practitioner of Indian medicine who 
possesses a recognised medical qualification and is enrolled on a State Register or t he Central Register of 
Indian Medicine ,— 
(a) shall hold office as Vaid, Siddha, Hakim or  1[physician or] any other office (by whatever 
designation called) in Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority;  
(b) shall practi se Indi an medicine in any State;  
(c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate 
required by a law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical practitioner;  
(d) shall be entitled to give eviden ce at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert under 
section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) , on any matter relating to Indian medicine.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 2) shall affect, — 
(a) the right of a practitioner of Indian medicine enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine 
to practi se Indian medicine in any State merely on the ground that, on the commencement of this Act, 
he does not possess a recognised medical qualification ; 
(b) the privileges (including the right to practi se any system of medicine) conferred by or under 
any law relating to registration of practitioners of Indian medicine for the time being in force in any 
State on a practitioner of Indian medicine enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medici ne; 
                                                           
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 43 of 2010, s. 6 , to read as “ physician or Amchi ”. 10 
 (c) the right of a person to practi se Indian medicine in a State in which, on the commencement of 
this Act, a State Register of Indian Medicine is not maintained if, on such commencement, he has 
been practicing Indian medicine for not less than five ye ars; 
(d) the rights conferred by or under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956  (102 of 
1956)[ including the right to practi se medicine as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the said Act ], on 
persons possessing any qualifications included in the Schedules  to the said Act.  
(4) Any person who acts in contravention of any provision of sub -section ( 2) shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
18. Power to req uire information as to courses of study and examinations .—Every University, 
Board or medical institution in India which grants a recognised medical qualification shall furnish such 
information as the Central Council may, from time to time, require as to th e courses of study and 
examinations to be undergone in order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of 
study and examinations are required to be undergone and such qualification is conferred and generally as 
to the requisites fo r obtaining such qualification.  
19. Inspectors at examinations .—(1) The Central Council shall appoint such number of medical 
inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical college, hospital or other institution where 
education in Indian medicin e is given, or to attend any examination held by any University, Board or 
medical institution for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of medical 
qualifications granted by that University, Board or medical institution.  
(2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but 
shall report to the Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including 
staffequipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education in Indian 
medicine or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  
(3) The Central Council shall forward a copy of any such report to the University, Board or medical 
institution concerned, and shall also forward a copy w ith the remarks of the University, Board or medical 
institution thereon, to the Central Government.  
20. Visitors at examinations .—(1) The Central Council may appoint such number of visitors as it 
may deem requisite to inspect any medical college, hospital or other institution where education in Indian 
medicine is given or to attend any examination for the purpose of granting recognised medical 
qualifications.  
(2) Any person, whether he is a member of the Central Council or not, may be appointed as a visitor  
under this section but a person who is appointed as an inspector under section 19 for any inspection or 
examination shall not be appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or examination.  
(3) The visitors shall not interfere with The conduct of any tr aining or examination, but shall report to 
the President of the Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff, 
equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education in Indian 
medicine or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  
(4) The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the President of 
the Central Council otherwise directs:  
Provided that if the Central Government requires a co py of the report of a visitor, the Central Council 
shall furnish the same.  
21. Withdrawal of recognition .—(1) When upon report by the inspector or the visitor, it appears to 
the Central Council — 
(a) that the courses of study and examination to be undergone  in, or the proficiency required from 
candidates at any examination held by, any University, Board or medical institution, or  11 
 (b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and 
training provided in such  Univer sity, Board or medical institution or in any college or other institution 
affiliated to the University,  
do not conform to the standard prescribed by the Central Council, the Central Council shall make a 
representation to that effect to the Central Governmen t. 
(2) After considering such representation, the Central Government may send it to the Government of 
the State in which the University, Board or medical institution is situated and the State Government shall 
forward it along with such remarks as it may choose to make to the University, Board or medical 
institution, with an intimation of the period within which the University, Board or medical institution may 
submit its explanation to the State Government.  
(3) On the receipt of the explanation or, where n o explanation is submitted within the period fixed, 
then,  on the expiry of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendations to the Central 
Government.  
(4) The Central Government, after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may think fi t, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate Schedule against 
the said medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when 
granted before a specified date, or that the said medical qualification if granted to students of a specified 
college or institution affiliated to any University shall be recognised medical qualification only when 
granted before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said medic al qualification shall be 
recognised medical qualification in relation to a specified college or institution affiliated to any University 
only when granted after a specified date.  
22. Minimum standards of education in Indian medicine .—(1) The Central Counc il may prescribe 
the minimum standards of education in Indian medicine, required for granting recognised medical 
qualifications by Universities, Boards or medical institutions in India . 
(2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments t hereof shall be furnished by the 
Central Council to all State Governments and the Central Council shall, before submitting the regulations 
or any amendment thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for sanction, take into 
consideration the com ments of any State Government received within three months from the furnishing of 
the copies as aforesaid.  
(3) Each of the Committees referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9 shall, 
from time to time, report to the Central Co uncil on the efficacy of the regulations and may recommend to 
the Central Council such amendments thereof as it may think fit.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE CENTRAL REGISTER OF INDIAN MEDICINE  
23. The Central Register of Indian Medicine .—(1) The Central Council shall cause to be 
maintained in the prescribed manner, a register of practitioners in separate parts for each of the system of 
Indian medicine to be known as the Central Register of Indian Medicine which shall contain the names of 
all persons who are for the tim e being enrolled on any State Register of Indian Medicine and who possess 
any of the recognised medical qualifications.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Central Council to keep and maintain the Central 
Register of Indian Medicine in accorda nce with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the 
Central Council, and from time to time to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India and in 
such other manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) , and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.  
  12 
 24. Supply of copies of State Register of Indian Medicine .—Each Board shall supply to the Central 
Council thre e printed copies of the State Register of Indian Medicine as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this A ct and subsequently after the first day of April of each year, and each Board sha ll 
inform the Central Council without delay of all additions to and other amendments in the State Register of 
Indian Medicine made from time to time.  
25. Registration in the Central Register of Indian Medicine .—The Registrar of the Central 
Council may on receipt of  the report of registration of a person in a State Register of Indian Medicine or 
on application made in the prescribed manner by any person, enter his name in the Central Register of 
Indian Medicine, provided that the Registrar is satisfied that the perso n concerned is eligible under this 
Act for such registration.  
26. Professional conduct .—(1) The Central Council may prescribe standards of professional conduct 
and etiquette and a code of ethics for practitioners of Indian medicine.  
(2) Regulations made by  the Central Council under sub -section ( 1) may specify which violations 
thereof shall constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional 
misconduct, and such provision shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force.  
27. Removal of names from the Central Register of Indian Medicine .—(1) If the name of any 
person enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine is removed therefrom in pursuance of any power 
conferred by or under an y law relating to registration of practitioners of Indian medicine for the time 
being in force in any State, the Central Council shall direct the removal of the name of such person from 
the Central Register of Indian Medicine.  
(2) Where the name of any per son has been removed from a State Register of Indian Medicine on any 
ground other than that he is not possessed of the requisite medical qualifications or where any application 
by the said person for restoration of his name to the State Register of Indian Medicine has been rejected, 
he may appeal in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions, including , conditions as to the 
payment of a fee, as may be prescribed, to the Central Government whose decision, which shall be given 
after consulting the C entral Council, shall be binding on the State Government and on the authorities 
concerned , with the preparation of the State Register of Indian Medicine.  
28. Provisional registration for practice .—If the courses of study to be undergone for obtaining a 
recognised medical qualification in Indian medicine include a period of training after a person has passed 
the qualifying examination and before such qualification is conferred on him, any such person shall, on 
application made by him in this behalf, be grant ed provisional registration in a State Register of Indian 
Medicine by the Board concerned in order to enable him to practi se Indian medicine in an approved 
institution for the purpose of such training and for no other purpose for the period aforesaid.  
29. Privileges of persons who are enrolled on the Central Register of Indian Medicine .—Subject 
to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act regarding practice of Indian medicine by persons 
possessing certain recognised medical qualifications, every  person whose name is for the time being 
borne on the Central Register of Indian Medicine shall be entitled according to his qualifications to 
practi se Indian medicine in any part of India and to recover in due course of law in respect of such 
practise any  expenses, charges in respect of medicaments or other appliances or any fees to which he may 
be entitled.  
30. Registration of additional qualifications .—(1) If any person whose name is entered in the 
Central Register of Indian Medicine obtains any title, d iploma or other qualification for proficiency in 
Indian medicine which is a recognised medical qualification, he shall, on application made in this behalf 
in the prescribed manner, be entitled to have an entry stating such other title, diploma or other 
qualification made against his name in the Central Register of Indian Medicine either in substitution for or 
in addition to any entry previously made.  
(2) The entries in respect of such person in a State Register of Indian Medicine shall be altered in 
accordance with the alterations made in the Central Register of Indian Medicine.  13 
 31. Persons enrolled on Central Register of Indian Medicine to notify change of place of 
residence and practice .—Every person registered in the Central Register of Indian Medi cine shall notify 
any transfer of the place of his residence or practice to the Central Council and to the Board concerned, 
within ninety days of such transfer , failing which his right to participate in the election of members to the 
Central Council or a B oard shall be liable to be forfeited by order of the Central Government either 
permanently or for such period as may be specified therein.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Information to be furnished by Central Council and publication thereof .—(1) The Central , 
Council shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts , and other information to 
the Central Government as that Government may require.  
(2) The Central Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit, any report, co py, abstract 
or other information furnished to it under this section or under section 20.  
33. Commission of inquiry .—(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Central Government that the 
Central Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Ac t, the Central Government may 
refer the particulars of the complaint to a commission of inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom 
shall be appointed by the Central Government, one being a Judge of a High Court, and one by the Central 
Council, and su ch commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Central 
Government as to the truth of the matters charged in the complaint, and in case of any charge of default or 
of improper action being found by the commission to have bee n established, the commission shall 
recommend the remedies, if any, which are in its opinion necessary.  
(2) The Central Government may require the Central Council to adopt the remedies so recommended 
within such time as, having regard to the report of the commission, it may think fit, and if the Central 
Council fails to comply with any such requirement, the Central Government may amend the regulations 
of the Central Council, or make such provision or order or take such other steps as may seem necessary to 
give effect to the recommendations of the commission.  
(3) A commission of inquiry shall have power to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance of 
witnesses and the production of documents, and shall have all such other necessary powers for the 
purpose of  any inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) . 
34. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government, the Central C ouncil or a Board or any committee thereof or any officer or 
servant of the Government or the Central Council or the Board aforesaid for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
35. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree in making any mo dification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without pre judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  14 
 36. Power to make regulations .—1[(1)] The Central Council may, with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government,2[by notification in the Official Gazette,] make regulations generally  to carry out the 
purposes of this Act, and , without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide 
for— 
(a) the manner of election of the President and the Vice -Presidents of the Central Council;  
(b) the management of the property  of the Central Council and the maintenance and audit of its 
accounts;  
(c) the resignation of members of the Central Council;  
(d) the powers and duties of the President and Vice -President;  
(e) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Central Council an d the committees thereof, 
the times and places where such meetings are to be held , and the conduct of business thereat and the 
number of members necessary to constitute a quorum;  
(f) the functions of the committees constituted under section 9 or section 10 ; 
(g) the tenure of office, and the powers and duties of the Registrar and other officers and servants 
of the Central Council;  
3[(ga) the form of the scheme, the particulars to be given in such scheme, the manner in which the 
scheme is to be preferred and the fees payable with the scheme under sub -section ( 3) of section 13A;  
(gb) any other factor under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 8) of section 13A;]  
(h) the appointment, powers, duties and procedure of inspectors and visitors;  
(i) the courses and period of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of 
examination and the standards of proficiency therein to be obtained, in any University, Board or 
medical institutions for grant of recognised medical qualifica tions;  
(j) the standards of st aff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for education in 
Indian medicine;  
(k) the conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of examiners and the conditions of 
admission to such examinations;  
(l) the standards of professional  conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by 
practitioners of Indian medicine;  
(m) the particulars to be stated, and the proof of qualifications to be given in applications for 
registration under this Act;  
(n) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which an appeal under section 27 may be 
preferred;  
(o) the fees to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act: and  
(p) any matter for which under this Act provision may be made by regulation s. 
4[(2) The Central Government shal l cause every regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session , for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessi ons, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be 
made, the regulation  shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, not any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Section 36 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 52 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28 -1-2003).  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s.2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  15 
   
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 1)(a)] 
1. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine the number of 
seats allocated in the Central Council to each of the Ayurveda, Sidha  1[and Unani] systems of medicine in 
each State on the fol lowing basis, namely: — 
(a) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine for 
any of such systems exceeds 100 but does not exceed 10,000    . .      . .     . .       . .   . .                          
1 seat  
(b) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine for 
any of such systems exceeds 10,000 but does not exceed 20,000  . .    . .   . .      . .                            
2 seats  
(c) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Registered of Indian Medicine 
for any of such systems exceeds 20,000 but does not exceed 30,000     . .     . .    . .     . .                         
3 seats  
(d) Where the number of persons enrolled on a Stat Register of Indian Medicine for 
any such systems exceeds 30,000 but does not exceed 40,000     . .      . .     . .       . . . .                         
4 seats  
(e) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine for 
any of such systems exceeds 40,000     . .      . .     . .        . .      . .      . .     . .       . .  . .                         
5 seats  
2. For every subsequent election to the Central Council under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
3, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine the number of seats 
allocated in the Central Council to each of the Ayurveda, Siddha  and Unani systems of medicine on the 
basis laid down in paragraph 1 above.  
  
                                                           
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 43 of 2010, s. 7 , to read as “, Unani a nd Sowa -
Rigpa”.  
 16 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 14 ) 
 
Recognised medical qualifications in Indian me dicine granted by Universities, Boards or other  
medical institutions in India.  
 
 Name of University , Board of 
Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
PART I.—AYURVEDAAND  SIDDHA  
 ANDHRA  
1. Board of Indian Medicine , 
Hyderabad , A.P.  Graduate of College of 
Ayurvedic Medicine . G.C.A.M.  . . 
  Graduate of the College of 
Integrated Medicine . G.C.I.M  . . 
  Ayurved a Visharad  A.V. V. . . 
  Bachelor o f Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S.  . . 
2. Andhra Ayurveda Parishad, 
Vijayawada  (Examining 
Body).  Vaidyavidwan  . . . . 
3. Shri Venkateswar Ayurved a 
Kalasala, Vijayawada . Ayurvedala nkara    
   Ayurv ed-Kalanidhi Diploma 
in Ayurvedic Medicine  D.A.M. . . 
4. Shri Rangacharya Rammohan 
Ayurvedic College, Guntur, 
A.P. Ayurveda Praveen  . . . . 
1[4A. Andhra University, Waltair  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S.  From 1976 
to 1977 ] 
2[4B Nagarjuna University, 
Nagarjuna Nagar . Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M. S.  From 1977 
onwards ]. 
4C. Kakahya University, 
Warangal.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) . B.A.M.S.  From 1976 
onwards.  
4D. Osmania University, 
Hyderabad  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery  B.A.M.S.  From 1976 
onwards.  
    Doctor of Medicine 
(Ayurved)  M.D.(Ayurve
da) From 1974 
onwards.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 638, dated 25 -1-1982.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  17 
  Name of University , Board of 
Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
1[4E. S.V, University, Tirupati  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 1988  
onwards ]. 
2[4F. University of Health Sciences, 
Vijayawada . Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 1992 
onwards].  
   Ayurved Vachaspati  M.D. 
(Ayurved a) From 1989  
onwards ]. 
ASSAM  
5. Board of Ayorvedic Medicine, 
Assam.  Diploma in Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  D.A.M.S.  . . 
3[5A. Gauhati University, Gauhati.  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and  Surgery 
(Ayurvedacharya)  B.A.M.S.  4[From 
1979onward
s]. 
BIHAR 
6 Stale Faculty of Ayurvedic and 
Unani Medicines, Patna, 
Bihar.  Graduate in Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  G.A.M.S.  From 1953 
onwards.  
7. Government Ayurvedic 
School, Patna, Bihar (Former).  Ayurvedacharya  .. . . 
8. Government Ayurvedic 
College, Patna, Bihar.  Ayurvedacharya  . . . . 
3[9. Kameshwar  Singh Darbhanga 
Sanskrit University, 
Darbhanga . Pranacharya (B.A.M.S.) . . From 1962 
onwards.  
   Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) . B.A.M.S.  From 1981 
onwards ]. 
  5[Ayurvedacharya  . . From 1962 
to 1988].  
  6[Vidya Varidhi (Ph. D.)  Ayurved  From 1974 
to 1988].  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 1910, dated 21 -7-1989.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 117(E), dated 17 -2-1999.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
4. Subs. by S.O. No. 1040, dated 6 -4-1989.  
5. Ins. by S.O. No. 5603, dated 2 -12-1985.  
6. Ins. by S.O. No. 518, dated 17 -2-1998.  18 
  Name of University , Board of 
Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 
 2 3 4 
1[9A. University of Bihar, 
Muzaffarpur.  Graducate in Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  G.A.M.S.  From 1973 
to 1981].  
  2[Ayurvedacharya (Bechelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery).  B.A.M.S.  From 1981 
onwards].  
DELHI 
10. Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbia 
College, Delhi.  Ayurvedacharya Dhanwantar
i .. Up to 1958 . 
   Bhishgacharya Dhanwantari . .. Up to 1958 . 
   Vaidya Dhatri  .. Up to 1958 . 
11. Board of Ayurvedic and 
Unani Systems of Medicine, 
Delhi Administration . Bachelor in Indian Medicine 
and Surgery . B.I.M.S.  From  1958 
to 1963 . 
   Ayurvedacharya Dhanwantar
i . . .  . 
   (Diploma in Indian 
Medicine and Surgery)  D.I.M.S.  From 1956 
to 1960.  
   BhishgacharyaDhanwantari  . . . . 
12. All India 
Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi  Ayurved -Visharad  . . . . 
  Ayurved -Bhishak  . . . . 
   Vaidacharya  . . . . 
   Prajavaidya Pariksha  . . . . 
  Vaidya -Visharad  . . . . 
  Ayurvedacharya  . . . . 
   3[Ayurved -Shastri  . . From 
1971onward
s. 
13. Banwarilal Ayurvedic 
Vidyalaya, Delhi.  Vaid -raj . . Up to 1958 . 
    Bhishgacharya  . . Up to 1958 . 
    Ayurvedacharya  . . Up to 1958 . 
14. Examining Body, Ayurvedic 
and Unani Systems of 
Medicine, Delhi . (Bachelor in Indian 
Medicine and Surgery .) B.I.M.S. From 1963 
onwards.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 2313, dated 20 -8-1981.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 2635, dated 18 -9-1980.  19 
  
 Name of University , Board of 
Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
  Ayurvedaeharya  Dhanwantri  . . . . 
  1[Ayurvedaeharya(Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) . B.A.M.S.  From 1978 
onwards].  
  2[Ayurvedaeharya(Ayurvedi
c Bachelor of Indian 
Medicine  and Surgery) . A.B.M.S. From 1975 
to 1978] . 
3[14A.  Delhi University, Delhi.  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  From 1979 
onwards ]. 
4[14B.  Sanatan Dharam Premgiri 
Ayurvedic College (Lahore), 
Delhi . Ayurvedacharya  M.A.M.S.  From 1951 
to 1957] . 
GUJARAT  
15. University of Gujarat . Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S.  3[From 
1961to 
1968] . 
16. M. S. University, Baroda . Ayurveda -visharad  .. 3[Up to 
1953] . 
17. Faculty of Ayurvedic and 
Unani Systems of Medicine, 
Gujarat.  Graduate of  the Faculty of 
Ayurve in Medicine  G.F.A.M.  . . 
18. The Committee for Shuddha 
Ayurvedic Course, Gujarat, 
Ahmedabad.  Ayurved Pravina  D.S.A.C.  . . 
19. Board of Indian Medicine , 
Sau-rashtra . Ayurved -Visharad  . . . . 
20. Post-graduate Training Centre 
in Ayurveda, Jamnagar . Higher Proficiency in 
Ayurveda . H.P.A.  . . 
21. Sarvanamsa Dakshina 
Pariksha Samiti, Baroda . Ayurveduttama  . . . . 
    Ayurved -Madhyama  . . . . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No.  1030, dated 30 -3-1987.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 3186, dated 30 -10-1987.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 2754, dated 29 -5-1985.  20 
 22. Rajkeeya Sanskrit 
Mahavidyalaya, Baroda . Ayurveda -Visharad  . . . . 
 Name of University , Board of 
Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
23. U.P. Ayurveda 
Mahavidyalaya, Patan (Baroda 
State) . Grihit Ayurveda Shastra 
Diploma in Ayurvedic  
Medicine.  D.A.M.  . . 
    Grihit Ayurveda Shastra  L.A M.  Up to 1942 . 
24. Gujarat Ayurved University, 
Jamnagar . Ayurvedacharya  B.S.A.M.  1[From 1968 
to 1982] . 
    Pranacharya  M.S.A.M.  1[Up to July, 
1974].  
  2[Doctor of Philosophy 
(Ayurveda) . Ph.D. 
(Ayurveda)  From 1977 
onwards] . 
    1[Doctor of Medicine . M.D. 
(Ayurveda)  From 1973 
onwards.  
    Doctor of Literature 
(Ayurveda).  D.Lit 
(Ayurveda ). From 1976  
onwards.  
    Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) . B.A.M.S.  From 1982 
onwards].  
2[HARYANA  
24A.  Kurukshetra University, 
Kurukshetra.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  From 1982 
onwards.  
24B.  Maharishi Dayanand 
University, Rohtak.  Ayurvedacharya 3(Graduate 
in Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery).  G.A.M.S.  From 1977  
to 1983.  
   Ayuivedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine  and 
Surgery).  B.A.M.S.  From 1982 
onwards.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 4068, dated 30 -11-1979.  
3. Subs. by S.O. No. 5671, dated 5 -12-1985.  21 
 1[24BB . Haryana State Faculty of 
Ayur vedic and Unani System  
of Medicine, Chandigarh . Ayurvedacharya (Graduate 
in Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) . G.A.M.S.  From 1971 
to 1976] . 
 Name of University , Board of 
Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
HIMACHAL PRADESH  
24C.  Himachal Pradesh University, 
Simla . Graduate of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and 
SurgeryAyurvedacharya.  G.A.M.S.  2[Degree 
obtained by 
passing 
Examination 
upto 1986 
only]. 
   3[Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) ]. B.A.M.S.  4[Degree 
obtained by 
passing 
Examination 
upto 1986 
only].  
      5[From 1986 
onwards].  
JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
25. Jammu and Kashmir 
University  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S.  Awarded 
from  1968 . 
KERALA  
26. University of Kerala  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine . B.A.M.  From 195 7 
to 1979  
onwards.  
   Diploma in Ayurvedic  
Medicine.  D.A.M.   Till 1962  
   6[Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  From 1979 
onwards.  
   Doctor of Medicine 
(Ayurveda).  M.D. 
(Ayurveda)  From 1976 
onwards] . 
27. Government of Travancore -
Cochin.  Vaidyakalanidhi  . . . . 
                                                           
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 627, dated 2 -2-1987.  
1. Subs. by S.O. No. 1946, dated 9 -7-1987.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 822, dated 17 -2-1986.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 1697, dated 15 -4-1988.  
4. Subs. by S.O. No. 214, dated 9 -1-1997.  
5. Ins. by S. O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  22 
 28. Government Ayurveda 
College, Tripunithura 
(Kerala)  Sastra -Bhoosana -Ayurveda  . . . . 
29. Cochin Government  Vidyabhoosanam  . . . . 
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
30. Travancore -Cochin 
Government  Ayurveda -Bhoosanam  . . . . 
31. Travancore Government  Netra, Vaidya -Visharada 
Vaidyakalanidhi  . . . . 
32. Kerala Government  Diploma in Ayurvedic 
Medicine  D.A.M . Still 
continuing  
33. Travancore Government  Vaidya -Shastri 
MarmaVaidya Visharad . . . . . 
34. Keraleeya -Ayurveda 
Mahapata sala, Shoranur, 
(Kerala ). Vaidyapadan  . . . . 
35. Cochin Government  “The Certificate Visha 
Vaidya Training .” . . . . 
36. Madhava Memorial 
Ayurvedic College, 
Cannanore, Kerala.  Vaidyavibhusanam  . . Up to 1963  
37. Madhava Ayurveda College, 
Ernakulam.  Ayurveda Sastry  D.A.S.  From 1953 
to 1957.  
  Ayurveda Vidwan  . . Up to 1957.  
38. Ayurvedic Col lege, 
Kottakal, Kerala  Arya Vaidyan  . . . . 
39. Arya Vaidya Patasala, 
Kottakal.  Arya Vidya, Diploma  . . . . 
40. Government Ayurvedic 
College, Tripunithura.  Ayurveda -sastra -Bhusan  . . . . 
41. Board of Public 
Examinations, Cochin.  Ayurveda Bhoosanam  . . . . 
42. Travancore Government  Diploma in 
Indigenous Medicine Visha 
Vaidya Visarada . D.I.M.  . . 
43 Travancore Siddha Vaidya 
Sangham, Munchira.  Diploma or Certificate in 
Siddha Medicine.  . . May, 1947.  
1[43A 1]. University of Calicut, 
Calicut.  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine . B.A.M.  From 1977 
onwards.  
                                                           
1. Renumbered as 43 -A1, therebyi ns., by S.O. No. 3110, dated 11 -10-1994.  23 
 1[43A2]. Calicut University , Calicut.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery).  B.A.M.S.  From 1985]  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 
 2 3 4 
2[43B.  Mahatma Gandhi University, 
Kottayam.  Ayurvedacharya (Bechelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery).  B.A.M.S.  From 1988 
to 1996].  
MADHYA PRADESH  
44. Jivaji Vishwavidyalaya, 
Gwalior . Bachelor of Ayurved with 
Modern Medicine and 
Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  From 1965 
onwards ]. 
    3[Doctor of Medicine 
(Ayurveda) (Dosh Dhatumal 
Vigyan).  M.D. 
(Ayurveda)  From 1982 
to 1987 ]. 
    Doctor  of Medicine 
(Ayurveda) (Sharirk riya, 
Vigyan).  M.D. 
(Ayurveda)  From 1985 
to 1987.  
45. Indore Vishwavidyalaya, 
Indore.  Bachelor of Ayurveda 
Medicine and Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  4[From 1965 
to 1982] . 
5[45A.  Devi Ahilya 
Vishwavidyalaya, Indore.  Ayurvedacharya Bachelor of 
Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  From 1983 
onwards]. 
46. Vikram Vishwavidyalaya, 
Ujjain.  
 Bachelor of Ayurved with 
Modern Medicine and 
Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  From 1964 
onwards.  
47. Ravishanker 
Vishwa vidyalaya, Raipur.  Bachelor of Ayurved with 
Modern Medicine and 
Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  From 1965 
onwards.  
   6[Doctor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine.  D. Ayurveda 
M. From 1977 
to 1978 . 
   Doctor of Medicine 
(Ayurved ) . . From 1979 
to 1981 . 
   Ayurved Vachaspati 
(Ayurved) (Kaya  Chikitsa)  M.D.  From 1982 
onwards.]  
                                                           
2. Ins. ibid. 
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 3375, dated 18 -10-1996.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 2594, dated 21 -9-1989.  
3. Subs. by S.O. No. 1793, dated 28 -8-1998.  
4. Ins.  by S.O. No. 1793, dated 28 -8-1998.  
5. Ins. by S.O. No. 2552, dated 22 -8-1990.  24 
 48. Board of Indian Medicine, 
Madhya  Pradesh (Madhya 
Bharat Region), Gwalior.  
 Bhishgacharya  L.I.M.  From 1957 
onwards.  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
49. Mahakoshal Ayurvedic 
Board, Jabalpur.  Bhisgwara  L.A.P.  . . 
50. Board of Indian Medicine, 
Madhya  Pradesh (Madhya 
Bharat Region), Gwalior.  Ayurveda -Vigyanacharya  A.V.M.S.  From 1958 
onwards . 
51. Government Ayurvedic 
Vidyalaya, Gwalior  (i) Vaidyas hastri  . . From 1916 
onwards.  
 (Ayurvedic Examination, 
Gwalior State) . (ii) Vaidya -wara  . . Up to 1954  
  (iii) Hindi Vaidya Pariksha  . . Now ceased  
  (iv) Ayurved Shastri  . . Now ceased  
52. Ashtanga Aurveda 
Vidyalaya, Ujjain.  Vaidya -Vachaspati  L.A.M.  Up to 1 -5-
1956. 
53. Board of Indian Medicine, 
Gwalior.  Sahayak -Vaidya.  . . From 1954 
and ceased 
afterwards.  
1[53A  Madhya Pradesh Board of 
Ayurvedic and Unani 
System s of Medicine and 
Naturopathy, Bhopal.  Licentiate Ayurvedic 
Practitioner (Bhishagwar) . L.A.P.  From 1971 
to 1973.  
   2[(Ayurveda Vigyanacharya 
with Modern Medicine and 
Surgery) . A.V.M.S.  From 19 69 
to 197 0]. 
   Bhishagacharya  L.I.M.  From 1971 
to 1974 ]. 
54. University of Saugor, Saugor  3[Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  B.A.M.S.  From 1964 
onwards].  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 462(E), dated 22 -8-1990.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 1910, dated 21 -7-1989.  
3. Subs. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  25 
 1[54A.  Awadesh Pratap Singh 
Vishwavidyalaya, Rewa.  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S.  From 1975 
onwards.  
54B.  University of Jabalpur, 
Jabalpur.  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S.  From 1971 
onwards ]. 
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
2[54C.  Rani Durgawati 
Vishwavidyalaya, Jabalpur . Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine & 
Surgery) . B.A.M.S. From 1983 
onwards ]. 
MAHARASHTRA  
55. Nagpur University, Nagpur  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S. 
(Nagpur)  From 1964 
onwards.  
  3[Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) . B.A.M.S. From 1980 
onwards].  
  4[Ayurved Vachaspati  M.D. (Ayurve
da) From 1988 
onwards.  
  Agadtantra —
Vyavharayurvedn ishnat  DTFM 
(Ayurveda)  From 1988 
onwards].  
5[56. University of Poona, Pune  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S. From 19 57 
to 1976.  
   Bachelor of Surgery and 
Ayurvedic Medicine . B.A.M.S. From 19 76 
to 1979.  
   Ayurvedacharya Bachelor of 
Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery.  B.A.M.S. From 
1978onward
s]. 
57. Vidarbha Board of 
Ayurvedic and Unani 
System s of Medicine, 
Maharashtra.  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  B.A.M.S. 
(Vidarbha)  . . 
58. Faculty of Ayurvedic and 
Unani Systems of Medicine, 
Maharashtra.  Ayurvedic Visharad  A.V.V. 
(Nanded)  . . 
59. Committee of Shuddha 
Ayurvedic Course, 
Maharashtra.  Ayurvedic Praveena  D.S.A.C. 
(Bombay) . . . 
                                                           
4. Ins. ibid. 
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 117(E), dated 17 -2-1999.  
2. Subs. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
3. Subs. by S.O. No. 1504, dated 22 -4-1988.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  26 
 60. Faculty of Ayurvedic and 
Unani Systems of Medicine, 
Bombay . Graduate  of Faculty 
Ayurvedic Medicine . G.F.A.M. 
(Bombay) . . . 
  Member of the Faculty of 
Ayurvedic Medicine . M.F.A.M. 
(Maharashtra) . . . 
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
  Ayurveda -Visharad  D.A.S.F. 
(Bombay) . . . 
  1[The Bachelor of Ayurvedic  
Medicine & Surgey . B.A.M.S. 
(Maharashtra 
Faculty) . From 1975 
onwards ]. 
  2[Fellow of the Faculty of 
Ayurvedic Medicine.  F.F.A.M.  Up to 1984].  
61. Tilak Maharashtra 
Vidyapeeth, Poona.  Ayurvidya Visharad  A.V.V. 
(Poona)  3[From 1942 
to 1980].  
   Ayurvidya Parangat  A.V.P. 
(Poona) . . . 
62. Aryangal Mahavidyalaya, 
Satara, Ayurveda Visharad  A.V.V. 
(Satara). Before 1942.  
63. Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, 
Ahmednagar.  Ayurvedateerth  A.T. 
(Ahmednagar)  Before 1942.  
4[63A.  Shivaji University, 
Kolhapur . (Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery)   B.A.M.S. From 197 5 
to 1982.  
  [Bachelor of Shuddha 
Ayurvedic Medicine ] B.S.A.M.  From 197 7 
to 1982.  
  Ayurvedacharya(Bachelor of 
Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) . B.A.M.S. From 
1978onward
s. 
63B.  Marathwada University, 
Aurangabad . Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery  B.A.M.S. From 19 71 
to 1977.  
  Ayurvedacharya  (Bachelor 
of Shuddha Ayurvedic 
Medicine ) B.S.A.M. From 19 76 
to 1979. 
  Ayurvedacharya(Bachelor of 
Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A. M.S. From 19 80 
onwards.  
63C.  University of Bombay, Ayurvedacharya  B.S.A.M.  From 19 76 
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 4068, dated 30 -11-1979.  
2. Added by S.O. No. 1832, dated 16 -4-1986.  
3. Subs. by S.O. N o. 627, dated 2 -2-1987.  
4. Subs. by S.O. No. 1504, dated 22 -4-1988.  27 
 Bombay . to 19 83. 
  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery) . B.A.M.S.  From 19 80 
onwards].  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
1[63D.  Amravati University, 
Amravati.  Ayurvedacharya (Bechelor 
of Ayurved Medicine and 
Surgery ) B.A.M.S.  From 1989 
onwards ]. 
2[63E.  North Maharashtra 
University, Jalgaon.   Ayurvedacharya (Bechelor 
of Ayurved Medicine and 
Surgery )  B.A.M.S.  From 19 97 
onwards].  
3[KARNATAKA]  
64. Board of Studies in Indian 
Medicine, Mysore, 
Bangalore.  Graduate Course of 
Indian Medicine  G.C.I.M.  From 1964 
onwards.  
65. Board of Studio in Indian 
Medicine, Mysore State, 
Bangalore.  Ayurveda -Praveena  D.S.A.C.  From 1958 
onwards.  
66. Govern ment Ayurvedic and 
Unani College, Mysore.  Ayurved -Vidwat (Licentiate 
in Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  L.A.M.S.  From 1928 
to 1953.  
67. Board of Studies in Indian 
Medicine, Mysore State, 
Bangalore.  Ayurved -Vidwat (Licentiate 
in Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery ) L.A.M.S.  From 1958 
onwards.  
68. Central Board of Indian 
Medicine, Mysore.  Ayurved -Vidwat (Licentiate 
in Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery ) L.A.M.S.  From 1953 
to 1958.  
69. Tranath Ayurveda 
Vidyapeetha, Bellary.  Ayurved -Vidwat (Licentiate 
in Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery.)  L.A.M.S.  From 1953 
to 1958.  
  Vaidya Praveena  . . Up to 1952.  
70. Committee or Authority of 
the Mysore, Maharaja ’s 
Sanskrit College (Ayurvedic 
Section) , Mysore.  Ayurved -Vidwat . .. Before 1909.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 1435, dated 7 -5-1992.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 820(E), dated 12 -9-2000.  
3. Subs. by S.O. No. 630, dated 7 -1-1992.  28 
 71. The Committee or Authority 
of the Government 
Ayurvedic College, Mysore.  Ayurved -Vidwat . . . From 1909 
to 1928.  
72. Karnataka Ayurveda 
Vidyapeetha, Belgaum.  Bhishagwar  . . . . 
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
73. Prema  Vidya Peetha, 
Thungabhadra.  Ayurvedachudamani  .. . . 
   Ayurveda Shiromani  .. . . 
   Bhibagindu   .. . . 
   Vaidyaguru  .. . . 
74. Government Ayurvedic 
School, Mysore.  .. A.M.S.  .. 
75. Government Ayurvedic 
School and College, Mysore.  Licentiate of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  L.A.M.S.  .. 
76. Board of Studies in Indian 
Medicine, Mysore State, 
Bangalore.  Diploma in Ayurvedic 
Medicine.  D.A.M.  From 1964 
onwards.  
77. University of Mysore, 
Mysore,  Bachelor of the Systems of 
Ayurved Medicine  B.S.A.M . From 1967 
onwards.  
1[78. University  ofBangalore, 
Bangalore.  Bachelor of the System of 
Ayurvedic Medicine  B.S.A.M. From 1967 
onwards.  
   Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S. Upto 1978].  
  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.S.A.M. From 1987 
onwards].  
2[78A.  University  of Bangalore, 
Bangalore.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S. Up to 1987.  
  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S. From 1987 
onwards.  
79. Karnataka University, 
Dharwar . Bachelor of the System  of 
Ayurvedic Medicine  B.S.A.M. From 1969 
onwards.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by S.O. No. 1040, dated 6 -4-1989.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No.1504, dated 22 -4-1988.  29 
    1[Ayurvedacharya(Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S. From 
1984onward
s. 
2[79A.  Mangalore University, 
Mangalore.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  3[From 1985 
to 2002]  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
4[79B.  Gulbarga University, 
Gulbarga . Bachelor of System of 
Ayurvedic Medicine  B.S.A.M. From 19 73 
to 1983.  
5[79C. Kuvempu University, 
Shankarghatta.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 
1983onward
s]. 
ORISSA  
80. Ayurvedic Examination 
Board, Orissa.  Diploma in (Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery ) D.A.M.S.  From 1953 
to 1962.  
81. Orissa Association of 
Sanskrit Learning and 
Culture, Puri . Ayurved Shastr y . . From 
1933onward
s. 
    Ayurveda  Acharya  . . From 1933 
onwards.  
82. State Faculty of Ayurvedic 
Medicine, Orissa.  Ayurvedacharya  B.S.A.M.  From 1969 
onwards.  
6[82A.  Utkal University 
Bhubanewar.  Bachelor in Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery  B.A.M.S.  From 19 74 
onwards . 
  7[Ayurveda Vachaspati 
(Kayachikitsa) ] M.D. 
Ayurveda  From 1981 
to 1989] . 
82B Sambalpur University, 
Burla, Sambalpur.  Ayurvedacharya ( Graduate 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery).  G.A.M.S.  From 1980 
onwards.  
8[82C.  Berhampur University, 
Berhampur  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 1983 
onwards ]. 
PUNJAB  
                                                           
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 627, dated 2 -2-1987.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 2745 , dated 29 -5-1985.  
5. Subs. by S.O. No. 630, dated 17 -1-1992.  
1. Ins. by S.O. No.1910, dated 21 -7-1989.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 303(E), dated 6 -5-1999.  
3. Subs. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 630, dated 17 -1-1992.  
5. Ins. by S.O. No. 1040, dated 6 -4-1989.  30 
 5[83. Punjab State Faculty of 
Ayurvedic and Unani 
Systems of Medicine, 
Chandigarh.  Ayurvedacharya (Graduate 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  G.A.M.S.  1[1961 to 
1992].  
   2[Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  Batches up 
to 1986 -87]. 
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
3[84. Sanatan Dharam Premgiri 
Ayurvedic College (Lahore) , 
Bhiwani /Jind/Kurkshetra.  Ayurvedacharya  Kaviraj  M.A.M.S.  Up to 1957 . 
    L.A.M.S.  From 1950 
to 1956] . 
85. D.A.V. Managing 
Committee, 
Amritsar/ Jullundur.  VaidyaVachaspati  V.V.  . . 
86. Vedic and Unani Tibbi 
College, Amritsar.  Vaid Kaviraj  V.K.   
   Vaid Rattan  V.R.  Up to 947.]  
   4[Vaidya Shastri  V.S.  
87. Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbi 
College, Amritsar.  Vachaspati  V. . . 
88. Government Ayurvedic 
Vidyalaya (College), Patiala.  Vaidya  V.  
   Vaidya Visharad  V.V.  Up to 1956  
   Vaidya Shastri  V.S.   
   Ayurvedacharya  A.A.  5[From 1912 
to 1961] . 
6[88A.  Gurunanak Dev University, 
Amritsar.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvcdic Medicine and 
Surgery).  B.A.M.S.  From 1982 
onwards.  
88B.  Punjabi University, Patiala . Ayurvedaharya (Bachelor of 
Ayurvcdic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 1976 
onwards.  
1[88C.  Punjab University, 
Chandigarh.  Ayurveda Vachaspati  M.D. 
Ayurveda  From 197 3 
onwards ]. 
                                                           
6. Subs. by S.O. No. 1888, dated 16 -7-1997.  
7. Subs. by S.O. No. 661, dated 2 -2-1982.  
1. Subs. by S.O. No. 627, dated 2 -2-1987.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 5671, dated 5 -12-1985.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 1504, dated 22 -4-1988.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  31 
   Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvcdic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 19 92 
onwards ]. 
RAJASTHAN  
89. Rajasthan 
Ayurved Vibhagiya Pariksha 
Mandal,  Ajmer.  Bhishagwara  . . From 1962 
onwards.  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
  Bhishagacharya  . . From 1962 
onwards.  
90. Rajputana Ayurvedic and 
Unani Tibbi College, Jaipur . Bhishagacharya Shiromani  . . From 1951 
onwards.  
     Bhishagaratna Shastri  . . From 1951 
onwards.  
91. Government Ayurvedic 
College, Jaipur.  Bhishak  . . . . 
   Bhishagacharya  . . . . 
   Bhish -kala . . . . 
2[91A.  Rajasthan University, Jaipur  3[Ayurvedacharya  . . From 19 72 
to 1980.  
  Ayurved Briharpati . . From 19 72 
to 1982.  
   . . From 19 81 
to 1984].  
  Ayurvedacharya  . . From 
1976onward
s]. 
   4[Ayurved Vachaspati  M.D. 
Ayurveda  . .] 
92. Maharaja College of 
Ayurved, Jaipur . Shastra -acharya  . . . . 
5[92A.  Shiksha Vibhagiya 
Parikshyan, Jaipur State , 
Rajasthan Sarkar , Jaipur.  Ayurveda Shastri  . . From 1872 
to 1968 . 
 Jaipur State Rajasthan 
Sarkar Jaipur.  Ayurvedacharya  . . From 1874 
to 1970.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
5. Ins. by S.O. No. 403(E), dated 31 -5-1999.  
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
2. Subs. by S.O. No. 1832 dated 16 -4-1986.  
3. Ins. by  S.O. No. 876(E), dated 5 -10-1998.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No.630, dated 17 -1-1992.  32 
    Bhishaga wara . . From 1836  
to 1968 . 
   Bhishagacharya  . . From 1838 
to 1970].  
TAMIL NADU  
93. Government College of 
Indian/ Indigenous/ Integrate d 
Medicine, Madras.  Graduate of the College of 
Indian/Indigenous/ Integrat ed 
Medicine  G.C.I.M.  From 19 47 
to 1960.  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
   Licentiate in 
Indian/Indigenous /Integrated 
Medicine  L.I.M.  From 1924 
to 1948.  
94. Madras Ayurvedic College, 
Madras . Ayurved Bhushan  . . . . 
     Ayurved Bhishagawara  . . . . 
95. Venkataramana Ayurvedic 
College, Mylapore, Madras.  Vaidya Visharada  .. . . 
96. Board of Examiners in 
Indian/ Indigenous/Integrated 
Medicine, Madras.  Higher Proficiency in 
Indian/Indigenous/Integrated 
Medicine . H.P.I.M. Up to 1955.  
97. University of Madras . Ayurveda -Shiromani  . . 1[From 19 30 
to 19 77]. 
  Bachelor of Indian Medicine 
(Siddha) . B.I M.  2[From 1965 
to 1970]. 
  3[Ayurvedaharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvcdic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 
1986onward
s]. 
3[98. Madurai Kamraj University, 
Madurai  Bachelor of Indian Medicine 
(Siddha)  B.I M.  From 1971 
onwards.  
  Doctor of Medicine (Siddha)  M.D.(Siddha)  From 1975 
onwards.  
  Bachelor of Siddha 
Medicine and Surgery  B.S.M .S. From 1982 
onwards ]. 
4[98A.  Bharathiar University, 
Coimbatore.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 1989 
to 1993] . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No.1910, dated 21 -7-1992.  
3. Subs., ibid. 
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 630, dated 17 -1-1992.  33 
 1[98B. Dr. M.G.R. Medical 
University, Chennai (Tamil 
Nadu)  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 1994 
onwards.  
  Siddha Maruthuva Arignar 
(Bachelor of Siddha  
Medicine and Surgery)  B.S.M .S. From 1994 
onwards.  
  Siddha Maruthuva 
Perarignar ( Doctor of 
Medicine Siddha)  M.D. (Siddha)  From 1992 
onwards].  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
UTTAR PRADESH  
99. Bana ras Hindu, University, 
Varanasi  Ayurved Shastracharya  . . From 1925 
to 1932 . 
   Ayuved acharya in Medicine 
and Surgery  A.M.S.  From 1934 
to 1953.  
   Ayuryedacharya with 
Modern Medicine and 
Surgery.  A.M.S.  From 1934 
to 1953 . 
   Doctor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine  D.Ay.M.  2[From 1963 
to 1977] . 
   Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Medicine and Surgery ). A.B.M.S.  From 1954 
to 1967.  
   3[Doctor of Medicine 
(Ayurveda)  M.D.(Ay.)  From 1977 
onwards].  
100 Lucknow University, 
Lucknow  Bachelor of Ayurveda with 
Modern Medicine and 
Surgery  B.A.M.M.S. From 1960 
onwards.  
  Bachelor of Medicine and 
Bachelor of Surgery  B.M.B.S. From 195 5 
to 196 4. 
  2[Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery ). B.A.M.S. From 
1982onward
s. 
  Doctor of Medicine 
(Ayurveda)  M.D.(Ay.)  From 
1974onward
s]. 
101. Ayurvedic College, Gurukul 
University, Kangri 
(Hardwar) . Ayurveda Alankara  
Ayurved Vachaspati  . . From 19 26 
to 19 56. 
                                                           
5. Ins. by S.O. No. 117(E), dated 17 -2-1999 . 
1. Subs. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
2. Ins., ibid. 34 
 102. Gurukul Vidyalaya, 
Vrindaban.  Ayurved -Shiromani  .. From 1916 
to 1967.  
   Ayurveda  Bhusan  .. From 1944 
to 1967.  
103. Rishikul Ayurvedic College, 
Hardwar.  Ayurved Visharad  
Vaidya Visharad  
Vaidya Shastri  
Ayurvedacharya  
Ayurved Shastri  .. Up to 1945.  
104. Lalit Hari Ayurvedic 
College, Pilibhit.  Vaid Bhushan  
Vaid Raj  .. Up to 1944.  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
105. Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, 
Prayag.  Vaidya Visharad.  .. From 1931 
to 1967.  
   Ayurved - Ratna.  .. From 1931 
to 1967.  
106. Jawalapur Mahavidyalaya, 
Hardwar  Ayurved Bhaskar 
(Jawalapur Centre only)  .. From 1950 
to 1967.  
107. Board of Indian Medicine, 
Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow . Diploma in Indigenous 
Medicine  D.I.M.  From 19 32 
to 19 44. 
  Diploma in Indigenous 
Medicine and Surgery  D.I.M.S.  From 19 43 
to 19 46. 
  Bachelor of Indian Medicine 
and Surgery  B.I.M.S.  From 19 47 
to 19 56. 
  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Medicine and Surgery)  A.B.M.S.  From 19 57 
to 19 66. 
  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurved  with Medicine 
and Surgery)  Ayurveda -
charya 
(B.A.M.S.) From 1959  
onwards.  
1[2[107A.  Kanpur University, Kanpur.  Ayurvedacharya (Bechelor 
of Ayurveda with Modern 
Medicine and Surgery) . B.A.M.S.  From 1972 
to 1982.  
   Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 1983 
onwards .] 
107B.  Sampurna nand Sanskrit 
University, Varanasi.  Ayurvedachary a (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From  1970 
onwards .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
2. Subs. by S.O. No. 5671, dated 5 -12-1985.  35 
 WEST BENGAL  
108. Syamadas Vaidya 
Shastrapith Parishad, 
Calcut ta. Vaidya Shastri.  .. From 1926 
to 1940 . 
109. Jamini Bhushan Ashtanga 
Ayurved Vidyalaya, 
Calcutta.  Bishagacharya (Master in  
Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery ) M.A.M.S.  From 1930 
to 1940.  
110. Jamini Bhushan Ashtanga 
Ayurved Vidyalaya, 
Calcutta.  Bhishagaratna (Licentiate in 
Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  L.A.M.S.  From 1920to 
1940. 
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
111. General Council and State 
Faculty of Ayurvedic 
Medicine, West Bengal (now 
Paschim Bengal Ayurveda 
Parishad), Calcutta . Vaidya Shiromani (Member 
of the Ayurvedic State 
Faculty)  
 M.A.S.F.  From 194 0 
to 1949 . 
  Vaidyashastri  . . From 194 0 
to 1945 . 
  Vaidyabhushan  (Licentiate 
in Ayurvedic State Faculty)  L.A.S.F.  From 19 39 
to 1950 . 
  Ayurvedatirtha( Member of 
the Ayurvedic State Faculty)  M.A.S.F.  From 
1947onward
s. 
   Ayurvedatirtha(Ayurvedic 
State Faculty) . A.S.F.  From 1946 
onwards.  
   Pranacharya  F.A.S.F.  . . 
  1[Diploma in Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery.  D.A.M.S.  From 19 79 
to 1983 . 
  Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery . B.A.M.S.  From 19 79 
to 1984] . 
112. Ayurvidya Pratisthan, 
Calcutta  Bhishagratna  .. From 1930 
to 1940.  
   Bhishagacharya  .. From 1930 
to 1940.  
113. Ganga Charan Ayurved 
Vidyalaya , Calcutta.  Ayurvedshastri  .. From 1928 
to 1940 . 
   Ayurvedacharya  .. From 1928 
to 1940.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 627, dated 2 -2-1987.  36 
 114. Maharaja Cossimbazar 
Gobinda -sundari Ayurvedic 
College, Calcutta.  Ayurvedshastri ( Bachelor in 
Ayurvedic Medicine)  A.M.B.  From 1927 
to 1940.  
   Ayurvedacharya (Maste r of 
Ayurvedic Medicine) Doctor  A.M.D.  From 1927 
to 1940.  
115. Vishwanath Ayurved 
Mahavidya laya, Calcutta.  Bishagralna (Diploma in 
Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  D.A.M.S.  From 1932 
to 1940.  
   Vaidyashiromani (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery).  B.A.M.S.  From 1932 
to 1940.  
   (Master of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery).  M.A.M.S.  From 1932 
to 1940.  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
1[116.  University of Calcutta, 
Calcutta.  Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.A.M.S.  From 1982 
onward s]. 
PART II. —UNANI  
ANDHRA PRADESH  
2[1. Sri Venkateswara 
University, Tirupati .  Tabib -e-Kamil  . . From 19 57 
to 19 82]. 
  3[Kamil -e-tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery ). B.U.M.S.  From 1985 
onwards ). 
2. Nizamia Tibbi College, 
Hyderabad . (Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery ) B.U.M.S. . . 
   Tabib -e-Mustanad . . . . . 
   Graduate of the College of 
Unani Medicine  G.C.U.M. . . 
4[2A Board of Indian Medicine, 
Hyderabad.  Kamil -e-Tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor  of Medicine and 
Unani Surgery) . B.M.U.S.  From 1965 
to 1975.  
2B. Osmania University, 
Hyderabad . Bachelor of Unani Medicine 
and Surgery  B.U.M.S. From 1976 
onwards.  
   Kamil -e-Tib-o-Jarahat  
(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery) . B.U.M.S. From 1982 
onwards.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 4057, dated 14 -8-1985.  
2. Subs. by S.O. No. 2314, dated 22 -8-1981.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 760, dated 25 -2-1987.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  37 
    Doctor in Unani Medicine  M.D. (Unani)  From 1976 
onwards].  
1[2C. University of Health 
Sciences, Andhra Pradesh, 
Vijayawada . Kamil -e-Tib-o-
Jarahat(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S. From 1992 
onwards.  
  Mahire -e-Tib M.D. (Unani)  From 1989 
onwards].  
BIHAR  
3. State Faculty of Ayurvedic 
and Unani Systems of 
Medicine, Patna  (Bihar ). Graduate in Unani        
Medi cine and Surgery.  G.U.M.S.  From 1953 
onwards.  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
2[3A. University of Bihar, 
Muzaffarpur.  Graduat e in Unani Medicine 
and Surgery  G.U.M.S.  From 1973 
to 1982.  
   Kamil -e-Tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1982 
onwards ]. 
DELHI  
4. Board of Ayurvedic and 
Unani Systems of Medicine, 
Delhi . (Bachelor in Indian 
Medicine and Syrgery)  
Fazil -i-tib-o-Jarahat . B.I.M.S.  From 1958 
to 1963.  
   (Diploma i n Indian 
Medicine and Surgery) 
Kamil -i-tib-o-Jarahat  D.I.M.S.  From 1956 
to 1963.  
5. Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbia 
College, Delhi.  Fazil -i-tib-o-Jarahat  .. Up to 1958.  
  Kamil -i-tib-o-Jarahat  . . Up to 1958.  
6. Jamia Tibbia , Delhi  Akmal -ul-Hukma  .. Up to 1958 . 
  Afzal -ul-Hukma  . . Up to 1958.  
7. Examining Body, Ayurvedic 
and Unani Systems of 
Medicine, Delhi.  Fazil -i-tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor in Indian 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.I. M.S.  From 1963 
onwards.  
1[7A. DelhiUniversity, Delhi.  Bachelor of UnaniMedicine 
and Surgery . B.U.M.S.  From 1979 
onwards.  
3[7B. Jamia Hamdard (Deemed 
University), New Delhi . Mahir -e-Tib M.D. (Unani)  4[From 1997 
onwards.]  
                                                           
5. Ins. by S.O. No. 117(E), dated 17 -2-1999.  
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983 and Subs. by S.O. No. 3550, dated 5 -9-1983.  
2. Ins . by S.O. No. 3375, dated 18 -10-1996.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 1020(E), dated 1 -12-1998.  38 
 JAMMU AND KASHMIR  
8. Jammu and Kashmir, 
University  Bachelo r of Unani Medicine 
and Surgery  B.U.M.S.  From 1966 
onwards.  
1[8A. Kashmir University, 
Srinagar . Bachelor of Unani Medicine 
andSurgery  B.U.M.S.  From 1969 
onwards.  
MADHYA  PRADESH  
9. Asipha Tibbia College, 
Bhopal . Hakim Kamil  . . . . 
1[9A. University of Sagar, Sagar.  Bachelo r of Unani Medicine 
and Surgery  B.U.M.S.  From  1973  
onwards.]  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
2[9B. Mahakoshal Board of 
Ayurvedic Systems of  
Medicine, Jabalpur.  Bachelor of Unani Medicine 
and Surgery.  B.U.M.S.  From 1966 
to 1970.  
9C. Madhya Pradesh Board of 
Ayurvedic and Unani 
Systems of Medicine and 
Naturopathy, Bhopal . Bachelor of Unani Medicine 
and Surgery.  B.U.M.S.  From 1971 
to 1974.]  
3[9D Doctor Harising Gour 
Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar  Bachelor of Unani Medicine 
and Surgery.  B.U.M.S.  From 1983 
onwards.]  
4[9E. Devi Ahilya 
Vishwavidyalaya, Indore . Kamil -e-tib-o-
Jarahat(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1996 
onwards. ] 
MAHARASHTRA  
10. Faculty of Ayurvedic and 
Unani Systems of Medicine, 
Maharashtra.  Mahir -e-tibb-o-Jarahat  D.U.S.F. 
(Bombay)  . . 
11. Board of Examiners in 
Unani  Mahir -e-tibb-o-Jarahat  M.T.J. 
(Bombay)  From 1942 
to 1943.  
5[11A.  Maharashtra Faculty of 
Ayurvedic and Unani 
Systems of Medicines, 
Bombay.  Diploma in Unani Medicine 
and Surgery.  D.U.M.S.  From 1973 
onwards.]  
                                                           
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 2314, dated 22 -8-1981.  
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 969, dated 29 -11-1989.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 116(E), dated 17 -2-1999. 
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 4068, dated 30 -11-1979.  39 
 1[11B.  University of Bombay, 
Bombay.  Kamile -tib-i-Jarahat 
(Bachelor of Unani 
Medi cine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1984 
onwards.]  
2[11C.  Poona University, Pune . Kamil -e-Tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1988 
onwards.]  
KARNATAKA  
12. Board of Studies in Indian 
Medicine, Mysore, 
Bangalore.  Tabib -e-Hasaq (Licentiate  in 
Unani Medicine and 
Surgery)  L.U.M.S.  From 1958 
onwards.]  
13. Government Ayurvedic and 
Unani College (College of 
Indian Medicine), Mysore.  Tabib -e-Hasaq (Licentiate  in 
Unani Medicine and 
Surgery)  L.U.M.S.  From 1928 
to 1953.  
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
14. Central Board of Indian 
Medicine, Mysore, 
Bangalore.  Tabib -e-Hasaq (Licentiate in 
Unani Medicine and 
Surgery)  L.U.M.S.  From 1953 
to 1958.  
15. Government Ayurvedic 
School, Mysore.  . . U.M.S.  . . 
3[15A.  Bangalore University, 
Bangalore . Bachelo r of Unani Medicine 
and Surgery  B.U.M.S.  From 1977 
onwards.  
TAMIL NADU  
16. Government College of 
Indian/Indigenous/Integrated 
Medicine, Madras . Licentiate in 
Indian /Indigenous/Integrated 
Medicine  L.I.M.  . . 
   Graduate of th e College of 
Indian/Indigenous/ Integrated 
Medicine  G.C.I.M.  . . 
17. Board of Examiner in 
Indian /Indigenous/Integrated 
Medicine.  Higher Proficiency in 
Indian/Indigenous/Integrated 
Medicine.  H.P.I.M.  . . 
1[17A.  University of Madras, 
Madras  Kamil -e-tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1979 
onwards.]  
4[17B. Dr. M.G.R. Medical 
University, Chennai, Tamil 
Nadu.  Kamil -e-Tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 19 94 
onwards.]  
PUNJAB  
                                                           
5. Ins. by S.O. No. 3404, dated 5 -7-1985.  
6. Ins. by S.O. No.2552, dated 22 -8-1990.  
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983 . 
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 117(E), dated 17 -2-1999.  40 
 1[18. Bhupinder Tibbi College, 
Patiala  Haziq -ul-Hukma  H.U. H. From 1927 
to 1950 . 
   Mahir -i-tib-o-Jarahat  M.T.J.  From 1927 
to 1950 . 
   Tibb -e-Akmal  T.A. From 1936 
to 1950 .] 
19. Ayurvedic an d Unani Tibbi 
College, Amritsar Vedic and 
Unani Tibbi College, 
Amritsar.  Kamil -ul-TibbiFazil -ul-
Tibbi UmdhoDal -Hukma  K.U.TF.U.T.
H.D.H.  Up to 1947.  
  2[Zabadat -tul-Atibba  .. Up to 1947] . 
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
RAJASTHAN   
20. Rajputana Ayurvedic and 
Unani College, Jaipur.  3[Umde-tul-Hukma  .. From 19 30to 
1980.  
   Talub -Fazil.    From 19 30 
to 1981 . 
4[20A.  Board of Indian Medicine, 
Rajasthan, Jaipur.  Kamil -e-tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor  of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1981 
onwards.  
5[20B.    University of Rajasthan, 
Jaipur.  Hamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor  of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1989 
onwards.]  
UTTAR PRADESH  
21. Muslim University, Aligarh.  Diploma in Indian Medicine 
and Surgery  D.I.M.S.  From 19 27 
to 19 43. 
  Diploma in Unani Medicine 
and Surgery  D.U.M.S.  From 19 44 
to 19 46. 
  Bachelor of Unani Medicine 
and Surgery  B.U.M.S.  From 
1953onward
s. 
  Bachelor of Unani Tib and 
Surgery  B.U. T.S. From 1947 
to 19 52. 
  6[Doctor of Unani Medicine  D.U.M.  From 19 74 
to 19 77. 
   M.D. (Unani)  From 
                                                           
3. Subs. by S.O. No. 1911, dated 17-1-1985.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 627, dated 2 -2-1987.  
1. Subs. by S.O. No. 1832, dated 16 -4-1986.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 3404, dated 5 -7-1985.  
3. Ins. by S.O. No. 923(E), dated 29 -12-1997.  
4. Ins. by S.O. No. 2314, dated 22 -8-1981.  41 
 1978onward
s. 
  Bachelor of Unani Medicine 
with Modern Medicine and 
Surgery  B.U.M. M.S. From 19 72 
to 19 83]. 
  1[Kamil -e-tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor  of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 19 80 
onwards].  
22. Board of Indian Medicine, 
Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow.  Diploma in Indigenous 
Medicine D.I.M.  From 19 32to 
1944. 
  Diploma in Indigenous 
Medicine and Surgery  D.I.M.S.  From 19 43 
to 19 46. 
  Bachelor  of Indian Medicine 
and Surgery  B.I.M.S.  From 19 47 
to 19 56. 
 Name of University , Board 
of Medical Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
 1 2 3 4 
  Fazil -ut-tib (Bachelor of 
Medicine and Surgery)  F.M.B.S. From 1957 
onwards.  
2[22A.  Kanpur University, Kanpur . Fazil -e-Tibb-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor of Unani with 
Modern Medicine and 
Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1972 
to 1982.  
    Kamile -e-Tib-o-Jarahat 
(Bachelor of Unani 
Medicine and Surgery)  B.U.M.S.  From 1983 
onwards.]  
3[23. Board of Arabic and Persian 
Examination, U.P., 
Allahabad.  Fazil -e-Tibb  .. From 1936 
to 1982.  
24. Darul -Uloom , Deoband, 
U.P. Fazil -ut-tibb D.U.M.  From 1964 
to 1984.]  
4[25. Jamiatun Naqba Unani 
Medical School, Allahabad.  Matamidut -tib-wal-Jarahat  M.U.M.S.  From 19 08 
to 19 42.] 
 
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
                                                           
5. Ins. by S.O. No. 354(E), dated 6 -5-1983.  
1. Subs. by S.O. No. 5671, dated 5 -12-1985.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 2314, dated 22 -8-1981.  
3. Added by S.O. No. 1832, dated 16 -4-1986 . 42 
      
     
 
     
     
 
     
     
     
     
     
     
 
     
     
     
     
     
NOTE:—The Second Schedule to the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 (48 of 1970) has been 
subsequently amended vide:— 
 
1. S.O. No. 4068, dated the 30 th November, 1979.  
2. S.O. No. 2635, dated the 18 th September, 1980.  
3. S.O. No. 2313, dated the 20 th August, 1981.  
4. S.O. No. 2313, dated the 22 nd August, 1981.  
5. S.O. No. 137, dated the 24 thDece mber, 19 81. 
6. S.O. No. 638, dated the 25th January , 1982. 
7. S.O. No. 661, dated the 2ndFebruary , 1982. 
8. S.O. No. 973, dated the 20thFebruary , 1982. 
9. S.O. No. 354(E) , dated the 6thMay, 1983. 
10. S.O. No. 3550, dated the 5 thSeptember , 1983. 
11. S.O. No. 804(E),  dated the 11th November, 19 83. 
12. S.O. No. 4 62(E) , dated the 23rdJune, 1984 . 
13. S.O. No. 1911 , dated the 17 thApril,  1985 . 
14. S.O. No. 2745 , dated the 29 thMay, 1985.  
15. S.O. No. 3404 , dated the 5 thJuly, 1985.  
16. S.O. No. 4057 , dated the 14 thAugust , 1985.  
17. S.O. No. 5603 , dated the 2nd  December, 1985.  
18. S.O. No. 5671 , dated the 5 th December, 1985.  
19. Inserted by S.O. No. 832, dated the 17 thFebruary , 1986.  
20. Inserted by S.O. No. 1832 , dated the 16thApril, 198 7. 
21. S.O. No. 6 27, dated the 2nd February, 1987.  
22. S.O. No. 760, dated the 25thFebruary, 1987.  43 
 23. S.O. No. 1030 , dated the 30thMarch , 1987.  
24. S.O. No. 1946 , dated the 9thJuly, 1987.  
25. S.O. No. 3186 , dated the 30thOctober , 1987.  
26. S.O. No. 1697 , dated the 15thApril , 1988.  
27. S.O. No. 1504 , dated the 22ndApril , 1988.  
28. S.O. No. 1040 , dated the 6thApril , 1989.  
29. S.O. No. 1910 , dated the 21stJuly, 1989.  
30. S.O. No. 2177 , dated the 14thAugust , 1989.  
31. S.O. No. 2594 , dated the 2 1stSeptember , 198 9. 
32. S.O. No. 969, dated the 29 th November, 1989.  
33. S.O. No. 2552, dated the 22nd August, 1990.  
34. S.O. No. 3246, dated the 31st October, 1990.  
35. S.O. No. 2 669, dated the 29th August, 1991.  
36. S.O. No. 630, dated the 1 7thJanuary , 1992. 
37. S.O. No. 1435 , dated the 7thMay, 1992. 
38. S.O. No. 3110 , dated the 1 1thOctober , 1994. 
39. S.O. No. 3375 , dated the 1 8thOctober , 1996. 
40. S.O. No. 923(E) , dated the 29thDecember , 1997. 
41. S.O. No. 518, dated the 1 7thFebruary , 199 8. 
42. S.O. No. 170(E), dated the 6thMarch , 1998. 
43. S.O. No. 1792 , dated the 25thJune, 1998. 
44. S.O. No. 1793 , dated the 28th August, 19 98. 
45. S.O. No. 876(E) , dated the 5thOctober , 1998. 
46. S.O. No. 1020(E), dated the 1st December, 1998.  
47. S.O. No. 214, dated the 9 thJanuary , 1997.  
48. S.O. No. 116(E), dated the 7 thFebruary , 1999.  
49. S.O. No. 117(E), dated the 17thFebruary , 199 9. 
50. S.O. No. 303(E), dated the 6thMay, 199 9. 
51. S.O. No. 403(E), dated the 31thMay, 199 9. 
52. S.O. No. 1888,  dated the 16thJuly, 1997.  
53. S.O. No. 820(E), dated the 12thSepte mber, 2000 . 
54. S.O. No. 1008 (E), dated the 9 thNovember, 2000 . 
  44 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(Sec section 15)  
Qualification s granted by certain medical institutions before 15th August, 1947  in areas which comprised 
within India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 . 
 
S.l 
No. University , Board of Medical 
Institution  Recognised Medical 
Qualifications  Abbreviation 
for 
Registration  Remarks  
1 2 3 4 5 
(PART I. AYURVED IC AND SIDDHA ) 
1. Dayanand Ayurvedic College, 
Lahore.  Vaidya Vachaspati  . . Before 1947  
  Vaidya Kaviraj  . . Before 1947  
2. Sanatan Dharam Premgiri 
Ayurvedic College, Lahore.  Vaidya Shastri  . . Before 1947  
  Shri Ayurvedacharya  . . Before 1947  
  Shri Vaid Kaviraj  . . Before 1947  
3.  Manomohan Chatuspati, Dacca.  Ayurvedshastri Ayurvedratna  . . From 1920 to 
1940.  
PART II. UNANI  
1. The Islamia College, Lahore.  Hakim -i-Haziq  . . . . 
  Zubdatul -Hukma  . . . . 
 Tibbia College, Lahore.  Hasiq -u-Hukma  H.U.H.  Upto 1947  
  Mahir-tib-o-Jarahat  M.T.J.  Upto 1947  
  Hakim -i-Haziq  H.H.  Upto 1947  
  45 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 16)  
Qualification s granted by medical institutions in countries with which there is a scheme of reciprocity  
 
University , Board of Medical 
Institution  Recognised Medical Qualification  Abbreviation for 
Registration  Remarks  
1 2 3 4 
AYURVEDA AND SIDDHA  
Government College of 
Indigenous Systems of 
Medicine, Ceylon . Diploma in IndigenousMedicine and 
Surgery  D.I.M.S.  .. 
1[Gove rnment College of 
Indigenous Medicine, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka . Diploma in Indigenous Medicine and 
Surgery  D.I.M.S.   Upto 1960 . 
 (Ayurved/ Siddha/Unani)Diploma in 
Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery  
(Ayurved/ Siddha/Unani)  D.A.M.S.  From 1961 
to 1976 .] 
1[Institute of Indigenous 
Medicine University of 
Colombo, Sri Lanka . Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery  D.A.M.S.   From 1977 
to 1987 . 
 (Ayurvedic  and Unani)Diploma in 
Ayurvedic  Medicine and Surgery 
(Siddha).               
D.A.M.S.  From 1977 
to 1984 .] 
 Bachelor of Ayur vedic Medicine and 
Surgery  B.A.M.S.  From 1991 
onwards . 
 2[Bachelor of Unani Medicine and 
Surgery  B.U.M.S.  From 1991 
onwards .] 
1[University of Jaffna, Sri 
Lanka.  Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and 
Surgery (Siddha)  D.A.M.S.  From 1984 
to 1987 .] 
 2[Bachelor of Siddha Medicine and 
Surgery  B.A.M.S   From 1989 
onwards.]  
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 3246, dated 31 -10-1990.  
2. Ins. by S.O. No. 2669, dated 29 -8-1991.  
--------------------------The Patents Act, 1970--------------------------
1 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS   
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definition s and interpretation.  
CHAPTER II  
INVENTIONS NOT PATENTABLE  
3. What are not inventions.  
4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable.  
5. [Omitted .] 
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS  
6. Persons entitled to apply for patents.  
7. Fo rm of application.  
8. Information and undertaking regarding foreign applications.  
9. Provisional and complete specifications.  
10. Contents of specification s.  
11. Priority dates of claims of a complete specification.  
 CHAPTER IV   
PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS  
11A. Publication of applications.  
11B. Request for examination . 
12. Examination of applicati on. 
13. Search for anticipation by previous publication and by prior claim.  
14. Consideration of report of examiner by Controller.  
15. Power of Controller to refuse or require amended applications, etc., in certain cases.  
16. Power of Controller to make orders respecting division of application.  
17. Power of Controller to make orders respecting dating of application.  
18. Power s of Controller in cases of anticipation.  
19. Powers of Controller in case of potential infringement.  
20. Powers of Controller to m ake orders regard ing substitution of applicants  etc. 
21. Time for putting application in order for grant.  
22. [Omitted .] 
23. [Omitted .] 
24. [Omitted .] 2 CHAPTER V  
OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS  
SECTIONS  
25. Opposition to patent.  
26. In cases of “obtaining” Controller may treat the patent as the patent of opponent.  
27. [Omitted .] 
28. Mention of inventor as such in patent.  
CHAPTER VI  
ANTICIPATION  
29. Anticipation by previous publication.  
30. Anticipation by previous communication to Government.  
31. Anticipation by public display, etc.  
32. Anticipation by public working.  
33. Anticipation by use and publication after provisional specification.  
34. No anticipation if circumstances are only as described in sections 29, 30, 31 and 32.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROVISIONS FOR SECRECY OF CERTAIN INVENTIONS  
35. Secrecy directions relating to inventions relevant for defence purposes.  
36. Secrecy directions to be periodically reviewed.  
37. Consequences of secrecy directions.  
38. Revocation of secrecy directions and ex tension of time.  
39. Residents not to apply for patents outside India without prior permission.  
40. Liability for contravention of section 35 or section 39.  
41. Finality of orders of Controller and Central Government.  
42. Savings respecting disclosure to G overnment.  
CHAPTER VIII  
GRANT OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY  
43. Grant of patent s. 
44. Amendment of patent granted to deceased applicant.  
45. Date of patent.  
46. Form, extent and effect of patent.  
47. Grant of patents to be subject to certain conditions.  
48. Rights of patentees.  
49. Patent rights not infringed when used on foreign vessels, etc., temporarily or accidentally in India.  
50. Rights of co -owners of patents.  
51. Power of Controller to give directions to co -owners.  
52. Grant of pa tent to true and first inventions  where it has been obtained by another in fraud of him.  
53. Term of patent.  
 3 CHAPTER IX  
PATENTS OF ADDITION  
SECTIONS  
54. Patents of addition.  
55. Term of patents of addition.  
56. Validity of patents of addition.  
CHAPTER X  
AMENDMENT OF APPLICATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS  
57. Amendment of application and specification before Controller.  
58. Amendment of specification before Appellate Board or High Court.  
59. Supplementary provisions as to amendment of application or specification.  
CHAPTER XI  
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS  
60. Applications for restoration of lapsed patents.  
61. Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of lapsed patents.  
62. Rights of patentees of lapsed patents which have been restored.  
 
CHAPTER XII  
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS  
63. Surrender of patents.  
64. Revocation of Power patents.  
65. Revocation of patent or amendment of complete specification on directions from Government in 
cases relating to atomic energy.  
66. Revocation of patent in publ ic interest.  
CHAPTER XIII  
REGISTER OF PATENTS  
67. Register of patents and particulars to be entered therein.  
68. Assignments, etc., not to be valid unless in writing and duly executed . 
69. Registration of assignments , transmissions, etc.  
70. Power of regis tered grantee or proprietor to deal with patent.  
71. Rectification of register by Appellate Board.  
72. Register to be open for inspection.  
CHAPTER XIV  
PATENT OFFICE AND ITS ESTABLISHMENT  
73. Controller and other officers.  
74. Patent office and its branches.  
75. Restriction on employees of patent office as to right or interest in patents.  
76. Officers and employees not to furnish information, etc.  
CHAPTER XV  
POWERS OF CONTROLLER GENERALLY  
77. Controller to have certain powers of a civil court.  
78. Po wer of Controller to correct clerical errors, etc.  4 SECTIONS  
79. Evidence how to be given and powers of Controller in respect thereof.  
80. Exercise of discretionary powers by Controller.  
81. Disposal by Controller of applications for extension of time.  
CHAP TER XVI  
WORKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES AND REVOCATION  
82. Definition of “patented articles” and “patentee”.  
83. General principles applicable to working of patented inventions.  
84. Compulsory licences.  
85. Revocation of patents by the Controller for non -working.  
86. Power of Controller to adjourn applications for compulsory licences, etc., in certain  cases.  
87. Procedure for dealing with applications under sections 84 and 85.  
88. Powers of Controller in granting compulsory licences.  
89. General purposes for granting compulsory licences.  
90. Terms and conditions of compulsory licences.  
91. Licensing of related patents.  
92. Special provision for compulsory licences on notifications by Central Government.  
92A. Compulsory licence for export of patent ed pharmaceutical products in certain exceptional    
circumstances.  
93. Order for licence to operate as a deed between parties concerned.  
94. Termination of compulsory licence.  
CHAPTER XVII  
USE OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT AND ACQUISITION OF INVENTIONS BY  
CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
99. Meaning of use of invention for purposes of Government.  
100. Power of Central Government to  use inventions for purposes of Government.  
101. Rights of third parties in respect of use of inve ntion for purposes of Government.  
102. Acquisition of inventions and patents by the Central Government.  
103. Reference to High Court of disputes as to use for purposes of Government.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
SUITS CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS  
104. Jurisdiction.  
104A. Burden of proof in case of suits concerning infringement.  
105. Power of court to make declaration as to non -infringement.  
106. Power of court to grant relief in cases of groundless threats of infringement proceedings.  
107. Defences, etc., in suit for infringement.  
107A. Certain acts not to be considered as infringement . 
108. Reliefs in suits for infringement.  
109. Right of exclusive licensee to take proceedings against infringement.  
110. Right of licensee under section 84 to take proceedings agains t infringement.  
111. Restriction on power of court to grant damages or account of profits for infringement.  5 SECTIONS  
112. [ Omitted .] 
113. Certificate of validity of specification and costs of subsequent suits for infringement thereof.  
114.  Relief for infringement of partially valid specification.  
115. Scientific advisers.  
CHAPTER XIX  
APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE  BOARD  
116. Appellate Board.  
117. Staff of Appellate Board.  
117A. Appeals to Appellate Board.  
117B. Procedure and powers of Appellate Board.  
117C. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.  
117D. Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellate Board.  
117E. Appearance of Controller in legal proceedings.  
117F. Costs of Controller in proceedings before Appellate Board.  
117G. Transfer of pending proceedings to Appellate Board.  
117H. Power of Appellate Board to make rules.  
CHAPTER XX  
PENALTIES  
118. Contravention of Secrecy provisions relating to certain inventions.  
119. Falsification of entries in register, etc.  
120. Unauthorised claim of patent rights.  
121. Wrongful use of words “patent office”.  
122. Refusal or failure to supply information.  
123. Practice by non -registered patent agents.  
124. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER XXI  
PATENT AGENTS  
125. Register of patent agents.  
126. Qualificatio ns for registration as patent agents.  
127. Rights of patent agents.  
128. Subscription and verification of certain documents by patent agents.  
129. Restrictions on practice as patent agents.  
130. Removal from register of patent agents and restoration.  
131. Power of Controller to refuse to deal with certain agents.  
132. Savings in respect of other persons authorised to act as agents.  
CHAPTER XXII  
INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  
133. Convention countries.  
134. Notification as to countries not providing for reciprocity.  
135. Convention applications.  6 SECTIONS  
136. Special provisions relating to convention applications.  
137. Multiple priorities.  
138. Supplementary provisions as to convention applications.  
139. Other provisions of Act to apply to convention appl ications.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
140. Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions.  
141. Determination of certain contracts.  
142. Fees.  
143. Restrictions upon publication of specification.  
144. Reports of Examiners to be confidential.  
145. Publication of official journal.  
146. Power of Controller to call for information from patent ees. 
147. Evidence of entries, documents, etc.  
148. Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc.  
149. Service of notices, etc. , by post.  
150. Security for costs.  
151. Transmission of orders of courts to Controller.  
152. [ Omitted .] 
153. Information relating to Patents.  
154. Loss or destruction of Patents.  
155. Reports of Controller to be placed before Parliament.  
156. Patent to bind Government.  
157. Right of Government to sell or use forfeited articles.  
157A. Protection of security of India.  
158. Power of High Courts to make rules.  
159. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
160. Rules to be placed before Parliament.  
161. [ Omitted .] 
162. Repeal of Act 2 of 1911 in so far as it rela tes to patents and savings.  
163. [ Omitted .] 
THE SCHEDULE.  7 THE PATENTS ACT, 1970  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1970  
[19th September , 1970.]  
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to patents.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Patents Act, 1970.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any referenc e 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definition s and interpretation. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “Appellate Board ” means the Appellate Board referred to in section 116;  
(ab) “assignee ” includes an assignee of the assignee and the legal representative of a deceased 
assignee and references to the assignee of any person include references to the assignee of the legal 
representative or assignee of that person;  
3[(aba) “Budapest Treaty ” means the Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the 
Deposit of Micro -organisms for the purposes of Patent Procedure done at Budapest on 28th day of 
April, 1977, as amended and modified from time to time; ] 
(ac) “capable of industrial application ”, in relation to an invention, means that the invention is 
capable of being made or used in an industry; ] 
 (b) “Controller ” means the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Mark s referred to in 
section 73 ; 
(c) “convention application ” means an application for a patent  made by virtue of section 135;  
4[(d) “convention country" means a country or a country which is member of a group of countries 
or a union of countries or an Inter -governmental organi sation  5[referred to as a convention country in 
section 133 ;] 
(e) “district court ” has the meaning assigned to that expression by the Code of Civi l Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908) ; 
(f) “exclusive licence ” means a licence from a patentee which confers on the licensee, or on the 
licensee and persons autho rised by him, to the exclusion of all other persons (including the patentee), 
any right in respect of the patented invention, and “exclusive licensee ” shall  be construed 
accordingly;  
6*   *   *  *   * 
                                                           
1. 1-4-1978 , vide notification No. S.O. 799 , dated 10 -3-1978, in respect of the provisions of sub -section (2) of s. 12 and            
sub-section (2) of s. 13, s. 28, s. 68, and ss. 125 to 132 see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
    20-4-1972 vide notification No. S.O. 300 dated 20 -4-1972, in respect of the provisions [except sub -section (2) of s. 12 and 
sub-section (2) of s. 13, s. 28, s. 68 and s s. 125 to 132] see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3, for claus e (a) (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2, for “notified as such under sub -section ( 1) of section 133” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005) . 
6. Clause ( g) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  8 (h) “Government undertaking ” means any indu strial undertaking  carried on — 
(i) by a department of the Government, or  
(ii) by a corporation established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, which is owned or 
controlled by the Government, or  
(iii) by a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956) , 1[or] 
1[(iv) by an institution wholly or substantially financed by the Government; ] 
2*   *   *   *  * 
3[(i) “High Court", in relation to a State or Union territory, means the High Court having 
territorial jurisdiction in that State or Union territory, as the case may be ;] 
4[(ia) “international application ” means an application for patent made in accordance with the 
Patent Cooper ation Treaty;]  
5[(j) “invention”  means a new product or process involving an inventive step and capable of 
industrial application;  
6[(ja) “inventive step”  means a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as 
compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance or both and that makes the 
invention not obvious to a person skilled in the art;] ] 
(k) “legal representative ” means a per son who in law represents t he estate of a deceased person;  
7[(l) “new invention ” means any invention or technology which has not been anticipated by 
publication in any document or used in the country or elsewhere in the world before the date of filing 
of patent application with complete specification, i.e., the subject matter has not fallen in public 
domain or that it does not form part of the state of the art;  
(la) “Opposition Board ” means an Opposition Board constituted under sub -section ( 3) of                
section 25;  
(m) “patent ” means a patent for any invention granted under this Act;]  
(n) “patent agent ” means a person for the time being registered under this Act as a patent agent;  
(o) “patented article ” and “patented process ” mean respectively an article or process in respect of 
which a patent is in force;  
4[(oa) “Patent Co operation Treaty ” means the Patent Co operation Treaty done at Washington on 
the 19th day of June, 1970 as amended and modified from time to time;]  
(p) “patentee ” means the person for the time being entered on the register as the grantee or 
proprietor of the patent;  
(q) “patent of addition ” means a patent granted i n accordance with section 54;  
(r) “patent office ” means the patent office referred to in sect ion 74;  
(s) “person" includes the Government;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. The words “and includes the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and any other institution which is financed 
wholly or for the major p art by the said Council” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005)  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5.Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( j)  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2, for clause ( ja) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause s (l) and ( m) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  9 (t) “person interested ” includes a person engaged in, or in promoting, research in the same field 
as that to which the invention relates;  
1[(ta) “pharmaceutical substance" means any new entity involving one or more inventive steps;]  
2[(u) “prescribed ” means, — 
(A) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules made by the High 
Court;  
(B) in relation to proceedings before the Appellate Board, prescribed by rules made by the 
Appellate Board; and 
(C) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act ;] 
(v) “prescribed  manner ” includes the payment of the prescribed fee;  
(w) “priority date ” has the meaning assigned to it by section 11;  
(x) “register ” means the register of patents referred to  in section 67;  
(y) “true and first inventor ” does not include either the first importer of an invention into India, or 
a person to whom an invention is first communicated  from outside India.  
(2) In this Act, unless the context ot herwise requires, any reference — 
(a) to the Controller shall be construed as including a reference to any officer discharging the 
functions of the Controller in pursuance of section 73;  
(b) to the patent office shall be construed as including a reference to any branch office of  the 
patent office.  
CHAPTER II  
INVENTIONS NOT PATENTABLE  
3. What are not inventions. —The following are not inventions w ithin the meaning of this                    
Act,— 
(a) an invention which is frivolous or which claims anything obviously contrary to wel l 
established natural laws;  
3[(b) an invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation of which would be 
contrary to public order or morality or which causes serious prejudice to human, animal or plant life 
or health or to the environment;]  
(c) the mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of an abstract theory  4[or 
discovery of any living thing or non -living substance occurring in nature] ; 
5[(d) the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the 
enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of any new property or 
new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless 
such known process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure 
form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and other derivatives of 
known substance shall be considered  to be the same substance, unless they differ significantly in 
properties with regard to efficacy; ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 3, for clause ( u) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 3, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  10 (e) a substance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation of the properties 
of the components thereof or a process for produc ing such substance;  
(f) the mere arrangement or re -arrangement or duplication of known devices each functioning 
independently  of one another in a known way;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(h) a method of agriculture or horticulture;  
(i) any process for the medicinal, s urgical, curative, prophylactic 2[diagnostic, therapeutic] or 
other treatment of human beings or any process for a similar treatment of animals 3*** to render them 
free of disease or to increase their economic value or that of their products.  
2[(j) plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro -organisms but including 
seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological processes for production or pr opagation of 
plants and animals ; 
(k) a mathematical or business method or a comp uter program me per se  or algorithms;  
(l) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation whatsoever 
including cinematographic works and television productions;  
(m) a mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or m ethod of playing game;  
(n) a presentation of information;  
(o) topography of integrated c ircuits;  
(p) an invention which, in effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an aggregation or 
duplication of known properties of traditionally known component or components.]  
4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable. —No patent shall be granted in respect of 
an invention relating to atomic energy falling within sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy 
Act, 1962 (33 of 1962) . 
5. [Inventions wh ere only methods or processes of manufacture patentable. ] Omitted by the 
Patents (Amendment) Act , 2005  (15 of 2005 ), s. 4 (w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS  
6. Persons entitled to apply for patents. —(1) Subject to the provisions contained in section 134, an 
application for a patent for an invention may be made by any of the foll owing persons, that is to say, — 
(a) by any person claiming to be the true and f irst inventor of the invention;  
(b) by any person being the assignee of the person claiming to be the true and first inventor in 
respect of the right to make such an application;  
(c) by the legal representative of any deceased person who immediately before his death was 
entitled to make such an application.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) may be made by any of the persons referred to therein either 
alone or jointly with any other person.  
7. Form of application. —(1) Every application for a patent shall be for one invention only and shall 
be made in the prescribed form a nd filed in the patent office.  
                                                           
1. Clause ( g) omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. The words “or plants” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  11 1[(1A) Every international application under the Patent Co operation Treaty for a patent, as may be 
filed designating India , shall be deemed to be an application under this Act, if a corresponding application 
has also been filed before the Controller in India.]  
2[(1B) The filing date of an application referred to in sub -section ( 1A) and its complete specification 
processed by t he patent office as designated office or elected office shall be the international filing date 
accorded under t he Patent Cooperation Treaty. ] 
(2) Where the application is made by virtue of an assignment of the right to apply for a patent for the 
invention,  there shall be furnished with the application, or within such period as may be prescribed after 
the filling of the application, proof of the right to make the application.  
(3) Every application under this section shall state that the applicant is in posse ssion of the invention 
and shall name the 3[person] claiming to be the true and first inventor; and where the person so claiming 
is not the applicant or one of the applicants, the application shall contain a declaration that the applicant 
believes the pers on so named to be the true and first inventor.  
4[(4) Every such application (not being a convention application or an application filed under the 
Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India) shall be accompanied by a provisional or a complete 
specification .] 
8. Information and undertaking regarding foreign applications. —(1) Where an applicant for a 
patent under this Act is prosecuting either alone or jointly with any other person an application for a 
patent in any country outside India in respect of the sam e or substantially the same invention, or where to 
his knowledge such an application is being prosecuted by some person through whom he claims or by 
some person deriving title from him, he shall file along with his application  5[or subsequently 6[within th e 
prescribed period as the Controller may allow]] — 
7[(a) a statement setting out detailed particulars of such application; and]  
(b) an undertaking that, 8[up to the date of grant of patent in India], he would keep the Controller 
informed in writing, from time to time, of 9[detailed particulars as required under]  clause ( a) in 
respect of every other application relating to the same or substantially the same invention, if any, filed 
in any country outside India subsequently to the filing of the statement referred to in the aforesaid 
clause within the prescribed time.  
10[(2) At any time after an application for patent is filed in India and till the grant of a pa tent or refusal 
to grant of a patent made thereon, the Controller may also require the applicant to furnish details, as may 
be prescribed, relating to the processing of the application in a country outside India, and in that event the 
applicant shall furni sh to the Controller information available to him within such period as may be 
prescribed.]  
9. Provisional and complete specifications. —11[(1) Where an application for a patent (not being a 
convention application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India) is 
accompanied by a provisional specification, a complete specification shall be filed within twelve months 
from the date of filing of the application, and if the complete specification is not so filed, the application  
shall be deemed to be abandoned .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “owner” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 7 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6.  Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 7, for clause ( a)  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
8. Subs. by Act 15 o f 2005, s. 6, for “up  to the date of the acceptance of his complete specification filed in India (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
9. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 7, for “details of the nature referred to in” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
10. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 6, for sub -section ( 2)  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
11. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   12 (2) Where two or more applications in the name of the same applicant are accompanied by 
provisional specifications in respect of inventions which are cognate or of which one is a modification of 
another and the Controller  is of opinion that the whole of such inventions are such as to constitute a single 
invention and may properly be included in one patent, he may allow one complete specification to be 
filed in respect of all such provisional specifications:  
1[Provided that  the period of time specified under sub -section ( 1) shall be reckoned from the date of 
filing of the earliest provisional specification .] 
2[(3) Where an application for a patent (not being a convention application or an application filed 
under the Patent C ooperation Treaty designating India) is accompanied by a specification purporting to be 
a complete specification, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests at any time within twelve 
months from the date of filing of the application, direct that such  specification shall be treated, for the 
purposes of this Act, as a provisional specification and proceed with the application accordingly .] 
(4) Where a complete specification has been filed in pursuance of an application for a patent 
accompanied by a prov isional specification or by a specification treated by virtue of a direction under 
sub-section ( 3) as a provisional specification, the Controller may, if the applicant so requests at any time 
before 3[grant of patent] , cancel the provisional specification and post -date the application to the date of 
filing of  the complete specification.  
10. Contents of specification s.—(1) Every specification, whether provisional or complete, shall 
describe the invention and shall begin with a title suff iciently indicating t he subject -matter to which the 
invention relates.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf under this Act, drawings may, and shall, if the 
Controller so requires, be supplied for the purposes of any specification, whether  complete or provis ional ; 
and any drawings so supplied shall, unless the Controller otherwise directs, be deemed to form part of the 
specification, and references in this Act to a specification shall be construed accordingly.  
(3) If, in any particular case, the Controller co nsiders that an application should be further 
supplemented by a model or sample of anything illustrating the invention or alleged to constitute an 
invention, such model or sample as he may require shall be furnished 4[before the application  is found in 
order for grant of a patent] , but such model or sample shall not be deemed to form part of the 
specification.  
(4) Every com plete specification shall — 
(a) fully and particularly describe the invention and its operation or use and the method by which 
it is to be performed;  
(b) disclose the best method of performing the invention which is known to the applicant and for 
which he is entitled to claim protection; and  
(c) end with a claim or claims defining the scope of the invention for which protection is claimed.  
 
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “the acceptance of the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “before the acceptance of the application” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  13 1[(d) be accompanied by an abstract to provide technical information on the invention:  
Provided that — 
(i) the Controller may amend the abstract for providing  better information to third parties; and  
(ii) if the applicant mentions a biological material in  the specification which may not be 
described in such a way as to satisfy clauses  (a) and ( b), and if such material is not available to 
the public, the  application shall be completed by depositing  2[the material to an international 
depository  authority und er the Budapest Treaty] and by fulfilling the following  conditions, 
namely :— 
3[(A) the deposit of the material shall be made not later than the date of filing the  patent 
application in India and a reference thereof shall be made in the  specification within  the 
prescribed period];  
(B) all the available characteristics of the material  required for it to be correctly identified 
or indicated are included in the  specification including the name, address of the depository 
institution and the  date and number of the deposit of the material at the institution;  
(C) access to the material is available in the depository  institution only after the date of 
the applica tion for patent in India or if priority is claimed after the date of the priority;  
(D) disclose the sour ce and geographical origin of the  biological material in the 
specification, when used in an invention.]  
4[(4A) In case of an international application designating India, the title, description,  drawings, 
abstract and claims filed with the application shall  be taken as the complete  specification for the purposes 
of this Act .] 
5[(5) The claim or claims of a complete specification shall relate to a  single invention, or to a group of 
inventions linked so as to form a single inventive  concept, shall be clear and  succinct and shall be fairly 
based on the matter  disclosed in the specification.]  
(6) A declaration as to the inventorship of the invention shall, in such cases as may be prescribed, be 
furnished in the prescribed form with the complete specification or within such period as may be 
prescribed after th e filing of that specification.  
(7) Subjec t to the foregoing provisions of this section, a complete specification filed after a 
provisional specification may include claims in respect of developments of, or a dditions to, the invention 
which was described in the provisional specification, being developments or additions in respect of which 
the applicant would be entitled under the provisions of section 6 to make a separate application for a 
patent.  
11. Priority  dates of claims of a complete specification. —(1) There shall be a priority date for each 
claim of a complete specification.  
(2) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of a si ngle application accompanied by — 
(a) a provisional specification; or 
(b) a specification which is treated by virtue of a direction under sub -section ( 3) of section 9 as a 
provisional specification,  
and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in the specification referred to in clause ( a) or                
claus e (b), the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing  of the relevant specification.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 8 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 8, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -clause ( A) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 4A) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 8, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  14 (3) Where the complete specification is filed or proceeded with in pursuance of two or more 
applications accompanied by such specifications as are mention ed in sub -section ( 2) and the claim is 
fairly  based on  the matter disclosed — 
(a) in one of those specifications, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing of 
the application ac companied by that specification ; 
(b) partly in one and par tly in another, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the filing 
of the application accompanied by the specification of the later da te. 
1[(3A) Where a complete specification based on a previously filed application in India has been filed 
within twelve months from the date of that application and the claim is fairly based on the matter 
disclosed in the previously filed application, the priority date of that claim shall be the date of the 
previously filed application in which the matter was first disclosed. ] 
(4) Where the complete specification has been filed in pursuance of a further application made by 
virtue of sub -section ( 1) of section 16 and the claim is fairly based on the matter disclosed in any of the 
earlier specifications, provisio nal or complete, as the case may be, the priority date of that claim shall be 
the date of the filing of that specification in which the matter was first disclosed.  
(5) Where, under the foregoing provisions of this section, any claim of a complete specifica tion 
would, but for the provisions of this sub -section, have two or more priority dates, the priority date of that 
claim shall be the earlier or earliest of those dates.  
(6) In any case to which sub -sections ( 2), (3), 1[(3A)], (4) and ( 5) do not apply, the  priority date of a 
claim shall, subject to the provisions of section 137, be the date of filing of the complete specification.  
(7) The reference to the date of the filing of the application or of the complete specification in this 
section shall, in cases where there has been a post -dating under section 9 or section 17 or, as the case may 
be, ante -dating under section 16, be a reference to the date as so post -dated or ante -dated.  
(8) A claim in a complete specification of a patent shall n ot be invalid by reason only of — 
(a) the publication or use of the invention so far as claimed in that claim on or after the priority 
date of such claim; or  
(b) the grant of another patent which claims the invention, so far as claimed in the first mentioned 
claim, in a cla im of the same or a later priority date.  
CHAPTER IV  
2[PUBLICATION AND EXAMINATION OF APPLICATIONS ] 
3[11A. Publication of applications. —4[(1) Save as otherwise provided, no application for patent 
shall ordinarily be open ed to the public for such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) The applicant may, in the prescribed manner, request the Controller to publish his application at 
any time before the expiry of the period prescribed under sub -section ( 1) and subject to the provisio ns of 
sub-section ( 3), the Controller shall publish such application as soon as possible.  
(3) Every application for a patent shall, on the expiry of the period specified under sub -section ( 1), be 
published, except  in cases where the application — 
(a) in whi ch secrecy direction is imposed under section 35; or  
(b) has been abandoned under sub -section ( 1) of section 9; or  
(c) has been withdrawn three months prior to the period specified under sub -section ( 1)]. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 9, for the Chapter heading “EXAMINATION OF APPLICATION” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 10, for sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).  
 15 (4) In case a secrecy direction has been given in r espect of an application under section 35, then ,          
it shall be published after the expiry of the period  1[prescribed under sub -section ( 1)] or when the secrecy 
direction has ceased to operate, whichever is later.  
(5) The publication of every application under this section shall include the particulars of the date of 
application, number of application, name and address of the applicant identifying the application and an 
abstract.  
(6) Upon publication of an application for a patent under this se ction — 
(a) the depository institution shall make the biological material men tioned in the specification 
available to the public;  
(b) the patent office may, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, make the specification 
and drawings, if any, of such a pplication available to the public.  
2[(7) On and from the date of publication of the application for patent and until the date of grant of a 
patent in respect of such application, the applicant shall have the like privileges and rights as if a patent 
for the invention had been granted on the date of publication of the application:  
Provided that the applicant shall not be entitled to institute any proceedings for infringement until the 
patent has been granted:  
Provided further that the rights of a patentee in respect of applications made under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5 before the 1st day of January, 2005 shall accrue from the date of grant of the patent : 
Provided also that after a patent is granted in respect of applications made under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5, the patent -holder shall only be entitled to receive reasonable royalty from such enterprises 
which have made significant investment and were producing and marketing the concerned product prior 
to the 1st day of January, 2005 and which continue t o manufacture the product covered by the patent on 
the date of grant of the patent and no infringement proceedings shall be instit uted against such 
enterprises.]  
11B.  Request for examination .—3[(1) No application for a patent shall be examined unless the 
applicant or any other interested person makes a request in the prescribed manner for such examination 
within the prescribed period.]  
4*   *   *   *   * 
5[(3) In case of an application in respect of a claim for a patent filed under sub -section ( 2) of secti on 5 
before the 1st day of January, 2005 a request for its examination shall be made in the prescribed manner 
and within the prescribed period by the applicant or any other interested person.]  
(4) In case the applicant or any other interested person does n ot make a request for examination of the 
application for a patent within the period as specified under sub -section ( 1) 6*** or sub -section ( 3), the 
application shall be treate d as withdrawn by the applicant : 
7[Provided that — 
(i) the applicant may, at any time after filing the application bu t before the grant of a patent , 
withdraw the application by making a request in the prescribed manner; and  
(ii) in a case where secrecy direction has been issued under section 35, the request for 
examination may be made within the prescribed period from the date of revocation of the secrecy 
direction.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 10, for “of eighteen months” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).  
5. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
6. The words, brackets and figure “or sub -section ( 2)” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  16 12. Examination of application. —1[(1) When a request for examination has been made in respect              
of an application for a patent in the prescribed manner 2[under sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) of 
section 11B, the application and specification and other documents related thereto  shall be referred  at the 
earliest by the Controller ] to an examiner for making a report to him in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) whether the application and the 3[specification  and other documents  relating thereto ] are in 
accordance with the requirements of this Act and of any rules made thereunde r; 
(b) whether there is any lawful ground of objection to the grant of the pa tent under this Act in 
pursuance of the application;  
(c) the result of investigations made under section 13; and  
(d) any other  matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) The examiner to whom the application and the 3[specification and other documents relating 
thereto ] are referred under sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily make the report to the Controller within 4[such 
period as may be prescribed] . 
13. Search for antic ipation by previous publication  and by prior claim. —(1) The examiner to 
whom an application for a  patent is referred under section 12 shall make investigation for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether the invention so far as claimed in any claim  of the complete specification — 
(a) has been anticipated by publication before the date of filing of the appli cant‟s complete 
specification in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India and 
dated on or after the 1st day of January, 1912;  
(b) is claimed in any claim of any other complete specification published on or after the  date of 
filing of the applicant ‟s complete specification, being a specification filed in pursuance of an 
application for a patent made in India and dated before or claiming the priority date earlier than that 
date.  
(2) The examiner shall, in addition, mak e such investigation 5*** for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, has been anticipated 
by publication in India or elsewhere in any document other than those mentioned in sub -section (1) before 
the date of filing of the applicant ‟s complete specification.  
(3) Where a complete specification is amended under the provisions of this Act before 6[the grant of a 
a patent] , the amended specification shall be examined and investigated in like  manner  as the original 
specification.  
(4) The examination and investigations required under section 12 and this section shall not be deemed 
in any way to warrant the validity of any patent, and no liability shall be incurred by the Central 
Government or a ny officer thereof by reason of, or in connection with, any such examination or 
investigation or any report or other proceedings consequent thereon.  
7[14. Consideration of report of examiner by Controller .—Where, in respect of an application for 
a patent, the report of the examiner received by the Controller is adverse to the applicant or requires any 
amendment of the application, the specification or other documents to ensure compliance with the 
provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, the C ontroller, before proceeding to dispose of the 
application in accordance with the provisions hereinafter appearing, shall communicate as expeditiously 
as possible the gist of the objections to the applicant and shall, if so required by the applicant within  the 
prescribed period, give him  an opportunity of being heard.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 12, for certain words, brackets, figures and letter (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 10, for “specification relating thereto” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 12, for “a period of eighteen months from the date of such reference” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. The words “as the Controller may direct” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 11 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 13, for  “it has been accepted” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sections  14 and 15 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   17 15. Power of Controller to refuse or require amended applications, etc., in certain                    
cases .—Where the Controller is satisfied that the application or any specification or any  other document 
filed in pursuance thereof does not comply with the requirements of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder, the Controller may refuse the application or may require the application, specification or the 
other documents, as the case may be , to be amended to his satisfaction before he proceeds with the 
application and refuse the a pplication on failure to do so. ] 
16. Power of Controller to make orders respecting division of application. —(1) A person who 
has made an application for a patent under this Act may, at any time 1[before the grant of the patent] , if he 
so desires, or with a view to remedy the objection raised by the Controller on the ground that the claims 
of the complete specifica tion relate to more than one invention, file a further application in respect of an 
invention disclosed in the provisional or complete specification already filed in respect of the first 
mentioned application.  
(2) The further application under sub -section (1) shall be accompanied by a complete specification, 
but such complete specification shall not include any matter not in substance disclosed in the complete 
specification filed in pursuance of the first mentioned application.  
(3) The Controller may requir e such amendment of the complete specification filed in pursuance of 
either the original or the further application as may be necessary to ensure that neither of the said 
complete specifications includes a claim for a ny matter claimed in the other.  
2[Explanation .— For the purposes of this Act, the further application and the complete specification 
accompanying it shall be deemed to have been filed on the date on which the first mentioned application 
had been filed, and the further application shall be proceeded with as a substantive application and be 
examined when the request for examination is filed within the prescribed period.]  
17. Power of Controller to make orders respecting dating of application. —(1) Subject to the 
provisions of section 9, at any time after the filing of an application and 3[before the grant of the patent]  
under this Act, the Controller may, at the request of the applicant made in the prescribed manner, direct 
that the application sh all be post -dated to such date as may be specified in the request, and proceed with 
the application accordingly:  
Provided that no application shall be post -dated un der this sub -section to a date later than six months 
from the date on which it was actually made or would, but for the provisions of this sub -section, be 
deemed to have been made.  
4[(2) Where an application or specification (including drawings) or any other document s is required to 
to be amended under section 15, the application or specification or other document shall, if the Controller 
so directs, be deemed to have been made on the date on which the requirement is complied with or where 
the application or specification  or other document is returned to the applicant , on the date on which it is 
refiled after complying with the requirement.]  
18. Power  of Controller in cases of anticipation. —(1) Where it appears to the Controller that the 
invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has been anticipated in the manner 
referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 13, he may refuse  to 5[the 
application]  unless the applicant — 
(a) shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of the claim of his complete 
specification is not later than the date on which the relevant document was published; or  
(b) amends his complete specification to the satisfaction of the Controller.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 15, for “before the acceptance of the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “before the acceptance of the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 13, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 17, for “to accept the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   18 (2) If it appears to the Controller t hat the invention is claimed in a claim of any other complete 
specification referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13, he may, subject to the provisions 
hereinafter contained, direct that a reference to that other specification shall be in serted by way of notice 
to the public in the applicant ‟s complete specification unless within such time as may be prescribed, — 
(a) the applicant shows to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of his claim is 
not later than the priority date of the claim of t he said other specification; or  
(b) the complete specification is amended to the satisfaction of the Controller.  
(3) If it appears to the Controller, as a result of an investigation under section 13 or otherwise, — 
(a) that the inventi on so far as claimed in any claim of the applicant ‟s complete specification               
has been claimed in any other complete specification referred to in clause ( a) of su b-section ( 1) of 
section 13; and  
(b) that such other complete specification was pu blished on or after the priority date of the 
applicant ‟s claim,  
then, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Controller that the priority date of the applicant ‟s claim is 
not later than the priority date of the claim of that specification, the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall 
apply thereto in the same manner as they apply to a specification published on or after the date of filing of 
the applicant ‟s complete specification.  
1*   *   *   *  * 
19. Powers of Controller in case of potential infrin gement. —(1) If, in consequence of the 
investigations required 2[under  this Act] , it appears to the Controller that an invention in respect of which 
an application for a patent has been made cannot be performed without substantial risk of infringement of 
a claim of any other patent, he may direct that a reference to that other patent shall be inserted in the 
applicant ‟s complete specification by way of notice to the public, unless within  such time as may be 
prescribed — 
(a) the applicant shows to the satisfac tion of the Controller that there are reasonable grounds for 
contesting the validity of the said claim of the other patent; or  
(b) the complete specification is amended to the satisfaction of the Controller.  
(2) Where, after a reference to another patent h as been inserted in a complete specification in 
pursuance of a direction under sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) that other patent is revoked or otherwise ceases to be in force; or  
(b) the specification of that other patent is amended by the deletion of the relevant claim; or  
(c) it is found, in proceedings before the court or the Controller, that the relevant claim of that 
other patent is invalid or is not infringed by any working of the applicant ‟s invention, the Controller 
may, on the application of the applicant, delete the reference to that other patent.  
20. Powers of Controller to make orders regarding substitution of applica nts, etc.—(1) If the 
Controller is satisfied, on a claim made in the prescribed manner at any time before a patent has been 
granted, that by  virtue of any assignment or agreement in writing made by the applicant or one of the 
applicants for the patent or by operation of law, the claimant would, if the patent were then granted be 
entitled thereto or to the interest of the applicant therein, or to an undivided share of the patent or of that 
interest, the Controller may, subject to the provisions of this section, direct that the application shall 
proceed in the name of the claimant or in the names of the claimants and the applicant or the other jo int 
applicant or applicants, accor dingly as the case may require.  
(2) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or agreement made by 
one of two or more joint applicants for a patent except with the consent of the other  joint applicant or 
applicants.  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “by the foregoing provisions of this Act or of proceedings under section 25” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   19 (3) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or agreement for the 
assignment of the benefit of an invention unless — 
(a) the invention is identified therein by reference to the number of the applica tion for the                 
patent; or  
(b) there is produced to the Controller an acknowledgment by the person by whom the 
assignment or agreement was made that the assignment or agreement relates to the invention in 
respect of which that application is m ade; or  
(c) the rights of the claimant in respect of the invention have been finally established by the 
decision of a court; or  
(d) the Controller gives directions for enabling the application to proceed or for regulating the 
manner in which it should be p rocee ded with under sub -section ( 5). 
(4) Where one of two or more joint applicants for a patent dies at any time before the patent has been 
granted, the Controller may, upon a request in that behalf made by the survivor or survivors, and with the 
consent of the legal representative of the decea sed, direct that the application shall proceed in the name of 
the survivor or survivors alone.  
(5) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for a patent whether or in what manner the 
application should be proceeded with, the Controller may, upon appl ication made to him in the prescribed 
manner by any of the parties, and after giving to all parties concerned an opportunity to be heard, give 
such directions as he thinks fit for enabling the application to proceed in the name of one or more of the 
partie s alone or for regulating the manner in which it should be proceeded with, or for both those 
purposes, as the case may require.  
1[21. Time for putting application in order for grant .—(1) An application for a patent  shall be 
deemed to have been abandoned un less, within such period as may be prescribed, the applicant has 
complied with all the requirements imposed on him by or under this Act, whether in connection with the 
complete specification or otherwise in relation to the application from the date on whic h the first 
statement of objections to the application or complete specification or other documents related thereto is 
forwarded to the applicant by the Controller.  
Explanation .—Where the application for a patent or any specification or, in the case of a c onvention 
application or an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India any document 
filed as part of the application has been returned to the applicant by the Controller in the course of the 
proceedings, the applicant shall not  be deemed to have complied with such requirements unless and until 
he has refiled it or the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Controller that for the reasons beyond his 
control such document could not be refiled.  
(2) If at the expiration of the period as pr escribed under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) an appeal to the High Court is pending in respect of the application for the patent for the main 
invention; or  
(b) in the case of an application for a patent of addition, an appeal to the High Court is pendi ng in 
respect of either that application or the application for the main invention, the time within which the 
requirements of the Controller shall be complied with shall, on an application made by the applicant 
before the expiration of the period as prescr ibed under sub -section ( 1), be extended until such date as 
the High Court may determine.  
(3) If the time within which the appeal mentioned in sub -section ( 2) may be instituted has not expired, 
the Controller may extend the period as prescribed under sub -section ( 1), to such further period as he may 
determine:  
Provided that if an appeal has been filed during the said further period, and the High Court has 
granted any extension of time for complying with the requirements of the Controller, then the 
requiremen ts may be complied with within the time granted by the Court.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 19, for section 21 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  20 22. [Acceptance of complete specification .]—Omitted by Act  The Patents (Amendment)                             
Act, 2005 (15 of 2005 ), s. 20 ( w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
23. [Advertisement of acceptance of complete specification .]—Omitted by s. 20, ibid.                        
(w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
24. [Effect of acceptance of complete specification .]—Omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).  
1*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER V  
2[OPPOSITION PROCE EDINGS TO GRANT OF  PATENTS ] 
3[25. Opposition to the patent. —(1) Where an application for a patent has been published but a 
patent has not been granted, any person may, in writing, represent by way of opposition to the Controller 
against th e grant of patent on the ground — 
(a) that the applicant for the patent or the person under or through whom he claims, wrongfully 
obtained the invention or any part thereof from him or from a person under or through whom he 
claims;  
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the  complete specification has been 
published before  the priority date of the claim — 
(i) in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India on or 
after the 1st day of January, 1912; or  
(ii) in India or elsewhere, in any other  document:  
Provided that the ground specified in sub -clause ( ii) shall not be available where such 
publication does not constitute an anticipation of the invention by virtue of sub -section ( 2) or     
sub-section ( 3) of section 29;  
(c) that the invention so  far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is claimed in a 
claim of a complete specification published on or after the priority date of the applicant ‟s claim and 
filed in pursuance of an application for a patent in India, being a claim of w hich the priority date is 
earlier than that of the applicant ‟s claim;  
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was pu blicly 
known or publicly used i n India before the priority date of that claim.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, an invention relating to a process for which a 
patent is claimed shall be deemed to have been publicly known or publicly used in India before the 
priority date of the claim if a product made by that process had already been imp orted into India 
before that date except where such importation has been for the purpose of reasonable trial or 
experiment only;  
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious and 
clearly does not involve any  inventive step, having regard to the matter published as mentioned in 
clause ( b) or having regard to what was used in India before the priority date of the applicant ‟s claim;  
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invent ion within the 
meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under this Act;  
(g) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or the 
method by which it is to be performed;  
(h) that the applicant has failed to disclos e to the Controller the information required by section 8 
or has furnished the information which in any material particular was false to his knowledge;  
(i) that in the case of a convention application, the application was not made within twelve 
months from  the date of the first application for protection for the invention made in a convention 
country by the applicant or a person from whom he derives title;  
                                                           
1. Chapter IVA omitted by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for Chapter Heading (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for sections 25 and 26 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  21 (j) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or 
geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;  
(k) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is anticipated 
having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous 
community in India or els ewhere,  
but on no other ground and the Controller shall, if requested by such person for being heard, hear him and 
dispose of such representation in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) At any time after the grant of patent but before the expiry of a period of one year from the date of 
publication of grant of a patent, any person interested may give notice of opposition to the Controller in 
the prescribed manner on any of the following ground s, namely: — 
(a) that the pa tentee or the person under or through whom he claims, wrongfully obtained the 
invention or any part thereof from him or from a person under or through whom he claims;  
(b) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification has b een 
published before  the priority date of the claim — 
(i) in any specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India on or 
after the 1st day of January, 1912; or  
(ii) in India or elsewhere, in any other document:  
Provided that the ground specified in sub -clause ( ii) shall not be available where such 
publication does not constitute an anticipation of the invention by virtue of sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3) of section 29;  
(c) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is claimed in a 
claim of a complete specification published on or after the priority date of the claim of the patentee 
and filed in pursuance of an application for a patent in India, being a claim of which the priority date 
is earlier than that of the claim of the patentee;  
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was publicly 
known or publicly used in India before the priority date of that claim.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this cla use, an invention relating to a process for which a 
patent is granted shall be deemed to have been publicly known or publicly used in India before the 
priority date of the claim if a product made by that process had already been imported into India 
before that date except where such importation has been for the purpose of reasonable trial or 
experiment only;  
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious and 
clearly does not involve any inventive step, having regard to the matter published as mentioned in 
clause ( b) or having regard to what was used in India before the priority date of the claim;  
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the 
meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under this Act;  
(g) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and clearly describe the invention or the 
method by which it is to be performed;  
(h) that the patentee has failed to disclose to the Controller the information required by section 8 
or has furnished the information which in any material particular was false to his knowledge;  
(i) that in the case of a patent granted on convention application, the application for patent was 
not made within twelve months from the da te of the first application for protection for the invention 
made in a convention country or in India by the patentee or a person from whom he derives title;  
(j) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source and 
geographi cal origin of biological material used for the invention;  22 (k) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated 
having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous 
community in India or elsewhere,  
but on no other ground.  
(3) (a) Where any such noti ce of opposition is duly given under sub -section ( 2), the Controller shall 
notify the patentee.  
(b) On receipt of such notice of opposition, the Controller shall, by order in writing, constitute a 
Board to be known as the Opposition Board consisting of such officers as he may determine and refer 
such notice of opposition along with the documents to th at Board for examination and submission of its 
recommendations to the Contr oller.  
(c) Every Opposition Board constituted under clause ( b) shall conduct the examination in accordance 
with such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(4) On receipt of the recommendation of the Opposition Board and after giving the patentee and the 
opponent  an opportunity of being heard, the Controller shall order either to maintain or to amend or to 
revoke the patent.  
(5) While passing an order under sub -section ( 4) in respect of the ground mentioned in clause ( d) or 
clause (e) of sub -section ( 2), the Contr oller shall not take into account any personal document or secret 
trial or secret use.  
(6) In case the Controller issues an order under sub -section ( 4) that the patent shall be maintained 
subject to amendment of the specification or any other document, the  patent s hall stand amended 
accordingly.  
26. In cases of “obtaining”  Controller may treat the patent as the patent of                            
opponent .—(1) Where in any opposition proceeding under thi s Act the Controller finds that — 
(a) the invention, so  far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, was obtained from 
the opponent in the manner set out in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 25 and revokes the 
patent on that ground, he may, on request by such opponent made in the prescribe d manner, direct 
that the patent shall stand amended in the name of the opponent;  
(b) a part of an invention described in the complete specification was so obtained from the 
opponent, he may pass an order requiring that the specification be amended by the exclusion of that 
part of the invention.  
(2) Where an opponent has, before the date of the order of the Controller requiring the amendment of 
a complete specification referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), filed an application for a patent for an 
invention which included the whole or a part of the invention held to have been obtained from him and 
such application is pending, the Controller may treat such application and specification in so far as they 
relate to the invention held to have been obtaine d from him, as having been filed, for the purposes of this 
Act relating to the priority dates of claims of the complete specification, on the date on which the 
corresponding document was or was deemed to have been filed by the patentee in the earlier appli cation 
but for all other purposes the application of the opponent shall be proceeded with as an application for a 
patent under this Act.]  
27. [Refusal of patent without opposition .]—Omitted by Act  The Patents (Amendment)                             
Act, 2005 (15 of 2005), s. 20 ( w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
28. Mention of inventor as such in patent. —(1) If the Controller is satisfied, upon a request or 
claim made in accordance with the provisions of this section, — 
(a) that the person in respect of or by whom the request or claim is made is the inventor of an 
invention in respect of which application for a patent has been made, or of a substantial part of that 
invention; and  
(b) that the application for the patent is a direct consequence of his being the inventor,  23 the Controller shall, subject to the provisions of this section, cause him to be mentioned as inventor in any 
patent granted in pursuance of the application in the complete specification a nd in the register of Patents:  
Provided that the mention of any pers on as inventor under this section shall not confer or derogate 
from any rights under the patent.  
(2) A request that any person shall be mentioned as aforesaid may be made in the prescribed manner 
by the applicant for the patent or (where the person alleged  to be the inventor is not the applicant or one 
of the applicants) by the applicant and that person.  
(3) If any person [other than a person in respect of whom a request in relation to the application in 
question has been made under sub -section ( 2)] desires  to be mentioned as aforesaid, he may make a claim 
in the prescribed manner in that behalf.  
1[(4) A request or claim under the  foregoing provisions of this section shall be made before the grant 
of patent.]  
2*   *   *   *   * 
(6) 3[Where] a claim is made u nder sub -section ( 3), the Controller shall give notice of the claim to 
every applicant for the patent (not being the claimant) and to any other person whom the Controller may 
consider to be interested; and before deciding upon any request or claim made und er sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3), the Controller shall, if required, hear the person in respect of or by whom the request or 
claim is made, and, in the case of a claim under sub -section ( 3), any person to whom notice of the claim 
has been given as afo resaid.  
(7) Where any person has been mentioned as inventor in pursuance of this section any  other person 
who alleges that he ought not to have been so mentioned may at any time apply to the Controller for a 
certificate to that effect , and the Controller m ay, after hearing, if required, any person whom he may 
consider to be interested, issue such a certificate, and if he does so, he shall rectify the specification and 
the register accordingly.  
CHAPTER VI  
ANTICIPATION  
29. Anticipation by previous publication. —(1) An invention claimed in a complete specification 
shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the invention was published in a 
specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made in India and dated befo re the 1st day 
of January, 1912.  
(2) Subject as hereinafter provided, an invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be 
deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that the invention was published before the priority date 
of the relevant cla im of the specification, if the patentee or the applicant for the patent proves — 
(a) that the matter published was obtained from him, or (where he is not himself the true and first 
inventor) from any person from whom he derives title, and was published wit hout his consent or the 
consent of any such person; and  
(b) where the patentee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title 
learned of the publication before the date of the application for the patent, or, in the case of a 
conve ntion application, before the date of the application for protection in a convention country, that 
the application or the application in the convention country, as the case may be, was made as soon as 
reasonably practicable thereafter:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 25, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), where” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   24 Provided that this sub-section shall not apply if the invention was before the priority date of the claim 
commercially worked in India, otherwise than for the purpose of reasonable trial, either by the patentee or 
the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he deriv es title or by any other person with the 
consent of the patentee or the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title.  
(3) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of an application for a patent made by a 
person being the tr ue and first inventor or deriving title from him, an invention claimed in that 
specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of any other application for a 
patent in respect of the same invention made in contravention of the rig hts of that person , or by reason 
only that after the date of filing of that other application the invention was used or published, without the 
consent of that person, by the applicant in respect of that other application or by any other person in 
consequen ce of any disclosure of any invention by that applicant.  
30. Anticipation by previous communication to Government. —An invention claimed in a 
complete specification shall not be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of the communication 
of the inve ntion to the Government or to any person authorised by the Government to investigate the 
invention or its merits, or of anything done, in consequence of such a communication, for the purpose of 
the investigation.  
31. Anticipation by public display, etc. —An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not 
be deemed to have been anticipated by reason only of — 
(a) the display of the invention with the consent of the true and first inventor or a person deriving 
title from him at an industrial or other ex hibition to which the provisions of this section have been 
extended by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, or the use thereof with 
his consent for the purpose of such an exhibition in the place where it is held; or  
(b) the publi cation of any description of the invention in consequence of the display or use of the 
invention at any such exhibition as aforesaid; or  
(c) the use of the invention, after it has been displayed or used at any such exhibition as aforesaid 
and during the pe riod of the exhibition, by any person without the consent of the true and first 
inventor or a person deriving title from him; or  
(d) the description of the invention in a paper read by the true and first inventor before a learned 
society or published with his consent in the transactions of such a society,  
if the application for the patent is made by the true and first inventor or a person deriving title from him 
1[not later than twelve months ] after the opening of the exhibition or the reading or publicatio n of the 
paper, as the case may be.  
32. Anticipation by public working. —An invention claimed in a complete specification shall not be 
deemed to have been anticipated by reason only that at any time within one year before the priority date 
of the relevant claim of the specification, the invention was publicly worked in India — 
(a) by the patentee or applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title; or  
(b) by any other person with the consent of the patentee or applicant for the patent or any  person 
from whom he derives title,  
if the working was effected for the purpose of reasonable trial only and if it was reasonably necessary, 
having regard to the nature of the invention, that the working for that purpose should be effected in 
public.  
33. A nticipation by use and publication after provisional specification. —(1) Where a complete 
specification is filed or proceeded with in pursuance of an application which was accompanied by a 
provisional specification or where a complete specification filed al ong with an application is treated by 
virtue of a direction under sub -section ( 3) of section 9 as a provisional specification, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse to grant the patent, and the 
patent shall n ot be revoked or invalidated, by reason only that any matter described in the provisional 
specification or in the specification treated as aforesaid as a provisional specification was used in India or 
published in India or elsewhere at any time after the d ate of the filing of that specification.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 15 of 2005, s. 26, for “not later than six months” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  25 (2) Where a complete specification is filed in pursuance of a convention application, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse to grant the patent, and the 
patent shall n ot be revoked or invalidated, by reason only that any matter disclosed in any application for 
protection in a convention country upon which the convention application is founded was used in India or 
published in India or elsewhere at any time after the dat e of that application for protection.  
34. No anticipation if circumstances are only as described in sections 29, 30, 31                        
and 32. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller shall not refuse 1*** to grant a 
patent, a nd a patent shall not be revoked or invalidated by reason only of any circumstances which, by 
virtue of section 29 or section 30 or section 31 or section 32, do not constitute an anticipation of the 
invention claimed in the specification.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROVISIONS FOR SECRECY OF CERTAIN INVENTIONS  
35. Secrecy directions relating to inventions relevant for defence purposes. —(1) Where, in 
respect of an application made before or after the commencement of this Act for a patent, it appears to the 
Controller that the invention is one of a class notified to him by the Central Government as relevant for 
defence purposes, or, where ot herwise the invention appears to him to be so relevant, he may give 
directions for prohibiting or restricting the publication of information with respect to the invention or the 
communication of such information 2***. 
(2) Where the Controller gives any suc h directions as are referred to in sub -section ( 1), he shall give 
notice of the application and of the directions to the Central Government, and the Central Government 
shall, upon receipt of such notice, consider whether the publication of the invention wo uld be prejudicial 
to the defence of India, and if upon such consideration, it appears to it that the publication of the invention 
would not so prejudice, give notice to the Controller to that effect, who shall thereupon revoke the 
directions and notify th e applicant accordingly.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), where the Central Government         
is of opinion that an invention in respect of which the Controller has not given any directions under              
sub-section (1), is relevant for defence purposes, it may at any time before 3[grant of patent ] notify the 
Controller to that effect, and thereupon the provisions of that sub -section shall apply as if the invention 
were one of the class notified by the Central Gove rnment, and accordingly the Controller shall give notice 
to the Central Government of the directions issued by him.  
36. Secrecy directions to be periodically reviewed. —4[(1) The question whether an invention in 
respect of which directions have been given under section 35 continues to be relevant for defence 
purposes shall be reconsidered by the C entral Government at intervals of 5[six months ] or on a request 
made by the applicant which is found to be reasonable by the Controller and if, on such reconsidera tion it 
appears to the Central Government that the publication of the invention would no longer be prejudicial to 
the defence of India or in case of an application filed by a foreign applicant it is found that the invention 
is published outside India it sh all forthwith give notice to the Controller to revoke the direction and the 
Controllers shall thereupon revoke the directions previously given by him.]  
(2) The result of every re -consideration under sub -section ( 1), shall be communicated to the applicant 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
37. Consequences of secrecy directions. —(1) So long as any directions under section 35 are in force 
in respect of an application — 
(a) the Controller shall not pass an order refusing 6[to grant]  the same; and  
                                                           
1. The words “to accept complete specification for a patent or” omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. The words “to any person or class of persons specified in the directions” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 19 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 28, for “acceptance of complete specification” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002,  s. 20, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
5 Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 29, for “twelve months” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
6. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “to accept” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  26 (b) notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no appeal shall lie from any order of the 
Controller passed in respect thereof:  
1[Provided that the application may, subject to the directions , proceed up to the stage of grant of the 
patent, but the application and the specification found to be in order for grant of the patent shall not be 
published, and no patent shall be granted in pursuance of th at application .] 
(2) Where a complete specification filed in pursuance o f an application for a patent for an invention 
in respect of which directions have been given under section 35 2[is found to be in order for grant of the 
patent]  during the continuance in force of the directions, then — 
(a) if, during the continuance in for ce of the directions, any use of the invention is made by or on 
behalf of, or to the order of the Government, the provisions of sections 100, 101 and 103 shall apply 
in relation to that use as if the patent had been granted for the invention ; and  
(b) if it appears to the Central Government that the applicant for the patent has suffered hardship 
by reason of the continuance in force of the directions, the Central Government may make to him 
such payment (if any) by way of solatium as appears to the Central G overnment to be reasonable 
having regard to the novelty and utility of the invention and the purpose for which it is designed, and 
to any other relevant circumstances.  
(3) Where a patent is granted in pursuance of an application in respect of which directi ons have been 
given under section 35, no renewal fee shall be payable in respect of any period during which those 
directions were in force.  
38. Revocation of secrecy directions and extension of time. —When any direction given under 
section 35 is revoked by the Controller, then, notwithstanding any provision of this Act specifying the 
time within which any step should be taken or any act done in connection with an application for the 
patent, the Controller may, subject to such conditions, if any, as he thinks  fit to impose, extend the time 
for doing anything required or authorised to be done by or under this Act in connection with the 
application, whether or not that time has previously expired.  
3[39. Residents not to apply for patents outside India without prior permission. —(1) No person 
resident in India shall, except under the authority of a written permit sought in the manner prescribed and 
granted by or on behalf of the Controller, make or cause to be made any application outside India for the 
grant of a  patent for an inv ention unless — 
(a) an application for a patent for the same invention has been made in India, not less than six 
weeks before the application outside India; and  
(b) either no direction has been given under sub -section ( 1) of section 35 in relation to the 
application in India, or all such directions have been revoked.  
(2) The Controller shall dispose of every such application within such period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if the invention is relevant for defence purpose or atomic ene rgy, the Controller shall 
not grant permit without the prior consent of the Central Government.  
(3) This section shall not apply in relation to an invention for which an application for protection has 
first been filed in a country outside India by a person  resident outside India.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 30, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “is accepted” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs by s. 31, ibid., for section 39 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   27 40. Liability for contravention of section 35 or section 39. —Without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in Chapter XX, if in respect of an application for a patent any person contravenes any direction 
as to secrecy given by the Controller under section 35 1[or makes or causes to be made an application for 
grant o f a patent outside India in contravention of section 39] , or the application for patent under this Act 
shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the patent granted, if any, shall be liable to be revoked under 
section 64.  
 41. Finality of orders of Control ler and Central Government. —All orders of the Controller 
giving directions as to secrecy as well as all orders of the Central Government under this Chapter shall be 
final and shall not be called in question in any court on any ground whatsoever.  
 42. Savin gs respecting disclosure to Government. —Nothing in this Act shall be held to prevent 
the disclosure by the Controller of information concerning an application for a patent or a specification 
filed in pursuance thereof to the Central Government for the purp ose of the application or specification 
being examined for considering whether an order under this Chapter should be made or whether an order 
so made should be revoked.  
CHAPTER VIII  
2[GRANT OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY]  
3[43. Grant of patent s.—(1) Where an application for a patent has been found to be in order fo r grant 
of the patent and either — 
(a) the application has not been refused by the Controller by virtue of any power vested in him by 
this Act; or  
(b) the application has not been found to  be in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act,  
the patent shall be granted as expeditiously as possible to the applicant or, in the case of a joint 
application, to the applicants jointly, with the seal of the patent office and the date on which  the patent is 
granted shall be entered in the register.  
(2) On the grant of patent, the Controller shall publish the fact that the patent has been granted and 
thereupon the application, specification and other documents related thereto shall be open for p ublic 
inspection. ] 
44. Amendment of patent granted to deceased applicant. —Where, at any time after a patent has 
been 4[granted]  in pursuance of an application under this Act, the Controller is satisfied that the person to 
whom the patent was granted had di ed, or, in the case of a body corporate, had ceased to exist, before the 
patent was 4[granted] , the Controller may amend the patent by substituting for the name of that person the 
name of the person to whom the patent ought to have been granted, and the pa tent shall have effect, and 
shall be deemed always to have had effect, accordingly.  
45. Date of patent. —5[(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, every patent shall be 
dated as of the date on which the application for patent was filed .] 
(2) The date of every patent shall be entered in the register.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no suit or other proceeding shall be 
commenced or prosecuted in respect of an infringement committed before 6[the date of publication  of the 
application] . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 22 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 32, for Chapter Heading (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for section 43 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for “sealed” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 24, for sub -section ( 1) (we.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 35, for certain words (we.f. 1 -1-2005).  28 46. Form, extent and effect of patent. —(1) Every patent shall be in the prescribed form and shall 
have effect throughout India.  
(2) A patent shall be granted for one invention only:  
Provided that it shall not be competent for any person in a suit or other proceeding to take any 
objection to a patent on the ground that it has been granted for more than one invention.  
47. Grant of patents to be subject to certain conditions. —The grant of a patent under this Act shall 
be subject to the condi tion that — 
(1) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the patent is granted or any article 
made by using a process in respect of which the patent is granted, may be imported or made by or on 
behalf of the Government for the purpose mer ely of its own use;  
(2) any process in respect of which the patent is granted may be used by or on behalf of the 
Government for the purpose merely of its own use;  
(3) any machine, apparatus or other article in respect of which the patent is granted or any article 
made by the use of the process in respect of which the patent is granted, may be made or used, and any 
process in respect of which the patent is granted may be used, by any person, for the purpose merely of 
experiment or research including the impa rting of instructions to pupils; and  
(4) in the case of a patent in respect of any medicine or drug, the medicine or drug may be imported 
by the Government for the purpose merely of its own use or for distribution in any dispensary, hospital or 
other medic al institution maintained by or on behalf of the Government or any other dispensary, hospital 
or other medical institution which the Central Government may, having regard to the public service that 
such dispensary, hospital or medical institution renders, specify in this behalf by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
1[48. Rights of patentees. —Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the conditions 
specified in section 47, a patent granted under this Act  shall confer upon the patentee — 
(a) where the subject matter of the patent is a product, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, 
who do not have his consent, from the act of making, using, offering for sale, selling or importing for 
those purposes that product in India;  
(b) where the subject matter of the patent is a process, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, 
who do not have his consent, from the act of using that process, and from the act of using, offering for 
sale, selling or importing for those purposes the product obta ined di rectly by that process in India.  
2*   *   *   *   *] 
49. Patent rights not infringed when used on foreign vessels, etc., temporarily or accidentally in 
India. —(1) Where a vessel or aircraft registered in a foreign country or a land vehicle owned by a person 
ordinarily resident in such country comes into India (including the territorial waters thereof) temporarily 
or accidentally only, the rights conferred by a patent for an invention shall not be deemed to be infringed 
by the use of the invention — 
(a) in the body of the vessel or in the machinery, tackle, apparatus or other accessories thereof, so 
far as the invention is used on board the vessel and for its actual needs only; or  
(b) in the construction or working of the aircraft or land vehicle or of the accessories thereof, as 
the case may be.  
(2) This section shall not extend to vessels, aircraft or land vehicles owned by person s ordinarily 
resident in a foreign country the laws of which do not confer corresponding rights with respect to the use 
of inventions in vessels, aircraft or land vehicles owned by persons ordinarily resident in India while in 
the ports or within the territorial waters of that foreign country or otherwise within the jurisdiction of its 
courts.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 25, for section 48 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. The p roviso omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 36 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  29 50. Rights of co -owners of patents .—(1) Where a patent is granted to two or more persons, each of 
those persons shall, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, be entitled to an equal undivided share 
in the patent.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in sect ion 51, where two or more persons 
are registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, then, unless an agreement to the contrary is in force, 
each of those persons shall be entitled, by himself or his agents, to 1[the rights conferred by section 48]  
for hi s own benefit without accounting to the other person or persons.  
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in this section and in section 51 and to any agreement for the 
time being in force, where two or more persons are registered as grantee or proprietor o f a patent, then, a 
licence under the patent shall not be granted and a share in the patent shall not be assigned by one of such 
persons except with the consent of the other person or persons.  
(4) Where a patented article is sold by one of two or more persons registered as grantee or proprietor 
of a patent, the purchaser and any person claiming through him shall be entitled to deal with the article in 
the same manner as if the article had been sold by a sole patentee.  
(5) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, the rules of law applicable to the ownership 
and devolution of movable property generally shall apply in relation to patents; and nothing contained in 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall affect the mutual rights or obligatio ns of trustees or of the legal 
representatives of a deceased person or their rights or obligations as such.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the rights of the assignees of a partial interest in a patent 
created before the commencement of this Act.  
51. Power of Controller to give directions to co -owners. —(1) Where two or more persons are 
registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent, the Controller may, upon application made to him in the 
prescribed manner by any of those persons, give such directi ons in accordance with the application as to 
the sale or lease of the patent or any interest therein, the grant of licences under the patent, or the exercise 
of any right under section 50 in relation thereto, as he thinks fit.  
(2) If any person registered as grantee or proprietor of a patent fails to execute any instrument or to do 
any other thing required for the carrying out of any direction given under this section within fourteen days 
after being requested in writing so to do by any of the other persons  so registered, the Controller may, 
upon application made to him in the prescribed manner by any such other person, give directions 
empowering any person to execute that instrument or to do that thing in the name and on behalf of the 
person in default.  
(3) Before giving any directions in pursuance of an application under this section, the Controller shall 
give an opportunity to be heard — 
(a) in the case of an application under sub -section ( 1), to the other person or persons registered as 
grant ee or propriet or of the patent;  
(b) in the case of an application under sub -section ( 2), to the person in default.  
(4) No direction shall be given under this section so as to affect the mutual rights or obligation  of 
trustees or of the legal representatives of a decease d person or of their rights or obligations as such, or 
which is inconsistent with the terms of any agreement between persons registered as grantee or proprietor 
of the patent.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 26, for “make, use, exercise and sell the patented invention” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003 ).  30 52. Grant of p atent to true and first inventor  where it has been obtained by ano ther in fraud of 
him. —(1) 1[Where the patent has been revoked under section 64]  on the ground that the patent was 
obtained wrongfully and in contravention of the rights of the petitioner or any person under or through 
whom he claims, or, where in a petitio n for revocation, the 2[Appellate Board or court ], instead of 
revoking the patent, directs the complete specification to be amended by the exclusion of a claim or 
claims in consequence of a finding that the invention covered by such claim or claims had bee n obtained 
from the petitioner, the 2[Appellate Board or court ] may, by order passed in the same proceeding, permit 
the grant to the petitioner of the whole or such part of the invention which the 2[Appellate Board or court ] 
finds has been wrongfully obtained by the patentee, in lieu of the patent so revoked or is excluded by 
amendment.  
(2) Where any such order is passed, the Controller shall, on request by the petitioner made in the 
prescribed manner grant to him :— 
(i) in ca ses where the 2[Appellate Board or court ] permits the whole of the patent to be granted, a 
new patent bearing the same date and number as the patent revoked;  
(ii) in cases where the 2[Appellate Board or court ] permits a part only of the patent to be grante d, 
a new patent for such part bearing the same date as the patent revoked and numbered in su ch manner 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Controller may, as a condition of such grant, require the petitioner to file a new and 
complete specification to t he satisfaction of the Controller describing and claiming that part of the 
invention for which the patent is to be granted.  
(3) No suit shall be brought for any infringement of a patent granted under this section committed 
before the actual date on which s uch patent was granted.  
53. Term of patent. —3[(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the term of every patent granted, 
after the commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002, and the term of every patent which has 
not expired and has not ceased to  have effect, on the date of such commencement, under this Act, shall be 
twenty years from the date of fil ing of the application for the patent.]  
4[Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the term of patent in case of International 
applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India, shall be twenty years from the 
international filing date accorded under the Patent Cooperation Treaty .] 
(2) A patent shall cease to have effect notwithstanding anything therein or in this Act on the 
expiration of the period prescribed for the payment of any renewal fee, if that fee is not paid within the 
prescribed period 5[or within such extended  period as may be prescribed] . 
6*   *   *   *   * 
7[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, on cessation of 
the patent right due to non -payment of renewal fee or on the expiry of the term of patent, the subject 
matter covered by the said patent shall not be entitle d to any protection.]  
CHAPTER IX  
PATENTS OF ADDITION  
54. Patents of addition. —(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where an 
application is made for a patent in re spect of any improvement in or  modification of an invention 
described or d isclosed in the complete specification filed therefor (in this Act referred to as the “main 
invention”) and the applicant also applies or has applied for a patent for that invention or is the patentee in 
respect thereof, the Controller may, if the applican t so requests, grant the patent for the improvement or 
modification as a patent of addition.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 37, for “Where a patent has been revoked” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “court” (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).   
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 27, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. The Explanation  ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   
5. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for “or within that period as extended under this section”  (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
6. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
7. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 27 (w. e.f. 20 -5-2003).   31 (2) Subject to the provisions contained in this section, where an invention, being an improvement in 
or modification of another invention, is the subject of an ind ependent patent and the patentee in respect of 
that patent is also the patentee in respect of the patent for the main invention, the Controller may, if the 
patentee so requests, by order, revoke the patent for the improvement or modification and grant to t he 
patentee a patent of addition in respect thereof, bearing the same date as the date of the patent so revoked.  
(3) A patent shall not be granted as a patent of addition unless the date of filing of the 1[application]  
was the same as or later than the dat e of filing of the 1[application]  in respect of the main invention.  
2[(4) A patent of addition shall  not be granted before grant of the patent for the main invention].  
55. Term of patents of addition. —(1) A patent of addition shall be granted for a term equal to that 
of the patent for the main invention, or so much thereof as has not expired, and shall remain in force 
during that term or until the previous cesser of the patent for the main invention and no longer:  
Provided that if the patent for the main invention is revoked under this Act, the court, or, as the case 
may be, the Controller, on request made to him by the patentee in the prescribed manner, may order that 
the patent of addition shall become an independent patent for the remainder of the term for the patent for 
the main invention and thereupon the patent shall continue in force as an independent patent accordingly.  
(2) No renewal fees shall be payable in respect of a patent of addition, but, if any such patent 
becomes an independent patent unde r sub -section ( 1), the same fees shall thereafter be payable, upon the 
same dates, as if the patent had been originally granted as an independent patent.  
56. Validity of patents of addition. —(1) The grant of a patent of addition shall not be refused, and a  
patent granted as a patent of addition shall not be revoked or invalidated, on the ground only that the 
invention claimed in the complete specification does not involve any inventive step having regard to any 
publication or use of — 
(a) the main invention described in the complete specification relating thereto; or  
(b) any improvement in or modification of the main invention described in the complete 
specification of a patent of addition to the patent for the main invention or of an application for such a 
patent of addition,  
and the validity of a patent of addition shall not be questioned on the ground that the invention ought to 
have been the subject of an independent patent.  
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in determining the novelt y of the invention 
claimed in the complete specification filed in pursuance of an application for a patent of addition regard 
shall be had also to the complete specification in which the main invention is described.  
CHAPTER X  
AMENDMENT OF APPLICATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS  
57. Amendment of application and specification before Controller. —(1) Subject to the provisions 
of section 59, the Controller may, upon application made under this section in the prescribed manner by 
an applicant for a patent or by a patente e, allow the application for the patent or the complete 
specification 3[or any document relating thereto] to be amended subject to such conditions, if any, as the 
Controller thinks fit : 
Provided that the Controller shall not pass any order allowing or refu sing an application to amend an 
application for a patent or a specification 3[or any document relating thereto] under this section while any 
suit before a court for the infringement of the patent or any proceeding before the High Court for the 
revocation o f the patent is pending, whether the suit or proceeding commenced before or after the filing 
of the application to amend.  
(2) Every application for leave to amend an application for a patent 4[or a complete specification  or 
any document relating thereto]  under this section shall state the nature of the proposed amendment, and 
shall give full particulars of the reasons for which the application is made.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 39, for “complete specification” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “or a  specification” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   32 1[(3) Any application for leave to amend an application for a patent or a complete specification or a 
docu ment related thereto under this section made after the grant of patent and the nature of the proposed 
amendment may be published.]  
(4) Where an application is 2[published]  under sub -section ( 3), any person interested may, within the 
prescribed period after the 3[publication]  thereof, give notice to the Controller of opposition thereto; and 
where such a notice is given within the period aforesaid, the Controller shall notify the person by whom 
the application under this section is made and shall give to that person and to the opponent an opportunity 
to be heard before he decides the case.  
(5) An amendment under this section of a complete specification may be, or include, an amendment 
of the prior ity date of a claim.  
4[(6) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to the right of an applicant for a patent 
to amend his specification or any other document related thereto to comply with the directions of the 
Controller issued before th e grant of a patent .] 
5[58. Amendment of specification before Appellate Board or High Court. —(1) In any proceeding 
before the Appellate Board or the  High Court for the revocation of a patent, the Appellate Board or the 
High  Court, as the case may be, may, subject to the provisions contained in section  59, allow the patentee 
to amend his complete specification in such manner and  subject to such terms as to costs, advertisement 
or otherwise, as the Appellate  Board or the High Court may think fit, and if in an y proceedings for  
revocation  the Appellate Board or the High Court decides that the patent is  invalid, it may allow the 
specification to be amended under this section instead  of revoking the patent.  
(2) Where an application for an order under this  section is made to the Appellate Board or the High 
Court, the applicant shall  give notice of the application to the Controller, and the Controller shall be  
entitled to appear and be heard, and shall appear if so directed by the  Appellate Board or the High Court.  
(3) Copies of all orders of the Appellate Board or  the High Court allowing the patentee to amend the 
specification shall be  transmitted by the Appellate Board or the High Court to the Controller who  shall, 
on receipt thereof, cause an entry thereof and refe rence thereto to be  made in the register .] 
59. Supplementary provisions as to amendment of application or specification. —6[(1) No 
amendment of an application for a patent or a complete speci fication or any document relating  thereto 
shall be made except by way of disclaimer, correction or explanation, and no amendment thereof shall be 
allowed, except for the purpose of incorporation of actual fact, and no amendment of a complete 
specification shall be allowed, the effect of which would be that the specificat ion as amended would 
claim or describe matter not in substance disclosed or shown in the specification before the amendment, 
or that any claim of the specification as amended would not fall wholly within the scope of a claim of the 
specification before the  amendment.]  
7[(2) Where after the date of grant of patent any amendment of the specification or any other 
documents related thereto is allowed by the Controller or by the Appellate Board or the High Court, as the 
case may be, — 
(a) the amendment shall for all purposes be deemed to form part of the specification along with 
other documents related thereto;  
(b) the fact that the specification or any other documents related thereto has been amended shall 
be published as expeditiously as possible; and  
(c) the ri ght of the applicant or patentee to make amendment shall not be called in question except 
on the ground of fraud].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 40, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for “advertised” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for “advertisement” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for section 58 (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 29, for sub -section (1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
7. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 42, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).   33 (3) In construing the specification as amended, reference may be made to the specification as 
originally accepted.  
CHAPTER XI  
RESTORATION OF LAPSED PATENTS  
60. Applications for restoration of lapsed patents. —(1) Where a patent has ceased to have effect 
by reason of failure to pay any renewal fee within the 1[period p rescribed under section 53 or within such 
period as may be allowed under sub-section ( 4) of section 142] , the patentee or his legal representative, 
and where the patent was held by two or more persons jointly, then, with the leave of the Controller, one 
or more of them without joining the others, may, within 2[eighteen months]  from the date on which the 
patent ceased to have effect, make an application for the restoration of the patent.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(3) An application under this section shall contain a statement, verified in the prescribed manner, 
fully setting out the cir cumstances which led to the failure to pay the prescribed fee, and the Controller 
may require from the applicant such further evidence as he may think necessary.  
61. Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of lapsed patents. —(1) If, after he aring 
the applicant in cases where the applicant so desires or the Controller thinks fit, the Controller is prima 
facie  satisfied that the failure to pay the renewal fee was unintentional and that there has been no undue 
delay in the making of the applicat ion, he shall 4[publish  the application ] in the prescribed manner; and 
within the prescribed period any person interested may give notice to the Controller of opposition thereto 
on either or both of the fol lowing grounds, that is to say, — 
(a) that the fail ure to pay the renewal fee was not unintentional; or  
(b) that there has been undue delay in  the making of the application.  
(2) If notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid, the Controller shall notify the 
applicant, and shall give to him an d to the opponent an opportunity to be he ard before he decides the case.  
(3) If no notice of opposition is given within the period aforesaid or if in the case of opposition, the 
decision of the Controller is in favour of the applicant, the Controller shall , upon payment of any unpaid 
renewal fee and such additional fee as may be prescribed, restore the patent and any patent of addition 
specified in the application which has ceased to have effec t on the cesser of that patent.  
(4) The Controller may, if he th inks fit as a condition of restoring the patent, require that an entry 
shall be made in the register of any document or matter which, under the provisions of this Act, has to be 
entered in the register but which has not been so entered.  
62. Rights of paten tees of lapsed patents which have been restored. —(1) Where a patent is 
restored, the rights of the patentee shall be subject to such provisions as may be prescribed and to such 
other provisions as the Controller thinks fit to impose for the protection or compensation of persons who 
may have begun to avail themselves of, or have taken definite steps by contract or otherwise to avail 
themselves of, the patented invention between the date when the patent ceased to have effect and the date 
of the 5[publication]  of the application for restoration of the patent u nder this Chapter.  
(2) No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced or prosecuted in respect of an infringement of a 
patent committed between the date on which the patent ceased to have effect and the 6[date of 
publication]  of the application for restora tion of the patent.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 43, for “prescribed period or within that period as extended under sub -section (3) of                
section 53” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 30, for “one year” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 44, for “advertise the application” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for “advertisement” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
6. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for “date of the a dvertisement” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   34 CHAPTER XII  
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF PATENTS  
63. Surrender of patents. —(1) A patentee may, at any time by giving notice in the prescribed 
manner to the Controller, offer to surrender his patent.  
(2) Where such an offer is made, the C ontroller shall 1[publish]  the offer in the prescribed manner, 
and also notify every person other than the patentee whose name appears in the register as having an 
interest in the patent.  
(3) Any person interested may, within the prescribed period after 2[such publication]  give notice to 
the Controller of opposition to the surrender, and where any such notice is given the Controller shall 
notify the patentee.  
(4) If the Controller is satisfied after hearing the patentee and any opponent, if desirous of bein g 
heard, that the patent may properly be surrendered, he may  accept the offer and, by order  revoke the 
patent.  
64. Revocation of Power patents. —(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, a patent  
whether granted before or after the commencement of this Act, may , 3[be revoked on a petition of any 
person interested or of the Central Government by the Appellate Board or on a counter -claim in a suit for 
infringement of the patent by the High Court]  on any of the following grounds, that is to say — 
(a) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification, was claimed in 
a valid claim of earlier priority date contained in the complete specification of a nother patent granted 
in India;  
(b) that the patent was granted on the application of a person not entitled under the provisions                    
of this Act to apply therefor : 
4*   *   *   *  * 
(c) that the patent was obtained wrongfully in contravention of the rights of the pe titioner or any 
person under or through  whom he claims;  
(d) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the 
meaning of this Act;  
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is not new, 
having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of the 
claim or to what was published in India or elsewhere in any of the documents referred to in section 
13: 
4*   *   *   *  * 
(f) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious or 
does not involve any inventive step, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in 
India or what was published in India or elsewhere before the priority date of the c laim:  
4*   *   *  *   * 
(g) that the invention, so far as claimed in any claim of the complet e specification, is not useful;  
(h) that the complete specification does not sufficiently and fairly describe the invention and the 
method by which it is to be performed, that is to say, that the description of the method or the 
instructions for the working of the invention as contained in the complete specification are not by 
themselves sufficient to enable a person in India possessing average skill in, and aver age knowledge 
of, the art to which the invention relates, to work the invention, or that it does not disclose the best 
method of performing it which was known to the applicant for the patent and for which he was 
entitled to claim , protection;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 46, for “advertise” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for “such advertisement” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 47, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
4. The proviso o mitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 31 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  35 (i) that the scope of any claim of the complete specification is not sufficiently and clearly defined 
or that any claim of the complete specification is not fairly based on the matter disclosed in the 
specification;  
(j) that the patent was obtained on a fals e suggestio n or representation;  
(k) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is  not patentable under this Act;  
(l) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was secretly 
used in India, otherwise than as mention ed in sub -section ( 3), before the priority date of the claim;  
(m) that the applicant for the patent has failed to disclose to the Controller the information 
required by section 8 or has furnished information which in any material particular was false to hi s 
knowledge;  
(n) that the applicant contravened any direction for secrecy passed under section 35  1[or made                 
or caused to be made an application for the grant of a patent outside India in contravention of                          
section 39] ; 
(o) that leave to amend the complete specification under section 57 or s ection 58 was obtained by 
fraud;  
1[(p) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or 
geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;  
(q) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated 
having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous 
community in India or elsewhere.]  
(2) For the purposes of clauses ( e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) no account shall be taken of 2[personal document or secret trial or secret use ]; and  
(b) where the patent is for a process or for a product as made by  a process described or claimed  
the importation into India of the product made abroad by that process shall constitute knowledge or 
use in India of the invention on the date of the importation, except where such importation has been 
for the purpose of reaso nable trial or experiment only . 
(3) For the purpose of clause ( l) of sub -section ( 1), no account shall be taken of any use of the 
invention — 
(a) for the purpose of reasonab le trial or experiment only; or  
(b) by the Government or by any person authorised by the Government or by a Govern ment 
undertaking, in consequence of the applicant for the patent or any person from whom he derives title 
having communicated or disclosed the invention directly or indirectly to the Government or person 
authorised as aforesaid or to the Government underta king; or  
(c) by any other person, in consequence of the applicant for the patent or any person from whom 
he derives title having communicated or disclosed the invention, and without the consent or 
acquiescence of the applicant or of any person from whom he  derives title.  
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), a patent may be revoked by the 
High Court on the petition of the Central Government, if the High Court is satisfied that the patentee has 
without reasonable cause failed to comply with the request of the Central Government to make, use or 
exercise the patented invention for the purposes of Government within the meaning of section 99 upon 
reasonable terms.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 31 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “secret use” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   36 (5) A notice of any petition for revocation of a patent under this s ection shall be served on all persons 
appearing from the register to be proprietors of that patent or to have shares or interests therein and it 
shall not be necessary to serve a notice on any other person.  
1[65. Revocation of patent or amendment of comple te specification on directions from 
Government in cases relating to atomic energy. —(1) Where at any time after grant of a patent, the 
Central Government is satisfied that a patent is for an invention relating to atomic energy for which no 
patent can be granted under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the Atom ic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962 ), it 
may direct the Controller to revoke the patent, and thereupon the Controller, after giving notice, to the 
patentee and every other person whose name has been entere d in the register as having an interest in the 
patent, and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, may revoke the patent.  
(2) In any proceedings under sub -section ( 1), the Controller may allow the patentee to amend the 
complete specification in su ch manner as he considers necessary instead of revoking the patent .] 
66. Revocation of patent in public interest. —Where the Central Government is of opinion that a 
patent or the mode in which it is exercised is mischievous to the State or generally prejudi cial to the 
public, it may, after giving the patentee an opportunity to be heard, make a declaration to that effect in the 
Official Gazette and thereupon the patent shall be deemed to be revoked.  
CHAPTER XIII  
REGISTER OF PATENTS  
67. Register of patents and  particulars to be entered therein. —(1) There shall be kept at the patent 
office a register of pa tents, wherein shall be entered — 
(a) the names and addresses of grantees of patents;  
(b) notifications of assignments and of transmissions of patents , of licences under patents, and of 
amendments, extensions, an revocations of patents; and  
(c) particulars of such other matters affecting the validity or proprietorship o f patents as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) No notice of any trust, whether express, implied o r constructive, shall be entered in the register, 
and the Controller shall not be affected by any such notice.  
(3) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central Government, the register shall be kept 
under the control an d management of the Co ntroller.  
2[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Controller to 
keep the register of pat ents or any  part thereof in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form  
subject to such safeguards as may  be pre scribed.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian  Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), a copy of, or 
extracts from, the register of  patents, certified to be a true copy under the hand of the Controller or any  
officer duly authorised by the C ontroller in this behalf shall, in all legal  proceedings, be admissible in 
evidence.  
(6) In the event the register is kept wholly or  partly in comput er floppies, diskette s or any other 
electronic form, — 
(a) reference in this Act to an entry in  the registe r shall be deemed to include reference to a record 
of particulars  kept in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form and comprising  the 
register or part of the register;  
(b) references in this Act to particulars  being registered or entered i n the register shall be deemed 
to include  references to the keeping of record of those particulars comprising the register  or part of 
the register in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic  form; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 48, for section 65 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 8 of 2002, s. 32, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  37 (c) references in this Act to the  rectification of the register are to be read as including references 
to the  rectifica tion of the record of particulars kept in computer floppies,  diskettes or any other 
electronic form and comprising the regis ter or part of  the register.]  
1[68. Assignmen ts, etc., not to be valid unless in writing and duly executed .—An assignment of a 
patent or of a share in a patent, a mortgage, licence or the creation of any other interest in a patent shall 
not be valid unless the same were in writing and the agreement b etween the parties concerned is reduced 
to the form of a document embodying all the terms and conditions governing their rights and obligations 
and duly executed .] 
69. Registration of assignments , transmissions, etc. —(1) Where any person becomes entitled by 
assignment, transmission or operation of law to a patent or to a share in a patent or becomes entitled as a 
mortgagee, licensee or otherwise to any other interest in a patent, he shall apply in writing in the 
prescribed manner to the Controller for the registration of his title or, as the case may be, of notice of his 
interest in the register.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), an application for the registration of the 
title of any person becoming entitled by assignment to a pat ent or a share in a patent or becoming entitled 
by virtue of a mortgage, licence or other instrument to any other interest in a patent may be made in the 
prescribed manner by the assignor, mortgagor, licensor or other party to that instrument, as the case may 
be. 
(3) Where an application is made under this section for the registration of the title of any person the 
Controller shall, upon proo f of title to his satisfaction, — 
(a) where that person is entitled to a patent or a share in a patent , register him i n the register as 
proprietor or co -proprietor of  the patent, and enter in the register particulars of the instrument or 
event by which he derives title ; or 
(b) where that person is entitled to any other interest in the patent, enter in the register notice  of 
his interest, with particulars of the i nstrument, if any, creating it:  
Provided that if there is any dispute between the parties whether the assignment, mortgage, licence, 
transmission, operation of law or any other such transaction has validly vested in such person a title to the 
patent or any share or interest therein, the Controller may refuse to take any action under clause ( a) or, as 
the case may be, under clause ( b), until the rights of the parties have been d etermined by a competent 
court.  
(4) There shall be supplied to the Controller in the prescribed manner for being filed in the patent 
office copies of all agreements, licences and other documents affecting the title to any patent or any 
licence thereunder authenticated in the prescribed manner and also such other documents as may be 
prescribed r elevant to the subject -matter:  
Provided that in the case of a licence granted under a patent, the Controller shall, if so requested by 
the patentee or licensee, take steps for securing that the terms of t he licence are not disclosed to any 
person exc ept under the order of a court.  
(5) Except for the purposes of an application under sub -section ( 1) or of an application to rectify the 
register, a document in respect of which no entry has been made in the reg ister under sub -section ( 3) shall 
not be admitted by the Controller or by any court as evidence of the title of any person to a patent or to a 
share or interest therein unless the Controller or the court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, otherwise 
directs.  
70. Power of registered grantee or proprietor to deal with patent. —Subject to the provisions 
contai ned in this Act relating to co -ownership of patents and subject also to any rights vested in any other 
person of which notice is entered in the regist er, the person or persons registered as grantee or proprietor 
of a patent shall have power to assign, grant licences under, or otherwise deal with, the patent and to give 
effectual receipts for any consideration for any such assignment, licence or dealing:  
Provided that any equities in respect of the patent may be enforced in like manner as in respect of any 
other movable property.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 49, for section 68 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  38 71. Rectification of register by 1[Appellate Board ].—(1) The 1[Appellate Board]  may, on the 
application of any person aggrieved — 
(a) by the absence or omission from the register of any entry; or  
(b) by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause; or  
(c) by any entry wrongl y remaining on the register; or  
(d) by any error or defec t in any entry in the register,  
make such  order for the making, variation or deletion, of any ent ry therein as it may think fit.  
(2) In any proceeding under this section the 1[Appellate Board]  may decide any question that may be 
necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the  rectificatio n of the register.  
(3) Notice of any application to the 1[Appellate Board]  under this section shall be given in the 
prescribed manner to the Controller who shall be entitled to appear and be heard on the application, and 
shall appe ar if so directed by the 2[Board].  
(4) Any order of the 1[Appellate Board]  under this section rectifying the register shall direct that 
notice of the rectification shall be served upon the Controller in the prescribed manner who shall upon 
receipt of such notice rectify the register accordingly.  
72. Register to be open for inspe ction. —(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and any 
rules made thereunder, the register shall at all convenient times be open to inspection by the public; and 
certified copies, sealed with the seal of the patent office, of any entry in the r egister shall be given to any 
person requiring them on  payment of the prescribed fee.  
(2) The register shall be prima facie  evidence of any matters required or authorised by or under this 
Act to be entered therein.  
3[(3) If the record o f particulars is kep t in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic 
form, sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deemed to have been complied with if the public is given access to 
such computer floppies, diskettes or any other elec tronic form or printouts of such r ecord of particulars 
for in spection.]  
CHAPTER XIV  
PATENT OFFICE AND ITS ESTABLISHMENT  
73. Controller and other officers. —(1) The Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade  Marks 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 4[section 3 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999)] , shall be the 
Controller of Patents for the purposes of this A ct. 
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint as many examiners and other 
officers and with such  designations as it thinks fit.  
(3) Subject to the p rovisions of this Act, the officers appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall discharge 
under the superintendence and directions of the Controller such functions of the Controller under this Act 
as he may, from time to time by general or special order in writi ng, authorise them to discharge.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the Controller may, by 
order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein withdraw any matter pending before an officer 
appointed under sub -section ( 2) and deal with such matter himself either de novo  or from the stage it was 
so withdrawn or transfer the same to another officer appointed under sub -section ( 2) who may, subject to 
special directions in the order of transfer, proceed with the mat ter either de novo  or from the stage it was 
so transferred.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 2, for “High Court” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Court” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   39 74. Patent office and its branches. —(1) For the purposes of this Act, there shall be an office which 
shall  be known as the patent office.  
1[(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the name of the 
Patent Office.]  
(3) The head office of the patent office shall be at such place as the Central Government may specify, 
and for the purpose of facilitating , the registration of patents there may be established, at s uch other 
places as the Central Government may think fit, branc h offices of the patent office.  
(4) There shall be a seal of the patent office.  
75. Restriction on employees of patent office as to right or interest in patents. —All officers and 
employees of the patent s office shall be incapable, during the period for which they hold their 
appointments, to acquire or take, directly or indirectly, except by inheritance or bequest, any right or 
interest in any patent issued by that office.  
76. Officers and emplo yees not to furnish information, etc. —An officer or employee in the patent 
office shall not, except when required or authorised by this Act or under a direction in writing of the 
2[Central Government  or Appellate Board]  or the Cont roller or by order of a c ourt,— 
(a) furnish information on a matter which is being, or has been , or dealt with under this Act 3***; 
(b) prepare or assist in the preparation of a document required or permitted by or under this Act 
3*** to be lodged in the patent office; or  
(c) conduct a search in the records of the patent office.  
CHAPTER XV  
POWERS OF CONTROLLER GENERALLY  
77. Controller to have certain powers of a civil court. —(1) Subject to any rules made in this 
behalf, the Controller in any proceedings before him under this Ac t shall have the powers of a civil court 
while trying a suit under the Code of C ivil Procedure,  1908 (5 of 1908 ), in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requirin g the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(e) awarding costs;  
(f) reviewing his own decision on application made within the prescribed time and in the 
prescribed manner;  
(g) setting aside an order passed ex parte  on application made within the prescribed time and in 
the prescribed manner;  
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) Any order for costs awarded by the Controller in exercis e of the powers conferred upon him under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be executable as a decree of a civil court.  
78. Power s of Controller to correct clerical errors, etc. —(1) Without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in sections 57 and 59 as regards amendmen t of applications for patents or complete 
specifications 4[or other documents relating thereto] and subject to the provisions of section 44, the 
Controller may, in accordance with the provisions of this section, correct any clerical error in any patent 
or in any specification or other document filed in pursuance of such application or in any application for a 
patent or any clerical error in any matter wh ich is entered in the register.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 50, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 36, for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. The words and figures “or under the Indian Patents or Designs Act, 1911 (2 of 1911 )” omitted by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   40 (2) A correction may be made in pursuance of this section either upon a r equest in writing made by 
any person interested and accompanied by the prescribed fee, or without such a request.  
(3) Where the Controller proposes to make any such correction as aforesaid otherwise than in 
pursuance of a request made under this section, h e shall give notice of the proposal to the patentee or the 
applicant for the patent, as the case may be, and to any other person who appears to him to be concerned, 
and shall give them an opportunity to be hear d before making the correction.  
(4) Where a re quest is made under this section for the correction of any error in a patent or 
application for a patent or any document filed in pursuance of such an application, and it appears to the 
Controller that the correction would materially alter the meaning or s cope of the document to which the 
request relates and ought not to be made without notice to persons affected thereby, he shall require 
notice of the nature of the proposed correction to be 1[published]  in the prescribed manner.  
(5) Within the prescribed time after any 2[such publication]  as aforesaid any person interested may 
give notice to the Controller of opposition to the request, and, where such notice of opposition is given, 
the Controller shall give notice thereof to the person by whom the request was made, and shall give to 
him an d to the opponent an opportunity to be heard before he decides the case.  
79. Evidence how to be given and powers of Controller in respect thereof. —Subject to any rules 
made in this behalf, in any proceeding under this Act before the Controller, evidence sh all be given by 
affidavit in the absence of directions by the Controller to the contrary, but in any case in which the 
Controller thinks it right so to do, he may take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, evidence by 
affidavit, or may allow any par ty to be cross -examined on the contents of his affidavit.  
80. Exercise of discretionary powers by Controller. —Without prejudice to any provision contained 
in this Act requiring the Controller to hear any party to the proceedings thereunder or to give any s uch 
party an opportunity to be heard, the Controller shall give to any applicant for a patent, or for amendment 
of a specification (if within the prescribed time the applicant so requires) an opportunity to be heard 
before exercising adversely to the appli cant any discretion vested in the Controller by or under this Act : 
3[Provided that the party desiring a hearing makes the request for such hearing to the Controller at 
least ten days in advance of the expiry of the time -limit specified in respect of the pr oceeding.]  
81. Disposal by Controller of applications for extension of time. —Where under the provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder the Controller may extend the time for doing any act, nothing in this 
Act shall be deemed to require him to giv e notice to or hear the party interested in opposing the extension, 
nor shall any appeal lie from any order of the Controller granting such extension.  
4[CHAPTER XVI  
WORKING OF PATENTS, COMPULSORY LICENCES AND REVOCATION  
82. Definition of “patented articles” and “patentee”. —In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “patented article” includes any article made by a patented process; and  
(b) “patentee” includes an exclusive licensee.  
83. General principles applicable to working of pa tented inventions .—Without prejudice to the 
other provisions contained in this Act, in exercising the powers conferred by this Chapter, regard shall be 
had to the following  general considerations, namely :— 
(a) that patents are granted to encourage inventio ns and to secure that the inventions are worked 
in India on a commercial scale and to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable without undue 
delay;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 51, for “advertised” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 51, ibid., for “such advertisement” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 38 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for Chapter XVI (sections 82 to 9 8) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   41 (b) that they are not granted merely to enable patentees to enjoy a monopoly for the importation 
of the patented article;  
(c) that the protection and enforcement of patent rights contribute to the promotion of 
technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the mutual advantage 
of producers and users of technological kno wledge and in a manner conducive to social and economic 
welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations;  
(d) that patents granted do not impede protection of public health and nutrition and should act as 
instrument to promote public interest specially in sectors of vital importance for socio -economic and 
technological development of India;  
(e) that patents granted do not in any way prohibit Central Government in taking measures to 
protect public health;  
(f) that the patent right is not abused by the pat entee or person deriving title or interest on patent 
from the patentee, and the patentee or a person deriving title or interest on patent from the patentee 
does not resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international  
transfer of technology; and  
(g) that patents are granted to make the benefit of the patented invention available at reasonably 
affordable prices to the public.  
84. Compulsory licences .—(1) At any time after the expiration of three years from the date of the 
1[grant] of patent, any person interested may make an application to the Controller for grant of 
compulsory licence on patent on any of  the following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented inve ntion have not 
been satisfied, or  
(b) that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, or  
(c) that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of India.  
(2) An application under this section may be made  by any person notwithstanding that he is already 
the holder of a licence under the patent and no person shall be estopped from alleging that the reasonable 
requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention are not satisfied or that the pat ented 
invention is not worked in the territory of India or that the patented invention is not available to the public 
at a reasonably affordable price by reason of any admission made by him, whether in such a licence or 
otherwise or by reason of his having  accepted such a licence.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a statement setting out the nature of the 
applicant ‟s interest together with such particulars as may be prescribed and the facts upon which the 
application is based.  
(4) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the 
patented invention have not been satisfied or that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of 
India or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, may 
grant a licence upon such terms as he may deem fit.  
(5) Where the Controller directs the patentee to grant a licence he may , as incidental thereto , exercise 
the powers set out in section 88.  
(6) In considering the application filed under this section, the Controller shall take into account, — 
(i) the nature of the invention, the time which has elapsed since the sealing of the patent and the 
measures already taken by the patentee or any licensee to mak e full use of the invention;  
(ii) the ability of the applicant to work the invention to the public advantage;  
(iii) the capacity of the applicant to undertake the risk in providing capital and working the 
invention, if the application were granted;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 52, for “sealing” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  42 (iv) as to whether the applicant has made efforts to obtain a licence from the patentee on 
reasonable terms and conditions and such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable period 
as the Controller may deem fit:  
Provided that this clause shall not be applicable in case of national emergency or other 
circumstances of extreme urgency or in case of public non -commercial use or on establishment of a 
ground of anti -competitive pra ctices adopted by the patentee,  
but shall not be required to take into account  matters subsequent to the making of the application.  
1[Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( iv), “reasonable period ” shall be construed as a period 
not ordinarily exceeding a period of six months .] 
(7) For the purposes of this Chapter, the reasonable requirements of the public shall be de emed not to 
have been satisfied — 
(a) if, by reason of the refusal of the patentee to grant a licence o r licences on reasonable 
terms, — 
(i) an existing trade or industry or the development thereof or the establishment o f any new 
trade or industry in India or the trade or industry of any person or class of persons trading or 
manufacturing in India is prejudiced; or  
(ii) the demand for the patented article has not been met to an adequate extent or on 
reasonable terms; or  
(iii) a market for export of the patented article manufactured in India is not being supplied or 
developed; or  
(iv) the establishment or development of commercial activities in India is prejudiced; or  
(b) if, by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee upon the grant of licences under the patent 
or upon the purchase, hire or use of the patented article or process, the manufacture, use or sale of 
materials not protected by the patent, or the establishment or development of any trade or industry in 
India, is prejudiced ; or 
(c) if the patentee imposes a condition upon the grant of licences under the patent to provide 
exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to the validity of patent or coercive package licensing, 
or 
(d) if the patented invention is not  being worked in the territory of India on a commercial scale to 
an adequate extent or is not being so worked to the fullest extent that is reasonably practicable, or  
(e) if the working of the patented invention in the territory of India on a commercial sc ale is being 
prevented or hindered by the importation from ab road of the patented article by — 
(i) the patentee or persons claiming under him; or  
(ii) persons directly or indirectly purchasing from him; or  
(iii) other persons against whom the patentee is no t taking or has not taken proceedings for 
infringement.  
85. Revocation of patents by the Controller for non -working .—(1) Where, in respect of a patent, a 
compulsory licence has been granted, the Central Government or any person interested may, after the 
expiration of two years from the date of the order granting the first compulsory licence, apply to the 
Controller for an order revoking the patent on the ground that the patented invention has not been worked 
in the territory of India or that reasonable requ irements of the public with respect to the patented 
invention has not been satisfied or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably 
affordable price.  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 52 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  43 (2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed, the 
facts upon which the application is based, and, in the case of an application other than by the Central 
Government, shall also set out the nature of the applicant‟s interest.  
(3) The Controller, if satisfied that the reasonable re quirements of the public with respect to the 
patented invention ha ve not been satisfied or that patented invention ha ve not been worked in the territory 
of India or that the patented invention is not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price , may 
make an order revoking the patent.  
(4) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily be decided within one year of its being 
presented to the Controller.  
86. Power of Controller to adjourn applications for compulsory licences, etc., in cer tain  
cases .—(1) Where an application under section 84 or section 85, as the case may be, is made on the 
grounds that the patented invention has not been worked in the territory of India or on the ground 
mentioned in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 7) of sectio n 84 and the Controller is satisfied that the time which 
has elapsed since the sealing of the patent has for any reason been insufficient to enable the invention to 
be worked on a commercial scale to an adequate extent or to enable the invention to be so w orked to the 
fullest extent that is reasonably practicable, he may, by order, adjourn the further hearing of the 
application for such period not exceeding twelve months in the aggregate as appears to him to be 
sufficient for the invention to be so worked:  
Provided that in any case where the patentee establishes that the reason why a patented invention 
could not be worked as aforesaid before the date of the application was due to any State or Central Act or 
any rule or regulation made thereunder or any order  of the Government imposed otherwise than by way of 
a condition for the working of the invention in the territory of India or for the disposal of the patented 
articles or of the articles made by the process or by the use of the patented plant, machinery, o r apparatus, 
then, the period of adjournment ordered under this sub -section shall be reckoned from the date on which 
the period during which the working of the invention was prevented by such Act, rule or regulation or 
order of Government as computed from the date of the application, expires.  
(2) No adjournment under sub -section ( 1) shall be ordered unless the Controller is satisfied that the 
patentee has taken with promptitude adequate or reasonable steps to start the working of the invention in 
the territ ory of India on a commercial scale and to an adequate extent.  
87. Procedure for dealing with applications under sections 84 and 85 .—(1) Where the Controller 
is satisfied, upon consideration of an application under section 84, or section 85, that a prima facie  case 
has been made out for the making of an order, he shall direct the applicant to serve copies of the 
application upon the patentee and any other person appearing from the register to be interested in the 
patent in respect of wh ich the application is made, and 1[shall publish the appl ication in the official 
journal] . 
(2) The patentee or any other person desirin g to oppose the application may  within such time as may 
be prescribed or within such further time as the Controller may on application (made either before or after 
the expiration of the prescribed time) allow, give to the Controller notice of opposition.  
(3) Any such notice of opposition shall contain a statement setting out the grounds on which the 
application is opposed.  
(4) Where any such no tice of opposition is duly given, the Controller shall notify the applicant, and 
shall give to the applicant and the opponent an opportunity to be heard before deciding the case.  
88. Powers of Controller in granting compulsory licences .—(1) Where the Contr oller is satisfied  
on an application made under section 84 that the manufacture, use or sale of materials not protected by 
the patent is prejudiced by reason of conditions imposed by the patentee upon the grant of licences under 
the patent, or upon the pur chase, hire or use of the patented article or process, he may, subject to the 
provisions of that section, order the grant of licences under the patent to such customers of the applicant 
as he thinks fit as well as to the applicant.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 53, for “shall advertise the application in the Official Gazette” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  44 (2) Where an application  under section 84 is made by a person being the holder of a licence under the 
patent, the Controller may, if he makes an order for the grant of a licence to the applicant, order the 
existing licence to be cancelled, or may, if he thinks fit, instead of mak ing an order for the grant of a 
licence to the applicant, order the existing licence to be amended.  
(3) Where two or more patents are held by the same patentee and an applicant for a compulsory 
licence establishes that the reasonable requirements of the pu blic have not been satisfied with respect to 
some only of the said patents, then, if the Controller is satisfied that the applicant cannot efficiently or 
satisfactorily work the licence granted to him under those patents without infringing the other patent s held 
by the patentee and if those patents involve important technical advancement or considerable economic 
significance in relation to the other patents, he may, by order, direct the grant of a licence in respect of the 
other patents also to enable the l icensee to work the patent or patents in regard to which a licence is 
granted under section 84.  
(4) Where the terms and conditions of a licence have been settled by the Controller, the licensee may, 
at any time after he has worked the invention on a commer cial scale for a period of not less than twelve 
months, make an application to the Controller for the revision of the terms and conditions on the ground 
that the terms and conditions settled have proved to be more onerous than originally expected and that in 
consequence thereof the licensee is unable to work the invention except at a loss:  
Provided that no such application shall be entertained a second time.  
89. General purposes for granting compulsory licences .—The powers of the Controller upon an 
application made under section 84 shall be exercised with a view to securing the following general 
purposes, that is to say, — 
(a) that patented inventions are worked on a commercial scale in the territory of India without 
undue delay and to the fullest ext ent that is reasonably practicable;  
(b) that the interests of any person for the time being working or developing an invention in the 
territory of India under the protection of a patent are not unfairly prejudiced.  
90. Terms and conditions of compulsory li cences .—(1) In settling the terms and conditions of a 
licence under section 84, the Contr oller shall endeavour to secure — 
(i) that the royalty and other remuneration, if any, reserved to the patentee or other person 
beneficially entitled to the patent, is reasonable, having regard to the nature of the invention, the 
expenditure incurred by the patentee in making the invention or in developing it and obtaining a 
patent and keeping it in force and other relevant factors;  
(ii) that the patented invention is wo rked to the fullest extent by the person to whom the licence is 
granted and with reasonable profit to him;  
(iii) that the patented articles are made available to the public at reasonably affordable prices;  
(iv) that the licence granted is a non -exclusive licence;  
(v) that the right of the licensee is non -assignable;  
(vi) that the licence is for the balance term of the patent unless a shorter term is consistent with 
public interest ; 
1[(vii) that the licence is granted with a predominant purpose of supply in  the Indian market and 
that the licensee may also export the patented product, if need be in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 7) of section 84;  
(viii) that in the case of semi -conductor technology, the licence granted is to work the invention 
for public non -commercial use;  
(ix) that in case the licence is granted to remedy a practice determined after judicial or 
administrative process to be anti -competitive, the licensee shall be permitted to export the patented 
product, if need be .] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 54, for clause ( vii) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  45 (2) No licence granted by the Controller shall authorise the licensee to import the patented article or 
an article or substance made by a patented process from abroad where such importation would, but for 
such authorisation, constitute an infringement of the rights of the patentee.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may, if in its 
opinion it is necessary so to do, in the public interest, direct the Controller at any time to author ise any 
licensee in respect of a patent to import the patented article or an article or substance made by a patented 
process from abroad (subject to such conditions as it considers necessary to impose relating among other 
matters to the royalty and other r emuneration, if any, payable to the patentee, the quantum of import, the 
sale price of the imported article and the period of importation), and thereupon the Controller shall give 
effect to the directions.  
91. Licensing of related patents .—(1) Notwithstand ing anything contained in the other provisions of 
this Chapter, at any time after the sealing of a patent, any person who has the right to work any other 
patented invention either as patentee or as licensee thereof, exclusive or otherwise, may apply to the  
Controller for the grant of a licence of the first -mentioned patent on the ground that he is prevented or 
hindered without such licence from working the other invention efficiently or to the best advantage 
possible.  
(2) No order under sub -section ( 1) shal l be made unless the Controller is satisfied — 
(i) that the applicant is able and willing to grant, or procure the grant to the patentee and his 
licensees if they so desire, of a licence in respect of the other invention on reasonable terms; and  
(ii) that t he other invention has made a substantial contribution to the establishment or 
development of commercial or industrial activities in the territory of India.  
(3) When the Controller is satisfied that the conditions mentioned in sub -section ( 1) have been 
established by the applicant, he may make an order on such terms as he thinks fit granting a licence under 
the first -mentioned patent and a similar order under the other patent if so requested by the proprietor of 
the first -mentioned patent or his licensee : 
Provided that the licence granted by the Controller shall be non -assignable except with the 
assignment of the respective patents.  
(4) The provisions of sections 87, 88, 89 and 90 shall apply to licences granted under this section as 
they apply to licences granted under section 84.  
92. Special provision for compulsory licences on notifications by Central Government .—(1) If 
the Central Government is satisfied, in respect of any patent in force in circumstances of national 
emergency or in circumstance s of extreme urgency or in case of public non -commercial use, that it is 
necessary that compulsory licences should be granted at any time after the sealing thereof to work the 
invention, it may make a declaration to that effect, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, and thereupon 
the following provisions shall have effect, that is to say ,— 
(i) the Controller shall , on application made at any time after the notification by any person 
interested , grant to the applicant a licence under the patent on such te rms and conditions as he thinks 
fit; 
(ii) in settling the terms and conditions of a licence granted under this section, the Controller shall 
endeavour to secure that the articles manufactured under the patent shall be available to the public at 
the lowest prices consistent with the patentees deriving a reasonable advantage from their patent 
rights.  
(2) The provisions of sections 83, 87, 88, 89 and 90 shall apply in relation to the grant of licences 
under this section as they apply in relation to the grant o f licences under section 84.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), where the Controller is satisfied on 
consideration of the application referred to in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) that it is necessary in — 
(i) a circumstance of national emergency; or  
(ii) a circumstance of extreme urgency; or  46 (iii) a case of public non -commercial use,  
which may arise or is required, as the case may be, including public health crises, relating to Acquired 
Immun o Deficiency Syndrome, human immunode ficiency virus, tuberculosis, malaria or other epidemics, 
he shall not apply any procedure specified in section 87 in relation to that application for grant of licence 
under this section:  
Provided that the Controller shall, as soon as may be practicable, i nform the patentee of the patent 
relating to the application for such non -application of section 87.  
1[92A. Compulsory licence for export of patented pharmaceutical products in certain 
exceptional circumstances .—(1) Compulsory licence shall be available for manufacture and export of 
patented pharmaceutical products to any country having insufficient or no manufacturing capacity in the 
pharmaceutical sector for the concerned product to address public health problems, provided compulsory 
licence has been gr anted by such country or such country has, by notification or otherwise, allowed 
importation of the patented phar maceutical products from India.  
(2) The Controller shall, on receipt of an application in the prescribed manner, grant a compulsory 
licence sol ely for manufacture and export of the concerned pharmaceutical product to such country under 
such terms and conditions as may be specified and published by him.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be without prejudice to the extent to whic h 
pharmaceutical products produced under a compulsory licen ce can be exported under any other provision 
of this Act.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “pharmaceutical products ” means any patented 
product, or product manufactured through a pate nted process, of the pharmaceutical sector needed to 
address public health problems and shall be inclusive of ingredients necessary for their manufacture and 
diagnost ic kits required for their use.]  
93. Order for licence to operate as a deed between partie s concerned .—Any order for the grant of 
a licence under this Chapter shall operate as if it were a deed granting a licence executed by the patentee 
and all other necessary parties embodying the terms and conditions, if any, settled by the Controller.  
94. Termination of compulsory licence .—(1) On an application made by the patentee or any other 
person deriving title or interest in the patent, a compulsory licence granted under section 84 may be 
terminated by the Controller, if and when the circumstances th at gave rise to the grant the reof no longer 
exist  and such circumstances are unlikely to recur:  
Provided that the holder of the compulsory licence shall have the right to object to such termination.  
(2) While considering an application under sub -section ( 1), the Controller shall take into account that 
the interest of the person who had previously been granted the li cence is not unduly prejudiced .]. 
CHAPTER XVII  
USE OF INVENTIONS FOR PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT AND ACQUISITION OF INVENTIONS BY CENTRAL  
GOVERNMENT  
99. Meaning of use of invention for purposes of Government. —(1) For the purposes of this 
Chapter, an invention is said to be used for the purposes of Government if it is made, used, exercised or 
vended for the purposes of the Central Government, a State Go vernme nt or a Government undertaking.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
(3) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply in respect of any such importation making or using 
of any machine, apparatus or other article or of any such using of any process or of any such impo rtation, 
using or distribution of any medicine or drug, as may be made by virtue of one or more of the conditions 
specified in section 47.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 55 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 40 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   47 100. Power of Central Government to use inventions for purposes of                                  
Government. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, at any time after an application for a 
patent has been filed at the patent office or a patent has been granted, the Central Government and any 
person authorised in writing by it, may use the invention for the purposes of Government in accordance 
with the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Where an invention has, before the priority date of the relevant claim of the complete 
specification, been duly recorded in a document, or tested or tried, by or on behalf of the  Government or a 
Government undertaking, otherwise than in consequence of the communication of the invention directly 
or indirectly by the patentee or by a person from whom he derives title, any use of the invention by the 
Central Government or any person authorised in writing by it for the purposes of Government may be 
made free of any royalty or othe r remuneration to the patentee.  
(3) If and so far as the invention has not been so recorded or tried or tested as aforesaid, any use of the 
invention made by the Central Government or any person authorised by it under sub -section ( 1), at any 
time after 1[grant  of the patent ] or in consequence of any such communication as aforesaid, shall be made 
upon terms as may be agreed upon either before or after the use, between the Central Government or any 
person autho rised under sub -section ( 1) and the patentee, or, as may in default of agreement be 
determined by the High Court o n a reference under section 103 : 
2[Provided that in case of any such use of any patent, the patentee shall be paid not more than 
adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each case, taking into account the economic value of the 
use of the patent.]  
(4) The authorisation by the Central Government in respect of an invention may be given under this 
section, either before or after the patent is granted and either before or after the acts in respect of which 
such authorisation is given or done, and may be given to any person, whether or not he is authorised 
directly or indirectly by the applicant or the patentee to make, use, exercise or vend the invention or 
import the machine, apparatus or other article or medici ne or drug covered by such patent.  
(5) Where an invention has been used by or with the authority of the Central Government for the 
purposes of Government under this section, then, 3[except in case of national emergency or other 
circumstances of extreme urg ency or for non -commercial use] , the Government shall notify the patentee 
as soon as practicable of the fact and furnish him with such information as to the extent of the use of the 
invention as he may, from time to time, reasonable require; and where the invention has been used for the 
purposes of a Government undertaking, the Central Government may call for such information as may be 
necessary for this purpose from such unde rtaking.  
(6) The right to make, use, exercise and vend an invention for the purpos es of Government under  
sub-section ( 1) shall include the 4[right to sell , on non -commercial basis, the goods]  which have been 
made in exercise of that right, and a purchaser of goods so sold, and a person claiming through him, shall 
have the power to deal  with the goods as if the Central Government or the person authorised under        
sub-section ( 1) were the patentee of the invention.  
(7) Where in respect of a patent which has been the subject of an authorisation under this section, 
there is an exclusive licensee as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 101, or where such patent has 
been assigned to the patentee in consideration of royalties or other benefits determined by reference to the 
use of the invention (including payments by way of minimum royalty), the notice directed to be given 
under sub -section ( 5) shall also be given to such exclusive licensee or assignor as the case may be, and the 
reference to the patentee in sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to include a reference to such assignor or 
exclusive licensee.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 56, for “ the acceptance of the complete specification in respect of the patent ” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 41, for the proviso (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003) . 
3. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for “right to sell the goods” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  48 101. Rights of third parties in respect of use of invention for purposes of Government. —(1) In 
relation to any use of  a patented invention, or an invention in respect of which an application for a patent 
is pending, made for the purposes  of Government — 
(a) by the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government under  
section 100; or  
(b) by the patentee or  applicant for the patent to the order made by the Central Government,  
the provisions of any licence, assignme nt or agreement granted or made , 1*** between the patentee or 
applicant for the patent (or any person who derives title fr om him or from whom he derives title) and any 
person other th an the Central Government shall be of no effect so far as those provisions — 
(i) restrict or regulate the use for the purposes of Government of the invention, or of any model , 
document or information relating thereto, or  
(ii) provide for the making of payments in respect of any use of the invention or of the model,  
document or info rmation relating theret o for the purposes of Government 2***, 
and the reproduction or publication of any model or document in connection with the said use for the 
purposes of Government shall not be deemed to be an infringement of any copyright subsisting in the 
model or document.  
(2) Where the patent, or the right to apply for or obtain the patent, has been assigned to the patentee in 
consideration of royalties or other benefits determined by refer ence to the use of the invention 2***, then, 
in relation to  any use of the invention made for the purposes of Government by the patentee to the order 
of the Central Government, sub -section ( 3) of section 100 shall have effect as if that use were made by 
the virtue of an authority given under that section; and any rise of the invention for the purposes of 
Government by virtue of sub -section ( 3) of that section shall have effect as if the reference to the patentee 
included a reference to the assignor of the patent, and any sum payable by virtue of that sub -section sh all 
be divided between the patentee and the assignor in such proportion as may be agreed upon between them 
or as may in default of agreement be determined by the High Court on a reference under section 103.  
(3) Where by virtue of sub -section ( 3) of section  100, payments are required to be made by the 
Central Government or persons authorised under sub -section ( 2) of that section in respect of the use of an 
invention for the purposes of Government and where in respect of such patent there is an exclusive 
licensee authorised under his licence to use the invention for the purposes of Government, such sum shall 
be shared by the patentee and such licensee in such proportions, if any, as may be agreed upon between 
them or as may in default of agreement be determine d by the High Court on a reference under section 103 
to be just, having regard to any expenditure incurred by the licensee — 
(a) in developing the said invention; or  
(b) in making payments to the patentees other than royalties or other benefits determined by 
reference to the use of the invention 3*** in consideration of the licence.  
102. Acquisition of inventions and patents by the Central Government. —(1) The Central 
Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary that an invention which is the subject of an application 
for a patent or a patent should be acquired from the applicant or the patentee for a public purpose, publish 
a notification to that effect in the Offici al Gazette, and thereupon the invention or patent and all rights in 
respect of the invention or patent shall, by force of this section, stand transferred to and be vested in the 
Central Government.  
(2) Notice of the acquisition shall be given to the applic ant, and, where a patent has been granted, to 
the patentee and other persons, if any, appearing in the register as ha ving an interest in the patent.  
                                                           
1. The words “, whether before or after the commencement of this Act,” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 42 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).  
2. The brackets and words “(including payments by way of minimum royalty)” omitted by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. The words “including payments by way of minimum royalty” omitted by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  49 (3) The Central Government shall pay to the applicant, or, as the case may be, the patentee and other 
perso ns appearing on the register as having an interest in the patent such compensation as may be agreed 
upon between the Central Government and the applicant, or the patentee and other persons; or, as may, in 
default of agreement, be determined by the High Cou rt on a reference under section 103 to be just having 
regard to the expenditure incurred in connection with the invention and, in the case of a patent, the term 
thereof, the period during which and the manner in which it has already been worked (including the 
profits made during such period by the patentee or by his licensee whether exclusive or otherwise) and 
other relevant factors.  
103. Reference to High Court of disputes as to use for purposes of Government. —(1) Any 
dispute as to the exercise by the Cent ral Government or a person authorised by it of the powers conferred 
by section 100, or as to terms for the use of an invention for the purposes of Government thereunder or as 
to the right of any person to receive any part of a payment made in pursuance of sub-section ( 3) of that 
section or as to the amount of compensation payable for the acquisition of an invention or a patent under 
section 102, may be referred to the High Court by either party to the dispute in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the rules  of the High Court.  
(2) In any proceeding under this section to which the Central Government is a party, the                        
Central Government may, — 
(a) if the patentee is a party to the proceedings, petition by way of counter -claim for revocation o f 
the patent on any ground upon which a patent may be revoked under section 64; and  
(b) whether a patentee is or is not a party to the proceedings, put in issue the validity of the patent 
without petitioning for its revocation.  
(3) If in such proceedings as aforesaid any question arises whether an invention has been recorded, 
tested or tried as is mentioned in section 100, and the disclosure of any document regarding the invention, 
or of any evidence of the test or trial thereof, would, in the opinion of t he Central Government, be 
prejudicial to the public interest, the disclosure may be made confidentially to the advocate of the other 
party or to an independent expert mutually agreed upon.  
(4) In determining under this section any dispute between the Centr al Government and any person as 
to terms for the use of an invention for the purposes of Government, the High Court shall have regard to 
any benefit or compensation which that person or any person from whom he derive title, may have 
received, or may be ent itled to receive, directly or indirectly in respect of the use of the invention in 
question for the purposes of Government.  
(5) In any proceedings under this section, the High Court may at any time order the whole 
proceedings or any question or issue of fact arising therein to be referred to an official referee, 
commissioner or an arbitrator on such terms as the High Court may direct, and references to the High 
Court in the foregoing provisions of this section shall be construed accordingly.  
(6) Where the  invention claimed in a patent was made by a person who at the time it was made was in 
the service of the Central Govern ment or of a State Government or was an employee of a Government 
undertaking and the subject -matter of the invention is certified by the  relevant Government or the 
principal officer of the Government undertaking to be connected with the work done in the course of the 
normal duties of the Government servant or employee of the Government undertaking, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any dispute of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
relating to the invention shall be disposed of by the Central Government conformably to the provisions of 
this section so far as may be applicable, but before doing so the Central Go vernment shall give an 
opportunity to the patentee and such other parties as it considers have an interest in the matter to be heard.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
SUITS CONCERNING INFRINGEMENT OF PATENTS  
104. Jurisdiction. —No suit for a declaration under section 105 or f or any relief under section 106 or 
for infringement of a patent shall be instituted in any court inferior to a district court havin g jurisdiction to 
try the suit:  
Provided that where a counter -claim for revocation of the patent is made by the defendant, th e suit, 
along with the counter -claim, shall be transferred to the High Court for decision.  50 1[104A. Burden of proof in case of suits concerning infringement .—(1) In any suit for 
infringement of a patent, where the subject matter of patent is a process for obtaining a product, the court 
may direct the defendant to prove that the process used by him to obtain the product, identical to the 
product of the patented process, is different from the patented process if, — 
(a) the subject matter of the patent is a pro cess for obtaining a new product; or  
(b) there is a substantial likelihood that the identical product is made by the process, and the 
patentee or a person deriving title or interest in the patent from him, has been unable through 
reasonable efforts to dete rmine the process actually used:  
Provided that the patentee or a person deriving title or interest in the patent from him, first proves that 
the product is identical to the product directly obtained by the patented process.  
(2) In considering whether a par ty has discharged the burden imposed upon him by sub -section ( 1), 
the court shall not require him to disclose any manufacturing or commercial secrets, if it appears to the 
court that it would be unreasonable to do so.]  
105. Power of court to make declarati on as to non -infringement. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 34 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963) ,  any person may institute a suit for a 
declaration that the use by him of any process, or the making, use or sale of any article by him does not, 
or would not, constitute an infringement of a claim of a patent against the patentee or the holder of an 
exclusive licence under the patent, notwithstanding that no assertion to the contrary has been made by the 
patentee or the licensee, i f it is shown — 
(a) that the plaintiff has applied in writing to the patentee or exclusive licensee for a written 
acknowledgment to the effect of the declaration claimed and has furnished him with full particulars in 
writing of the process or article in question; and  
(b) that the patentee or licensee has refused or neglected to give such an acknowledgment.  
(2) The costs of all parties in a suit for a declaration brought by virtue of this section shall, unless for 
special reasons the court thinks fit to or der other wise, be paid by the plaintiff.  
(3) The validity of a claim of the specification of a patent shall not be called in question in a suit for a 
declaration brought by virtue of this section, and accordingly the making or refusal of such a declaration  
in the case of a patent shall not be deemed to imply that the patent is valid or invalid.  
(4) A suit for a declaration may be brought by virtue of this section at any time 2[after the publication 
of grant of a patent ], and references in this section to th e patentee shall be construed accordingly.  
106. Power of court to grant relief in cases of groundless threats of infringement proceedings. —
(1) Where any person (whether entitled to or interested in a patent or an application for a patent or not) 
threatens any other person by circulars or advertisements or by communications, oral or in writing 
addressed to that or any other person, with proceedings for infringement of a patent, any person aggrieved 
thereby may bring a suit against him praying for the followi ng reliefs, that is to say — 
(a) a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable;  
(b) an injunction against the continuance of the threats; and  
(c) such damages, if any, as he has sustained thereby.  
(2) Unless in such suit the defendant prove s that the acts in respect of which the proceedings were 
threatened constitute or, if done, would constitute, an infringement of a patent or of rights arising from the 
publication of a complete specification in respect of a claim of the specification not s hown by the plaintiff 
to be invalid, the court may grant to the plaintiff all or any of the reliefs prayed for.  
Explanation .—A mere notification of the 3[existence]  of a patent does not constitute a threat of 
proceeding within the meaning of this section.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 43 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 57, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “existing” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).   51 107. Defences, etc., in suit for infringement. —(1) In any suit for infringement of a patent, every 
ground on which it may be revoked under section 64 shall be available as a ground for defence.  
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent by the making, us ing or importation of any machine, 
apparatus or other article or by the using of any process or by the importation, use or distribution of any 
medicine or drug, it shall be a ground for defence that such making, using, importation or distribution is 
in acc ordance with any one or more of the conditions specified in section 47.  
1[107A. Certain acts not to be considered as infringement .—For the purposes of this Act, — 
(a) any act of making, constructing,  2[using, selling or importing] a patented invention solel y for 
uses reasonably related  to the development and submission of information required under any law for 
the time being in force, in India, or in a country other than India, that regulates the manufacture, 
construction, 3[use, sale or import] of any produ ct; 
(b) importation of patented products by any person from a person  4[who is duly authorised under 
the law to produce and s ell or distribute the product],  
shall not be considered as a n infringement of patent rights.]  
108. Reliefs in suits for infringement .—5[(1)] The reliefs which a court may grant in any suit for 
infringement include an injunction (subject to such terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and, at the option 
of the plaintiff, either damages or an account of profits.  
6[(2) The court may also order that the goods which are found to be infringing and materials and 
implement, the predominant use of which is in the creation of infringing goods shall be seized, forfeited 
or destroyed, as the court deems fit under the circumstances of the case witho ut payment of any 
compensation .] 
109. Right of exclusive licensee to take proceedings against infringement. —(1) The holder of an 
exclusive licence shall have the like right as the patentee to institute a suit in respect of any infringement 
of the patent co mmitted after the date of the licence, and in awarding damages or an account of profits or 
granting any other relief in any such suit the court shall take into consideration any loss suffered or likely 
to be suffered by the exclusive licensee as such or, a s the case may be, the profits earned by means of the 
infringement so far as it constitutes an infringement of the rights of the exclusive licensee as such.  
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent by the holder of an exclusive licence under sub -sectio n (1), 
the patentee shall, unless he has joined as a plaintiff in the suit, be added as a defendant, but a patentee so 
added as defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the 
proceedings.  
110. Right of lice nsee under section 84 to take proceedings against infringement. —Any person to 
whom a licence has been granted under section 84 shall be entitled to call upon the patentee to take 
proceedings to prevent any infringement of the patent, and, if the patentee r efuses or neglects to do so 
within two months after being so called upon, the licensee may institute proceedings for the infringement 
in his own name as though he were the patentee, making the patentee a defendant; but a patentee so added 
as defendant shal l not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the 
proceedings.  
111. Restriction on power of court to grant damages or account of profits for                       
infringement. —(1) In a suit for infringement of a patent, da mages or an account of profits shall not be 
granted against the defendant who proves that at the date of the infringement he was not aware and had no 
reasonable grounds for bel ieving that the patent existed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 44 (w.e.f 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 58, for “using or selling” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 58, ibid., for “use or sale” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 58, ibid., for “who is duly authorised by the patentee to sell or distribute the product” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Section 108 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 38 of 2002, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Ins. by s. 45, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  52 Explanation .—A person shall not be deemed to have been aware or to have had reasonable grounds 
for believing that a patent exists by reason only of the application to an article of the word “patent ”, 
“patented ” or any word or words expressing or implying that a patent has been obtained for the article, 
unless the number of the patent accompanies  the word or words in question.  
(2) In any suit for infringement of a patent the court may, if it thinks fit, refuse to  grant any damages 
or an account of profits in respect of any infringement committed after a failure to pay any renewal fee 
within the prescribed period and before any extension of that period.  
(3) Where an amendment of a specification by way of disclaimer , correction or explanation has been 
allowed under this Act after the publication of the specification, no damages or account of profits shall be 
granted in any proceeding s in respect of the use of the invention before the date of the decision allowing 
the amendment, unless the court is satisfied that the specification as originally published was framed in 
good faith and with reasonable skill and knowledge.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the court to grant an injunction in any suit fo r 
infringement of a patent.  
112. [Restriction o n power of court to grant injunction in certain cases.]—Omitted by The Patents 
(Amendment) Act,  2002 (38 of 2002), s. 46 ( w.e.f.  20-5-2003).  
113. Certificate of validity of specification and costs of subsequent suits for infringement                 
thereof. —1[(1) If in any proceedings before the Appellate Board or a High Court for the revocation of a 
patent under section 64 and section 104, as the case may be, the validity of any claim of a specificat ion is 
contested and that claim is found by the Appellate Board or the High Court to be valid, the Appellate 
Board or the High Court may certify that the validity of that claim was contested in those proceedings and 
was upheld].  
(2) Where any such certific ate has been granted, then, if in any subsequent suit before a court for 
infringement of that claim of the patent or in any subsequent proceeding for revocation of the patent in so 
far as it relates to that claim, the patentee or other person relying on th e validity of the claim obtains a 
final order or judgment in his favour, he shall be entitled to an order for the payment of his full co sts, 
charges and expenses of an  incidental to any such suit or proceeding properly incurred so far as they 
concern the c laim in respect of which the certificate was granted, unless the court trying the suit or 
proceeding otherwise directs : 
Provided that the costs as specified in this sub -section shall not be ordered when the party disputing 
the validity of the claim satisfi es the court that he was not aware of the grant of the certificate when he 
raised the dispute and withdrew forthwith such defence when he beca me aware of such a certificate.  
2[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as authorising the cour ts or the Appellate 
Board hearing appeals from decrees or orders in suits for infringement or petitions for revocation, as the 
case may be, to pass orders for costs on the scale referred to therein].  
114.  Relief for infringement of partially valid specification .—(1) If in proceedings for 
infringement of a patent it is found that any  claim of the specification, being a claim in respect of which 
infringement is alleged, is valid, but that any other claim is invalid, the court may grant relief in respe ct of 
any valid claim which is infringed:  
Provided that the court shall not grant relief except by way of injunction save in the circumstance s 
mentioned in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) Where the plaintiff proves that the invalid claim was framed in good faith and with reasonable 
skill and knowledge, the court shall grant relief in respect of any valid claim which is infringed subject to 
the discretion of the court as to costs and as to the date from which damages or an account of profits 
should be reckoned, and in exercising such discretion the court may take into consideration the conduct of 
the parties in inserting such invalid claims in the specification or permitting them to remain there.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 59, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 59, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).   53 115. Scientific advisers. —(1) In any suit for infringement or in any proceeding before a court under 
this Act, the court may at any time, and whether or not an application has been made by any party for that 
purpose, appoint an independent scientific adviser to assist the court or to inquire and report upon any 
such questio n of fact or of opinion (not involving a question of interpretation of law) as it may formulate 
for the purpose.  
(2) The remuneration of the scientific adviser shall be fixed by the court and shall include the costs of 
making a report and a proper daily fe e for any day on which the scientific adviser may be required to 
attend before the court, and such remuneration shall be defrayed out of moneys provided by Parliament 
by law for the purpose.  
1[CHAPTER XIX  
APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE  BOARD  
116. Appellate Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Board established 
under section 83 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999  (47 of 1999)  shall be the Appellate Board for the purposes 
of this Act and the said Appellate Board shall exercise the jurisdiction, power and authority conferred on 
it by or under this Act:  
Provided that the Technical Member of the Appellate Board for the purposes of  this Act shall have 
the qualifications specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member for the purpos es of this 
Act unless he — 
(a) has , at least five years , held the post of Controller under this Act  or has exercised the 
functions of the Controller under this Act for at least five years; or  
(b) has been for at least ten years , functioned as a Registered Patent Agent and possesses a degree 
in engineering or technology or a masters degree in science fro m any University established under 
law for the time being in force or equivalent; or  
2*   *   *   *  * 
117. Staff of Appellate Board .—(1) The Central Government shall  determine the nature and 
categories of the officers and other employees required  to assist the Appellate Board in the discharge of 
its functions under this Act  and provide the Appellate Board with such officers and other employees as it 
may think fit.  
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers  and other empl oyees of the 
Appellate Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Board shall  discharge their functions under the 
general superintendence of the Chairman of  the Appellate Board in the manner as may be pr escribed.  
117A.  Appeals to Appellate Board .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in sub -section ( 2), 
no appeal shall lie from any decision, order or direction made or issued under this Act by the                    
Central Government, or from any act or order of the Controller for the purpose of giving effect to any 
such decision, order or direction.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Appellate Board from any decision, order or direction of the Controller 
of Central Government under section 15, section 16,  section 17, section 18, section 19, 3[section 20,            
sub-section  (4) of section 25, section 28], section 51, section 54, section 57, section 60, section 61, 
section 63, section 66, sub -section ( 3) of section 69, section 78, sub -sections ( 1) to ( 5) of section 84, 
section 85, section 88, section 91, section 92 and section 94.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 47, for Chapter XIX (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 60 (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for “section 20, section 25, section 27, section 28” (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  54 (3) Every appeal under this section shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in such 
manner as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a copy of the decision,  order or direction 
appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) Every appeal shall be made within three months from the date of the decision, order or direction, 
as the case may be, of the Contr oller or the Central Government  or within such  further time as the 
Appellate Board may, in accordance with the rules made by it , allow.  
117B . Procedure and powers of Appellate Board .—The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) to ( 6) of 
section 84, section 87, section 92, section 95 and section 96 of the Trade  Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999) 
shall apply to the Appellate Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the 
discharge of its functions under the Trade Marks Act, 1999.  
117C . Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc. —No court or o ther authority shall have or, be entitled to, 
exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 117A or section 117D.  
117D.  Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellat e Board .—(1) An 
application 1[for revocation of a patent before the Appellate Board under section 64 and an application for 
rectification of the register] made to the Appellate Board under section 71 shall be in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to a patent under this 
Act shall be communicated to the Controller by the Board and the Controller shall give effect to the order 
of the Board and shall, when so directed, amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in accordance with 
such order.  
117E. Appearance of Controller in legal proceedings .—(1) The Controller shall have the right to 
appear and be heard — 
(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the re lief sought includes 
alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to the practice of the patent 
office is raised;  
(b) in any appeal to the Appellate Board from an order of the Controller on an application for 
grant of a patent — 
(i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Controller or is accepted 
by him subject to any amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, or  
(ii) which has been opposed and the Controller considers that his app earance is necessary in 
the public interest,  
and the Controller shall appear in any case if so directed by the Appellate Board.  
(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Controller may, in lieu of appearing, submit a 
statement in writing signed  by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before 
him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision given by him or of the practice of the 
patent office in like cases, or of other matters relevant to the iss ues and within his knowledge as the 
Controller may deem it necessary, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.  
117F . Costs of Controller in proceedings before Appellate Board .—In all proceedings under this 
Act before the Appellate Board, the  costs of the Controller shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the 
Controller shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any of the parties.  
2[117G. Transfer of pending  proceedings to Appellate Board. —All cases of appeals against             
any order or decision of the Controller and all cases pertaining to revocation of patent other than on a 
counter -claim in a suit for infringement and rectification of register pending before any High Court, shall 
be transferred to the Appellate Board from such date as may be notified by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette and the Appellate Board may proceed with the matter either de novo  or from the stage it 
was so transferred.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 62, for “for rectification of the register” (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 63, ibid., for section 117G  (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).   55 117H.  Power of Appellate Board to make rules .—The Appellate Board may make rules consistent 
with this Act as to the conduct and procedure in respect of all proceedings before it under this Act.]  
CHAPTER XX  
PENALTIES  
118. Contravention of Secrecy provisions relating to certain inventions. —If any person fails to 
comply wit h any direction given under section 35  1[or makes or causes to be made an application for the 
grant of a patent in contravention of section 39] , he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
119. Falsification of entries in register, etc. —If any person makes, or causes to be made, a false 
entry in any register kept under this Act, or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in such a 
register, or produces or tenders, or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing 
knowing the entry or writing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine or with both.  
120. Unauthorised claim of patent rights. —If any p erson falsely represents that any article sold by 
him is patented in India or is the subject of an application for a patent in India, he shall be punishable with 
fine which may  extend to 2[one lakh rupees].  
Explanation  l.—For the purposes of this section, a pers on shall be deemed to represent — 
(a) that an article is patented in India if there is stamped, engraved or impressed on, or otherwise 
applied to, the article the word “patent ” or “patented ” or some other word expressing or implying that 
a patent for the article has been obtained in India;  
(b) that an article is the subject of an application for a patent in India, if there are stamped, 
engraved or impressed on, or otherwise applied to, the article the words “patent applied for ”, “patent 
pending ”, or so me other words implying that an application for a patent for the article has been made 
in India.  
Explanation  2.—The use of words “patent ”, “patented ”, “patent applied for ”, “patent pending ” or 
other words expressing or implying that an article is patented or that a patent has been applied for shall be 
deemed to refer to a patent in force in India, or to a pending application for a patent in India, as the case 
may be unless there is an accompanying indication that the patent has been obtained or applied for in any 
country outside India.  
121. Wrongful use of words “patent office”. —If any person uses on his place of business or any 
document issued by him or otherwise the words “patent office ” or any other words which would 
reasonably lead to the belief that his place of business is, or is officially connected with, the patent office, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or 
with both.  
122. Refusal or failure to supply information. —(1) If any pers on refuses or fails to furnish :— 
(a) to the Central Government any information which he is required to furnish under                           
sub-section ( 5) of section 100;  
(b) to the Control ler any information or statement which he is required to f urnish by or under 
section 146,  
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 3[ten lakh  rupees ]. 
(2) If any person, being required to furnish any such information as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), 
furnishes information or statement which is false, and which he either knows or has reason to believe to 
be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with both . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 48 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 200 5, s. 64, for “ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by s. 65, ibid., for “twenty thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  56 123. Practice by non -registered patent agents. —If any person contravenes the provisions of    
section 129, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 1[one lakh rupees in the case of a first 
offence and five lakh rupees] in the case of a second  or subsequent offence.  
124. Offences by companies. —(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he prov es that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a com pany and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director , manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punishe d accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER XXI  
PATENT AGENTS  
2[125. Register of patent agents. —(1) The Controller shall maintain a register to be called the 
register of patent agents in which shall be entered the names, addresses and other relevant particulars, as 
may be prescribed, of all persons qualified to have their names so entered under section 126.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything  contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Controller to keep 
the register of patent agents in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form subject to such 
safeguards as may be prescribed.]  
126. Qualifications for registration a s patent agents. —(1) A person shall be qualified to have his 
name entered in the regist er of patent agents if he fulfi ls the following conditions, namely: — 
(a) he is a citizen of India;  
(b) he has completed the age of 21 years;  
(c) he has obtained a 3[degree in science, engineering or technology from any University 
established under law for the time being in force]  in the territory of India or possesses such other 
equivalent qualifications as the Central Government may specify in  this behalf, and, in ad dition, — 
4*   *   *   *  * 
(ii) has passed the qualifying examination prescribed for the purpose;  5[or] 
5[(iii) has, for a total period of not less than ten years, functioned either as an examiner or 
discharged the functions of the Controller under section  73 or both, but ceased to hold any such 
capacity at the time of making the application for registration;]  
(d) he has paid  such fee as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 66, for “ten thousand rupees in the case of a first offence and forty thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1-1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 52, for section 125 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 53, ibid., for “degree from any University” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Sub -clause ( i) omitted by Act 15 of 2005, s. 67 ( w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Ins. by Act 38 of 20 02, s. 53 (w.e.f. 20-5-2003).  57 1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a person who has been registered as a 
patent agent before the commencement of  2[the Patents (Amendment) Act, 200 5 (15 of 2005) ] shall be 
entitled to continue to be, or when required to be re -registered, as a patent agent, on payment of the fee as 
may be prescribed.]  
127. Rights of patent agent s.—Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and in any rules made 
thereunder, every patent agent whose name is entered in  the register shall be entitled :— 
(a) to prac tice before the Controller; and  
(b) to prepare all documents, transact all business  and discharge such other functions as may be 
prescribed in connection with any proceeding before the Controller under this Act.  
128. Subscription and verification of certain documents by patent agents. —(1) 3*** all 
applications and communications to the Controller under this Act may be signed by a patent agent 
authorised in writing in this behalf by the person concerned.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
129. Restrictions on practice as patent agents. —(1) No person, either alone or in partnership s with 
any other person, shall practise, describe or hold himself out as a patent agent, or permit himself to be so 
described or held out, unless he is registered as a patent agent or, as the case may be, unless he and all his 
partners are so registered.  
(2) No company or other body corporate shall practise, describe itself or hold itself out as patent 
agents or permit itself to be so described or held out.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, practise as a patent agent includes any  of the 
followin g acts, namely: — 
(a) applying for or obtaining patents in India or elsewhere;  
(b) preparing specifications or other documents for the purposes of this Act or of the p atent law of 
any other country;  
(c) giving advice other than of a scientific or technical nature as to the validity of patents or their 
infringement.  
130. Removal from register of patent agents and restoration. —(1) The 5[Controller]  may remove 
the name of any person from the register when 6[he] is satisfied, after giving that person a reasonabl e 
opportunity of being heard and after such further inquiry, if any, as 6[he] thinks fit to make — 
(i) that his name has been entered in the register by error or on account of misrepresentation or 
suppression of material fact;  
(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment or has 
been guilty of misconduct in his professional capacity which in the opinion of the 5[Controller]  
renders him unfit to be kept in the register.  
(2) The 5[Controller]  may, on application and on sufficient cause being shown, restore to the register 
the name o f any person removed therefrom.  
131. Power of Controller to refuse to deal with certain agents. —(1) Subject to any rules made in 
this behalf, the Controller may refu se to recognise as agent in respect of any business under this Act — 
(a) any individual whose name has been removed from, and not restored to, the register;  
(b) any person who has been convicted of an offence under section 123;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 53, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 67, for “the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002  (38 of 2002) ” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. The words, brackets and figure “Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2) and to any rules made under this 
Act,” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 54 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 54, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   
5. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for “it” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  58 (c) any person, not being reg istered as a patent agent, who in the opinion of the Controller is 
engaged wholly or mainly in acting as agent in applying for patents in India or elsewhere in the name 
or for the benefit of the person by whom he is employed;  
(d) any company or firm, if an y person whom the Controller could refuse to recognise as agent in 
respect of any business under this Act, is acting as a director or manager of the compa ny or is a 
partner in the firm.  
(2) The Controller shall refuse to recognise as agent in respect of an y business under this Act any 
person who neither resides nor has a place of business in India.  
132. Savings in respect of other persons authorised to act as agents. —Nothing in this Chap ter 
shall be deemed to prohibit — 
(a) the applicant for a patent 1*** from drafting any specification or appearing or acting before 
the Controller; or  
(b) an advocate, not being a patent agent, from taking part in any 2[hearing before the Controller 
on behalf of a party who is taking part in any proceedings under this Act] . 
CHAPTER X XII 
INTERNATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  
3[133. C onvention countries .—Any country, which is a signatory or party or a group of countries, 
union of countries or inter -governmental organi sations which are signatories or parties to an international, 
regional or bi -lateral treaty, convention or arrangement to which India is also a signatory or party and 
which affords to the applicants for patents in India or to citizens of India similar privileges as are granted 
to their own citizens or citizens to their member  countries in respect of the grant of patents and protection 
of patent rights shall be a convention country or convention countries for the purposes of this Act .] 
134. Notification as to countries not providing for reciprocity. —Where any country specified by 
the Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to citizens of 
India the same rights in respect of the grant of patents and the protection of patent rights as it accords to 
its own nationals, no national of such country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with an y other 
person, — 
(a) to apply for the grant of a patent or be registered as the proprietor of a patent;  
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor of a patent; or  
(c) to apply for a licence or hold any licence under a patent granted under this Act.  
135. Convention applications. —(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 6, 
where a person has made an application for a patent in respect of an invention in a conventio n country 
(hereinafter referred to as the “basic application ”), and that person or the legal representative or assignee 
of that person makes an application under this Act for a patent within twelve months after the date on 
which the basic application was m ade, the priority date of a claim of the complete specification, being a 
claim based on matter disclosed in the basic application, is the date of m aking of the basic application.  
Explanation .—Where applications have been made for similar protection in resp ect of an invention in 
two or more convention countries, the period of twelve months referred to in this sub -section shall be 
reckoned from the date on which the earlier or earliest of the said applications was made.  
(2) Where applications for protection h ave been made in one or more convention countries in respect 
of two or more inventions which are cognate or of which one is a modification of another, a single 
convention application may, subject to the provisions contained in section 10, be made in respec t of those 
inventions at any time within twelve months from the date of the earliest of the sa id applications for 
protection:  
                                                           
1. The words  “or any person, not being a patent agent, who is duly authorised by the applicant ” omitted by Act 38 of 2002, 
s. 56 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 56, ibid., for c ertain words (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 68, for section 133 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  59 Provided that the fee payable on the making of any such application shall be the same as if separate 
applications have been made i n respect of each of the said inventions, and the requirements of clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 136 shall, in the case of any such application, apply separately to the 
applications for protection in respect of each of the said inventions.  
1[(3) In case of an application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India and 
claiming priority from a previously filed application in India, the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) 
shall apply as if the previously filed applica tion were the  basic application : 
Provided that a request for examination under section 11B shall be made only for one of the 
applications filed in India .] 
136. Special provisions relating to convention applications. —(1) Eve ry convention application 
shall — 
(a) be accompanied b y a complete specification; and  
(b) specify the date on which and the convention country in which the application for protection, 
or as the case may be, the first of such applications was made; and  
(c) state that no application for protection in respect of the invention had been made in a 
convention country before that date by the applicant or by any per son from whom he derives title.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in section 10, a complete specification filed with a convention 
applica tion may include claims in respect of developments of, or additions to, the invention in respect of 
which the application for protection was made in a convention country, being developments or additions 
in respect of w hich the applicant would be en titled u nder the provisions of section 6 to make a separate 
application for a patent . 
(3) A convention application shall not be post -dated under sub -section ( 1) of section 17 to a date later 
than the date on which under the provisions of this Act the application c ould have been made.  
137. Multiple priorities. —(1) Where two or more applications for patents in respect of inventions 
have been made in one or more convention countries and those inventions are so related as to constitute 
one invention, one application ma y be made by any or all of the persons referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 135 within twelve months from the date on which the earlier or earliest of those applications was 
made, in respect of the inventions disclosed in the specifications which acco mpanied the basic 
applications.  
(2) The priority date of a claim of the complete specification, being a claim based on matters 
disclosed in one or more of the basic applications, is the date on which that matter was first so disclosed.  
(3) For the purposes  of this Act, a matter shall be deemed to have been disclosed in a basic 
application for protection in a convention country if it was claimed or disclosed (otherwise than by way of 
disclaimer or acknowledgment of a prior art) in that application, or any do cuments submitted by the 
applicant for protection in support of and at the same time as that application, but no account shall be 
taken of any disclosure effected by any such document unless a copy of the document is filed at the patent 
office with the con vention application or within such period as may be prescribed after the filing of that 
application.  
138. Supplementary provisions as to convention applications. —2[(1) Where a convention 
application is made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter , the applicant shall furnish, when 
required by the Controller, in addition to the complete specification, copies of the specifications or 
corresponding documents filed or deposited by the applicant in the patent office of the convention country 
as referre d to in section 133 verified to the satisfaction of the Controller, within the prescribed period 
from the date of communication by the Controller .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 69 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 70, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).    60 (2) If any such specification or other document is in a foreign language, a translation into English of 
the specification or document, verified by affidavit or otherwise to the satisfaction of the Controller, shall 
be 1[furnished when required by the control ler]. 
(3) For the purposes of this Act, the date on which an application was made in a convention country is 
such date as the Controller is satisfied by certificate of the official chief or head of the patent office of the 
convention country or otherwise, is the date on which the application was made in that convention 
country.  
2[(4) An international application filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty designating India shall 
have effect of filing an application for patent under section 7, section 54 and s ection 135, as the case may 
be, and the title, description, claim and abstract and drawings, if any, filed in the international application 
shall be taken as complete specification for the purposes of this Act.  
(5) The filing date of an application for pat ent and its complete specification processed by the patent 
office as designated office shall be the international filing date accorded under the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty.  
(6) Amendment, if any, proposed by the applicant for an international application de signating India or 
designating and electing India before international searching authority or preliminary  made  examination 
authority shall, if the applicant so desires, be taken as an amendment made before the patent office.]  
139. Other provisions of Act to apply to convention applications. —Save as otherwise provided in 
this Chapter, all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to a convention application and a patent 
granted in pursuance thereof as they apply in relation to an ordinary applicati on and a patent granted in 
pursuance thereof.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
140. Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions. —(1) It shall not be lawful to insert — 
(i) in any contract for or in relation to the sale or lease of a patented article or an articl e made by a 
patented process; or  
(ii) in a licence to manufacture or use a patented article; or  
(iii) in a licence to work any process protected by a patent,  a condition the effect of which may 
be— 
(a) to require the purchaser, lessee, or licensee to acqui re from the vendor, lessor, or licensor, 
or his nominees, or to prohibit him from acquiring or to restrict in any manner or to any extent his 
right to acquire from any person or to prohibit him from acquiring except from the vendor, lessor, 
or licensor or his nominees, any article other than the patented article or an article other than that 
made by the patented process; or  
(b) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using, or to restrict in any manner or to 
any extent the right of the purchaser,  lessee or licensee, to use an article other than the patented 
article or an article other than that made by the patented process, which is not supplied by the 
vendor, lessor or licensor or his nominee; or  
(c) to prohibit the purchaser, lessee or licensee from using or to restrict in any manner or to                       
any extent the right of the purchaser, lessee or licensee to use any process other than the pat ented 
process ; or 
3[(d) to provide exclusive grant back, prevention to challenges to validity of patent  and 
coercive package licensing ,] 
and any such condition shall be void.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 58, for “annexed to the specification or document”  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. Ins. by s. 58, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 59, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  61  (2) A condition of the nature referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall not cease to be a condition falling within that sub -section merely by reason of the fact that the 
agreement containing it has been entered into separately, whether before or after the contract relating 
to the sale, lease or licence of the patented article or process.  
(3) In proceedings against any person for the infringement of a patent, it shall be a defence to prove 
that at the time of the infringement there was in force a contract relating to the patent and containing a 
condition declared un lawful by this section:  
Provi ded that this sub -section shall not apply if the plaintiff is not a party to the contract and proves to 
the satisfaction of the court that the restrictive condition was inserted in the contract without his 
knowledge and consent, express or implied.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall — 
(a) affect a condition in a contract by which a person is prohibited from selling goods other than 
those of a particular person;  
(b) validate a contract which, but for this section, would be invalid;  
(c) affect a condition in  a contract for the lease of, or licence to use, a patented article, by which 
the lessor or licensor reserves to himself or his nominee the right to supply such new parts of the 
patented article as may be required or to put or keep it in repair.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
141. Determination of certain contracts. —(1) Any contract for the sale or lease of a patented article 
or for licence to manufacture, use or work a patented article or process, or relating to a ny such sale, lease 
or licence  2*** may at any time aft er the patent or all the patents by which the article or process was 
protected at the time of the making of the contract has or have ceased to be in force , and notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary in the contract or in any other contract, be determined  by the purchaser, lessee, or 
licensee, as the case may be, of the patent on giving three months‟ notice  in writing to the other party.  
(2) The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to any right of determining a contract 
exercisable apart f rom this section.  
142. Fees. —(1) There shall be paid in respect of the grant of patents and applications therefor, and in 
respect of other matters in relation to the grant of patents under this Act, such fees as may be prescr ibed 
by the Central Government.  
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Controller, the Controller shall not 
do that act until the fee has been paid.  
3[(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the patent office, the fee shall be 
paid along with the document or within the prescribed time and the document shall be deemed not to have 
been filed at the office if the fee has not been paid within such time.]  
(4) Where a principal patent is granted later than two years from the date of fil ing of 4[the 
application] , the fees which have become due in the meantime may be paid within a term of three months 
from the date of the recording of the patent in the register  5[or within the extended period not later than 
nine months from the date of rec ording] . 
6[143. Restrictions upon publication of specification. —Subject to the provisions of Chapter VII,  
an application for a pat ent, and any specification file  in pursuance thereof, shall not, except with the 
consent of the applicant, be published by the Controller before the expiration of the period prescribed 
under  sub-section ( 1) of section 11A or before the same is open to pu blic inspection in pursuance of           
sub-section ( 3) of section 11A or section 43.]  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by Act 38 of 2002, s. 59 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. The words  “ whether made before or after the commencement of this Act, ” omitted by s. 60, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 71, for “the complete specification” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
5. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 61 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 72, for section 143 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).   62 144. Reports of Examiners to be confidential. —The reports of examiners to the Controller under 
this Act shall not be open to public inspection or be published by the Controller; and such reports shall  
not be liable to production or inspection in any legal proceeding unless the court certifies that the 
production or inspection is desirable in the interests of justice, and ought to be allowed.  
1[145. Publication of official journal .—The Controller shall publish periodically an official  journal 
which shall contain such information as may be required to be  published by or under the provisions of 
this Act or any rule made thereunder.]  
146. Power of Controller to call for information from patent ees.—(1) The C ontroller may, at any 
time during the continuance of the patent, by notice in writing, require a patentee or a licensee, exclusive 
or otherwise, to furnish to him within two months from the date of such notice or within such further time 
as the Controller may allow, such information or such periodical statements as to the extent to which the 
patented invention has been commercially worked in India as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), every patentee a nd every licensee (whether 
exclusive or otherwise) shall furnish in such manner and form and at such intervals (not being less than 
six months) as may be prescribed statements as to the extent to which the patented invention has been 
worked on a commercial  scale in India.  
(3) The Controller may publish the information received by him under sub -section ( 1) or                           
sub-section ( 2) in such manner as may be prescribed.  
147. Evidence of entries, documents, etc. —(1) A certificate purporting t o be signed by the 
Controller as to any entry, matter or thing which he is authorised by this Act or any rules made thereunder 
to make or do, shall be prima facie  evidence of the entry having been made and of the contents thereof 
and of the matter or thing  having been done or omitted to be done.  
(2) A copy of any entry in any register or of any document kept in the patent office or of any patent, 
or an extract from any such register or document, purporting to be certified by the Controller and sealed 
with the seal of the patent office shall be admitted in evidence in all courts, and in all proceedings, 
without further proof or production of the original.  
(3) The Controller or any other officer of the patent office shall not, in any legal proceedings to whic h 
he is not a party, be compellable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, the 
contents of which can be proved by the production of a certified copy issued under this Act or to appear 
as a witness to prove the matters therein recorde d unless by order of the court made for special causes.  
148. Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc. —(1) If any person is, by reason of minority, lunacy or other 
disability, incapable of making any statement or doing anything required or permitted by or under  this 
Act, the lawful guardian, committee or manager (if any) of the person subject to the disability, or if there 
be none, any person appointed by any court possessing jurisdiction in respect of his property, may make 
such statement or a statement as near ly corresponding thereto as circumstances permit, and do such things 
in the name and on behalf of the person subject to the disability.  
(2) An appointment may be made by the court for the purposes of this section upon the petition of any 
person acting on b ehalf of the person subject to the disability or of any other person interested in the 
making of the statement or the doing of the thing.  
149. Service of notices, etc. by post. —Any notice required or authorised to be given by or under this 
Act, and any app lication or other document so authorised or required to be made or filed, may b e given, 
made or filed by post.  
150. Security for costs. —If any party by whom notice of any opposition is given under this Act or by 
whom application is made to the Controller for the grant of a licence under a patent neither resides nor 
carries on business in India, the Controller may require him to give security for the costs of the 
proceedings, and in default of such security being given may treat the opposition or applicatio n as 
abandoned.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005 , s. 73 , for secti on 145 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  63 151. Transmission of orders of courts to Controller. —(1) Every order of 1[the High Court  or the 
Appellate Board]  on a petition for revocation, including orders granting certificates of validity of any 
claim, shall be transmitted by 1[the Hi gh Court or the Appellate Board] to the Controller who shall cause 
an entry thereof and reference ther eto to be made in the register.  
(2) Where in any suit for infringement of a patent or in any suit under section 106 the validity of any 
claim or a specifi cation is contested and that claim is found by the court to be valid or not valid, as the 
case may be, the court shall transmit a copy of its judgment and decree to the Controller who shall on 
receipt thereof cause an entry in relation to such proceeding t o be made in the prescribed manner in a 
supplemental record.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall also apply to the court to which appeals are 
preferred against decisions of the 2[Appellate Board or the courts, as the case may be,]  referred  to in those 
sub-sections.  
152. [Transmission of copies of specification, etc., and inspection thereof .]—Omitted by  The Patents 
(Amendment) Act , 2005 (15 of 2005), s. 75 ( w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  
153. Information relating to Patents. —A person making a request to the Controller in the 
prescribed manner for information relating to any such matters as may be prescribed as respects any 
patent specified in the request or as respects any application for a patent so specified shall be entitled, 
subject to the payment of the prescribed fee, to have information supplied to him accordingly.  
154. Loss or destruction of Patents. —If a patent is lost or destroyed, or its non -production is 
accounted for to the satisfaction of the Controller, the Controller may at any time, on app lication made in 
the prescribed manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, cause a duplicate thereof to be sealed and 
delivered to the applicant.  
155. Reports of Controller to be placed before Parliament. —The Central Government shall cause 
to be placed before both Houses of Parliament once a year a report respecting the execution of this Act by 
or under the Controller.  
156. Patent to bind Government. —Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a patent 
shall have to all intents the like effect  as against Government as it has against any person.  
157. Right of Government to sell or use forfeited articles. —Nothing in this Act shall affect the 
power of the Government or of any person deriving title directly or indirectly from the Government to sell  
or use any articles forfeited under any law for the time being in force.  
3[157A. Protection of security of India .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Ac t, the 
Central Government shall — 
(a) not disclose any information relating to any patentable inv ention or any application relating to 
the grant of patent under this Act, which it considers prejudicial to the interest of the security of India;  
(b) take any action including the revocation of any patent which it considers necessary in the 
interest of th e security of India by issue of a notification in the Official Gazette to that effect.  
Explanation . —For the purposes of this section, the expression “security of India ” include  any action 
necessary for the security of India which - 
(i) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived; or  
(ii) relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in other 
goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplyi ng a military 
establishment; or  
(iii) is taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 74, for “the High Court” (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 74, ibid., for “courts” (w.e.f. 2 -4-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2002, s.63, for section 157A (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   64 158. Power of High Courts to make rules. —The High Court may make rules consistent with this 
Act as to the conduct and procedure in respect of all proceedings before it under this Act.  
159. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government may make 
rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) the form and manner in which any application for a patent, any specifications or drawings and 
any other application or document may be filed in  the patent office;  
1[(ia) the period which the Controller may allow for filing of statement and undertaking for in 
respect of applications under sub -section ( 1), the period within which the details relating to 
processing of applications may be filed before the Controller and the details to be furnished by the 
applicant to the Controller under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(ib) the period within which a reference to the deposit of materials shall be made in the 
specification under sub -clause ( A) of clause ( ii) of the proviso to sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(ic) the period for which application for patent shall not be open to the public under                           
sub-section ( 1) and the manner in which the applicant may make a request to the  Controller to publish 
his application under sub section ( 2) of section 11A;  
(id) the manner of making the request for examination for an application for patent and the period 
within which such examination shall be made under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) of se ction 11B;  
(ie) the manner in which an application for withdrawal of an application for grant of a patent shall 
be made and the period within which a request for examination from the date of revocation of secrecy 
directions shall be made under the proviso to sub -section ( 4) of section 11B .] 
(ii) the time within which any act or thing may be done under this Act, including the manner in 
which and the time within which any matter may be 2[published]  under this Act;  
(iii) the fees which may be payable under thi s Act and the manner  3[and time]  of payment of such 
fees;  
(iv) the matters in respect of which the examiner may make a report to the Controller;  
4[(v) the manner in which and the period within which the Controlle r shall consider and dispose 
of a representation under sub -section ( 1) of section 25;  
(va) the period within which the Controller is required to dispose of an application under              
section 39 ;] 
(vi) the form and manner in which and the time within which any notice may be given u nder this 
Act; 
(vii) the provisions which may be inserted in an order for restoration of a patent for the protection 
of persons who may have availed themselves of the subject -matter of the patent after the patent had 
ceased;  
(viii) the establishment of branch offices of the patent office and the regulation generally of the 
business of the patent office , including its branch offices;  
(ix) the maintenance of the register of patents 3[and the safeguards to be observed in the 
maintenance of such register in computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form] and the 
matters to be entered therein;  
(x) the matters in respect of which the Controller shall have powers of a civil court;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76, for clauses ( ia) and ( ib) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 76, ibid., for “advertised” (w.e.f. (1 -1-2005).  
3. Ins. by Act 38 of 2002, s. 64 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76, for clause ( v) (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  65 (xi) the time when and the manner in which the register and any other d ocument open to 
inspection may be inspected under this Act;  
(xii) the qualifications of, and the preparation of a roll of, scientific advisers for the purpose of 
section 115;  
1[(xiia) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the offic ers and other 
employees of the Appellate Board under sub -section ( 2) and the manner in which the officers and 
other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their functions under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 117;  
(xiib) the form of making an appeal, manner of verification and the fee s payable under              
sub-section ( 3) of section 117A;  
(xiic) the form in which, and the particulars to be included in, the application to the Appellate 
Board under sub -section ( 1) of section 117D;]  
(xiii) the manner in which any compensation for acquisition by Governme nt of an invention may 
be paid;  
(xiv) the manner in which the register of patent agents may be maintained  1[under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 125 and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of such register of patent agents 
on computer floppies, diskettes or any other electronic form under sub -section ( 2) of that section]  the 
conduct of qualifying examinations for patent agents; and matters connected with their practice and 
conduc t, including the taking of disciplinary proceedings against patent agents for misconduct;  
(xv) the regulation of the making, printing, publishing and selling of indexes to, and abridgments 
of, specifications and other documents in the patent office; and th e inspection of indexes and 
abridgments and other documents;  
(xvi) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to condition of the rules being made 
after previous publication s: 
2[Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the circumstances exist which 
render it practically not possible to comply with such condition of previous publication, dispense with 
such compliance .] 
160. Rules to be placed before Parlia ment. —Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may b e comprised in one session or 3[in two or more successive sessions, and if before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have e ffect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything p reviously done under that rule.  
161. [Special provisions with respect to certain applications deemed to have been refused under      
Act 2 of 1911 .]—Omitted by The Patents (Amendment) Act,  2002 (38 of 2002), s. 46 ( w.e.f.  20-5-2003).  
162. Repeal of Act 2 of 1911 in so far as it relates to pate nts and savings. —(1) The Indian Patents 
and Designs Act, 1911, in so far as it relates to patents, is hereby repealed, that is to say, the said Act shall 
be amended in the manner specified in the Schedule.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Ins. b y Act 38 of 2002, s. 64 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).  
2. The p roviso added by Act 15 of 2005, s. 76 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
4. Sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) omitted by s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2003).   66 (4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not prejudice the general application of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1987), with respect to repeals.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any suit for infringement of a patent or any 
proceeding for revo cation of a patent, pending in any court at the commencement of this Act, may be 
continued and disposed of, as if this Act had not been passed.  
163. [Amendment of Act  43 of 1958] .—Omitted by  The Patents (Amendment) Act , 2005 (15 of 2005), 
s. 77 (w.e.f . 1-1-2005).  67 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 162]  
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN PATENTS AND DESIGNS  ACT, 1911  
1. Long title —Omit “Inventions and ”. 
2. Preamble —Omit “inventions and ”. 
3. Section 1 —In sub -section ( 1) omit “Indian Patents and ”. 
4. Section 2— 
(a) omit clause ( 1); 
(b) in clause ( 2) omit “(as respects designs) ”; 
(c) for clause ( 3), substitute — 
„(3) “controller ” means the Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 
of 1958) ;‟; 
(d) in clause ( 5) for “trade mark as defined in section 478 ”, substitute “trade mark                                  
as defined  in clause ( v) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks                   
Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) ”.; 
(e) omit clause ( 6);  
(f) in clause 7, after sub -clause ( ee) insert, — 
“(f) in relation to the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa, Daman and Diu, 
the High Court at Bombay;  
(g) in relation to the Union territory of Pondicherry, the High Court at Madras. ”; 
(g) omit clauses ( 8), (10) and ( 11); 
(h) for clause ( 12), substitute — 
„(12) “patent office ” means the patent office referred to in section 74 of the Patents                    
Act, 1970 ‟.‟ 
5. Omit  Part I.  
6. For section 5 1B, substitute — 
“51B.  Designs to bind Government. —A registered design shall have to all intents the like effect 
as against Government as it has against any person and the provisions of Chapter XVII of the Patents 
Act, 1970, shall a pply to registered designs as they apply to patents. ” 
7. In section 54, for “The provisions of this Act, ” substitute “The provisions of the Patents                    
Act, 1970 ”. 
8. Omit sections 55 and 56.  
9. Section 57 —For sub -section ( 1), substitute — 
“(1) There shall be paid in respect of the registration of designs and applications therefor and in 
respect of other matters relating to designs under this Act such fees as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government. ”. 
10. Omit section 59A.  
11. Section 61—Omit sub -section ( 1). 68 12. For section 62, substitute — 
“62. Power of Controller to correct clerical errors. —The Controller may, on request in writing 
accompanied by the prescribed fee, correct any clerical error in the representation of a design or in the 
name or address of the proprietor of any design or in any other matter which is entered upon the register 
of designs. ”. 
13. Section 63 — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), omit “to a patent or ” and “patent or ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2), omit “patent or ” and for “patent s or designs, as the case may be, ”, 
substitute “designs ,”; 
(c) in sub -section ( 3), omit “patent or ” wherever that expression occurs;  
(d) in sub -section ( 4), omit “to a patent or ”. 
14. Section 64 — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), omit “patents or ” and omit the word “either ” wherever it occurs;  
(b) in sub -section ( 5), omit clause ( a). 
15. Omit section 66.  
16. Section 67 —Omit “for a patent, or for amendment of an application or of a specification, or ”. 
17. Section 69 —In sub -section ( 1), omit "to gran t a patent for an invention or ”. 
18. Section 71A —Omit “or from patents, specifications and other .”. 
19. Omit section 72.  
20. Omit sections 74A and 75.  
21. Section 76 — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), omit “other ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2), in clause ( c), omit “opponent ”. 
22. Section 77 — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1)— 
(i) in clauses ( c) and ( d), omit “specifications ”; 
(ii) for clause ( e), substitute — 
“(e) providing for the inspection of documents in the patent office and for the manner in 
which they may be published; ”; 
(iii) omit clause ( eee); 
(b) omit sub -section (2A).  
23. Omit section 78.  
24. For section 78A, substitute — 
“78A. Reciprocal arrangement with United Kingdom a nd other Commonwealth                 
countries —(1) Any person who has applied for protection for any design in the United Kingdom or 
his legal representative or assignee shall, either alone or jointly with any other person, be entitled to 
claim that the registration of the said design under this Act shall be in priority to other applicants and 
shall h ave the same date as the date of the application in the United Kingdom:  
Provided that — 
(a) the application is made within six months from the application for protection in the 
United Kingdom; and  
(b) nothing in this section shall entitle the proprietor of the design to recover damages for 
infringements happening prior to the actual date on which the design is registered in India.  69 (2) The registration of a design shall not be invalidated by reason only of the exhibition or use of, 
or the publication of a des cription or representation of, the design in India during the period specified 
in this section as that within which the application may be made.  
(3) The application for the registration of a design under this section must be made in the same 
manner as an o rdinary application under this Act.  
(4) Where it is made to appear to the Central Government that the legislature of any such 
Commonwealth country as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf has made 
satisfactory provision  for the protectio n of designs registered in India, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this section, with such variations 
or additions, if any, as may be set out in such notification, shall apply for the protec tion of designs 
registered in that Commonwealth country. ”. 
25. Omit sections 78B, 78C, 7 8D and 78E.  
26. Omit the Schedule.  
--------------------------The State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH ACT, 1970  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
PART  II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF HIMACHAL  PRADESH  
3. Establishment of State of Himachal Pradesh.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution.  
PART  III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
5. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
6. Allocation of sitting members.  
7. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950.  
The House of the People  
8. [Omitted.] 
9. [Omitted. ] 
The Legislative Assembly  
10. Provision  as to Legislative Assembly as constituted on the appointed day.  
11. Duration of Legislative Assembly.  
12. Speaker and Deputy Speaker.  
13. Rules of procedure.  
Delimitation of constituencies  
14. Allocation of seats in the House of the People.  
15. Allocation of seats in the Legislative Assembly.  
16. Amendment of First and Second Schedules to Act 43 of 1950.  
17. Delimitation of constituencies.  
18. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date.  
19. Amendment  of Scheduled Castes Orde rs. 
20. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders.  
PART  IV 
HIGH COURT  
21. High Court for Himachal Pradesh.  
22. Judges of High Court.  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Jurisdiction of High Court . 
24. Special provision relating to Advocates and Bar Council.  
25. Practice and procedure in High Court.  
26. Custody of seal of High Court.  
27. Form of writs and other processes.  
28. Powers of Judges.  
29. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court . 
30. Transfer of proceedings from High Court of Delhi to High Court of Himachal Pradesh.  
31. Right to appear or to  act in proceedings transferred to High Court of Himachal Pradesh . 
32. Savings.  
PART  V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
33. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature.  
34. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh.  
35. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Himachal Pradesh.  
36. Distribution of revenues.  
PART  VI 
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
37. Property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc.  
38. Special provision as to transfer of assets, rights, liabilities, etc., of Union in relation to transferred 
territories under Act 31 of 1966.  
PART  VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
39. Provisions relating to All -India Services.  
40. Provision relating to certain Services.  
41. Provisions relating to other services.  
42. Other provisions as to services.  
43. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posts.  
44. Advisory Committee s. 
45. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
PART  VIII 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
46. Amendment  of article 210 and article 239 A. 
47. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.  
48. Amendment of Act 20 of 1963.  
49. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptation.  
50. Power to construe laws.  
51. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc.  
  3 
 SECTIONS  
52. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws.  
53. Power to remove difficulties.  
54. Power to make rules.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
  4 
  
THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH ACT, 1970  
ACT NO. 53 OF 1970  
[25th December , 1970 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of the State of Himachal Pradesh and for matters             
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
Constitution;  
(b) “appointed day ” means the day which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(c) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(d) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
article 324;  
(e) “existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh ” means the Union territory of Himachal 
Pradesh as existing immediately before the appointed day;  
(f) “law” includes any enactment , ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, no tification 
or other instrument  having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of law in the whole or 
any part of the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh;  
(g) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of 
the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, means a person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is a member of that House or that Assembly;  
(h) “treasury ” includes a sub -treasury.  
PART  II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE OF HIMACHAL  PRADESH  
3. Establishment of State of Himachal Pradesh .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be 
established a new State, to be known as the State of Himachal Pradesh, comprising the territories which 
immediately before that day were comprised in the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in the First  
Schedule to the Constitution, — 
(a) under the heading “I. THE STATES, ” after entry 17, the following ent ry shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
 
“18. Himachal Pradesh  The territories which immediately before 
the commence ment of this Constitution 
were being administered as if they were 
Chief Commissioners ‟ Provinces under the 
names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur 
and the territories specified in                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966 .”; 5 
 (b) under the heading “II. THE UNION TERRITORIES ”, entry 2 relating to Himachal Pradesh 
shall be omitted and entries 3 to 10 shall be re -numbered as entries 2 to 9 respective ly. 
PART  III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
5. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in the Fourth 
Schedule to t he Constitution, in the Table, — 
(a) entry  18 shall be re -numbered as entry  19 and before the entry as so re -numbered, the following 
entry  shall be inserted, namely: — 
“18. Himachal Pradesh …………. 3”; 
(b) entry  19 shall be omitted.  
6. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the three sitting  mem bers of the 
Council of States representing the existing Union territory of  Himachal Pradesh  shall be deemed to have been duly 
elected under clause (4) of article  80 to fill the three seats allotted to the State of  Himachal Pradesh in that Council.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting  members  shall remain unaltered.  
7. Amendment of section 27 A of Act 43 of 1950 .—On and from the appointed day, in section 27A 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, in sub -section ( 4), the words “Himachal Pradesh” shall be 
omitted.  
The House  of the People  
8. [Allocation of seats in the existing House of the People .] Omitted by the State of Himachal, 
Pradesh (Amendment) Act , 1971 (15 of 1971), s. 2 (w.e.f.  5-1-1971).  
9. [Provision as to sitting members .] Omitted by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-1-1971).  
The Legislative Assembly  
10. Provision  as to Legislative Assembly as constituted on the appointed day .—(1) On and from 
the appointed day, the total number of seats in the Legislat ive Assembly of the State of Hi machal Pradesh 
to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from Assembly constituencies sh all be sixty and the 
number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes of that State          
shall be fourteen and three res pectively; and the Second Schedule to the Representati on of the People Act, 
1950 (43 of 1950) , shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the sixty territorial constituencies of the  existing Union territory 
of Himachal Pr adesh sh all be deemed to be the constituencies of the Legislat ive Assembly of the State of 
Himachal Pradesh and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Ord er, 1966 , shall 
be construed accordingly.  
(3) Every sitting me mber of the Legislative Assembly of the  existing Union territory of Hi machal 
Pradesh representing a territorial constituency which, on the appointed day b y virtue of the  provisions of 
sub-section ( 2), becomes a constituency of th e State of Himachal Pradesh , shall be d eemed to have been 
elected under article 170 to the Legislat ive Assembly of the State of Hi machal Pradesh by that 
constituency.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Legisla tive 
Assembly of the State of H imachal Pradesh sh all be deemed to be duly constituted on the appointed day . 
11. Duration of Legislative Assembly .—The period of five years referred to in clause ( 1) of 
article  172 shall, in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the State of  Himachal Pradesh, be deemed to have 
commenced on the day  on which the duration of the existing Legislative Assembly of the Union territory 
of Himachal Pradesh commenced under section  5 of the Government of Union Territories Act,  1963 (20 of 1963) . 
12. Speaker and Deputy Speaker .—The persons who immediately before the appointed day  .are the 
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assemb ly of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh 6 
 shall be the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, respectively, of th e Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Himachal Pradesh on and from that day.  
13. Rules of procedure .—The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of the existing Union territory of  Himachal Pradesh as in force immediately before the ap pointed 
day shall, until rules are made under clause (1) of article  208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of 
the Legislative Assembly of the State of  Himachal Pradesh,  subject to such modifications and adaptations as may 
be made therein by the Speaker thereof.  
Delimitation of constituencies  
14. Allocation of seats in the House of the People .—In the House of the People to be consti tuted 
after the appointed day, there  shall be allotted four seats to the State of  Himachal Pradesh of which  one seat  shall 
be reserved for the Scheduled Castes.  
15. Allocation of seats in the Legislative Assembly .—The total number of seats in the Legisla tive 
Assembly of the State of  Himachal Pradesh to be constituted at any time after the appoi nted day, to be filled by 
persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies,  shall be sixty -eight of which sixteen seats  shall be 
reserved for the Scheduled Castes and three seats  shall be re served for the Scheduled Tribes.  
16. Amendment of  First and Second Schedules to Act 43 of 1950 .—(1) In the Representation of the 
People Act,  1950,— 
(a) in the First Schedule, — 
(i) under the heading “I. STATES ”, after entry  17, the following entry  shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“18. Himachal Pradesh.....4         1.....”; 
(ii) under the heading “II. UNION TERRITORIES ”, entry  6 relating to  Himachal Pradesh  shall 
be omitted;  
(b) in the Second Sche dule,— 
(i) under the heading “I. STATES ”, after entry  16, the following entry  shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“17. Himachal Pradesh.....68   16   3”; 
(ii) under the heading “II. UNION TERRITORIES ”, entry  2 relating to  Himachal Pradesh  shall 
be omitted.  
(2) The amendments made by clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall have effect in relation to the House 
of the People and the Legislative Assembly of  Himachal Pradesh to be constituted at any time after the appointed 
day. 
17. Delimitation of Constituencies .—(1) The Election Commission  shall, in the manner herein provided, 
distribute, whether before or after the appointed day, the seats in the House of the People allotted to the State 
of Himachal Pradesh under section  14 and the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of the State of  Himachal 
Pradesh under section  15 to single -member territorial constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest 
census figures , having regard to the provisions of the Consti tution and to the following provisions, na mely:— 
(a) all constituencies  shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in delimit ing 
them regard  shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, facilities of 
communication and public convenience;  
(b) every assembly constituency  shall be so delimited as to fall wholly within one parliamentary 
constituenc y; 
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes  shall be distributed in 
different parts of the State and located, as far as practicable , in those areas where the proportion of their 
population to the total population is comparatively large; and  7 
 (d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes  shall, as far as practicable, be 
located in areas where the proportion of t heir population to the total population is the largest.  
Explanation .—In this section , “latest census figures ” mean the census figures with respect to the existing 
Union territory of  Himachal Pradesh or, as the case may be, of the State of  Himachal Pradesh ascer tainable from 
the latest census  of which the finally published figures are available.  
(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions under  sub-section ( 1), the Election 
Commission  shall associate with itself as associate  members, — 
1[(a) all the persons (or as many of them as are available) who having been elected from 
parliamentary constituencies in the Union territory of  Himachal Pradesh, were  members of the House 
of the People immediately before its dissolution by the  order of the President published with           
notifica tion No. 37/2/70/T, dated  the 27th December,  1970, of the Lok Sabha Secretariat, in the 
Gazette of India, dated the  27th December,  1970, or if the delimitation of any constituencies is taken 
up after  the first constitution, following such dissolution, of the House of the People, all the  members 
elected to such House (or as many of them as are available) from parliamentary constituencies in the 
State of  Himachal Pradesh; and]  
(b) such six of the  member s of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of  Himachal 
Pradesh or, as the case may be, of the State of  Himachal Pradesh referred to in section  10 as the Speaker 
thereof may nominate : 
Provided that none of the associate  members  shall have  a right to vote or to sign any decision of the 
Election Commission.  
(3) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate  member falls vacant, it  shall be filled, if 
practicable, in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section ( 2). 
(4) The Election Commission  shall— 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together with the dissenting 
propos als, if any, of any associate  member who desire s publication thereof, in the Official Gazette and in 
such other  manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and 
suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be further 
considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which m ay have been received by it before the date so 
specified;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified, determine by one or more  orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause suc h order 
or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the  order or  orders  shall have the 
full force of law and  shall not be called in question in any court. 
(5) As soon as may be after such publication, every such  order relating to parliamentary constitu encies  shall be 
laid before the House of the People and every such  order relating to assembly constituen cies shall be laid before 
the Legislative Assembly.  
18. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders  up-to-date.—(1) The Election 
Commission may, from time to time, by notificat ion in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any  order made under section  17 or any error arising therein from 
inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where  the boundaries or name of any territorial division  mentioned in any such  order are or is 
altered , make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such  order up -to-date. 
(2) Every notification under this section relating to a  parliamentary or an assembly constituency  shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is issued, before the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative 
Assembly.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1971, s. 3, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 5 -1-1971).  8 
 19. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders .—(1) On and from the appointed day,  the Constitution 
(Sche duled Castes) Order, 1950, sh all stand amended as directed in the First Schedule.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union  Territories) Order, 
1951, sh all stand amended as directed in the Second Schedule.  
20. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders .—(1) On and from the appointed day,  the Const itution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Ord er, 1950, sh all stand amended as directed in the Third Schedule.  
(2) On and from the appointed day,  the Constitution (Scheduled T ribes) (Union Territories) Ord er, 
1951 , shall stand amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule.  
PART  IV 
HIGH COURT  
21. High Court for Himachal Pradesh .—(1) On and from the appointed day,  there shall be a 
separate High Court for the State of Himachal Pradesh (hereinafter referred to as the High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh).  
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh shall be at Simla.  
22. Judges of High Court .—(1) The President may, if he thinks fit, direct that such of the Judges of 
the High Court of Delhi holding office immediately before the appointed day as may be determined by 
him, shall on that day cease to be Judges of the High Court of Delhi and become Judges of the High Court 
of Himachal Pradesh.  
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) becomes Judges of the High Court of Himachal 
Pradesh shall, except in the case where a ny such person is appointed to b e the Chief Justice of the High 
Court, rank in that Court according to the priority of their respective appointments as  Judges of the High 
Court of Delhi.  
23. Jurisdiction of High Court .—The High Court of Himachal Pradesh shall have, in respect of any 
part of the territories comprised in the State of Himachal Pradesh, all such jurisdiction, powers and 
authority as, under the law in force immediately before the appointed day,  are exercisable in respect of 
that part of the said territories by the High Court of Delhi.  
24. Special provision relating to Advocates and Bar Council .—(1) Subject to any rule made or 
direction given by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh in this behalf, any person who immediately before 
the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Delhi shall be entitled to practise 
as an advocate in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.  
(2) The right of audience in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh shall be regulated in accordance 
with the like principles as immediately before the appointed day are in force with respect to the right of 
audience in the High Court of Delhi.  
(3) On and from th e appointed day, in the Advocate s Act, 1961  (25 of 1961) (hereafter in this section 
referred to as the Advocates Act), in section 3, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for clause ( d), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(d) for the States of Punjab and Haryana and the Union territory of Chandigarh, to be known 
as the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana;  
(dd) for the State of Himachal Pradesh, to be known as the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh;  
(b) in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2), after the words “Bar Council of Orissa ”, the words “, the Bar 
Council of Himachal Pradesh ” shall be inserted.  
  9 
 (4) The provisions of section 17 of the Advocates Act shall have effect in respect of the roll of the Bar 
Council of Himachal Pradesh sub ject to the modifications that — 
(a) for clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of the said section 17, the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“(a) all persons who were entered as advocates on the roll  of the Bar Council of Punjab and 
Haryana immediately before the day appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the State of 
Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970, and who within three months from that day express in such manner 
as the Bar Council of India may, by ru les, prescribe an intention in writing to prac tise within the 
jurisdiction of the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh ”; 
(b) in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of the said section 17, for the words and figures “with his date 
of enrolment under the Indian Bar Cou ncils Act, 1926  (38 of 1926) ”, the words “with his seniority on 
the roll of the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana ” shall be substituted.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Advocates Act as amended or modified by                     
sub-sections  (3) and ( 4),— 
(a) in the case of the first Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh under that Act, the fifteen members 
required to be elected under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 of that Act, as amended by                  
sub-section ( 3), shall be no minated by the Chief Justice of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh from 
amongst advocates who are entitled as of right to practise in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh and 
are ordinarily practising within the territories comprised in the State of Himachal  Pradesh and the 
term of office of the members so nominated shall be one year from the date of the first meeting of the 
Council or until their successors are duly elected in accord ance with the provisions of the said Act, 
whichever is earlier;  
(b) until t he members of the first Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh required to be nominated 
under clause ( a) are duly nominated in accordance with the provisions of that clause, the Bar Council 
of Punjab and Haryana shall function as the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh and the provi sions of 
the Advocates Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly;  
(c) the names of persons entered on the roll of the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh in 
accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 1 7 of the Advocates Act, as 
modified by sub -section ( 4), shall, as from the date or dates on which the names are so entered, stand 
removed from the roll of the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana;  
(d) any proceedings which may be pending or which may be insti tuted against any person before 
or by the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana immediately before his name is removed under clause 
(c) from the roll of that Bar Council may after such removal be continued or instituted before or by 
the Bar Council of Himachal  Pradesh;  
(e) every person who immediately before his name stands removed from the roll of the Bar 
Council of Punjab and Haryana in accordance with the provisions of clause ( c) is a member of the Bar 
Council of Punjab and Haryana shall cease to be a member  of that Council as from the date on which 
his name stands so removed from the roll of that Bar Council;  
(f) the rules made or deemed to have been made by the Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana and in 
force immediately before the date on which the first Bar  Council of Himachal Pradesh is duly 
constituted in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) shall, subject to such modifications and 
adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman of the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh, be 
deemed to be rules made by the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh and shall have effect accordingly.  
(6) As soon as may be, after the first Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh is duly constituted in 
accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 5), the assets and liabilities of the Bar 
Council of Punjab and Haryana shall be apportioned between that Bar Council and the Bar Council of 
Himachal Pradesh in such manner and proportion as may be agreed upon by the two Bar Councils and in 
default of agreement with referenc e to any matter, the matter shall be referred to the Chairman of the Bar 
Council of India and his decision thereon shall be final.  
Explanation .—Expressions used in this section but not defined in this Act shall have the mean ings 
assigned to them respectiv ely in the Advocates Act.  10 
 25. Practice and procedure in High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force 
immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court of Delhi 
shall, with the necessary mo difications, apply in relation to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.  
26. Custody of seal of High Court .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Delhi shall, with the necessary modi fications, apply 
with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.  
27. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Delhi 
shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other proc esses used, 
issued or awarded by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.  
28. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately be fore the appointed day with respect to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court of Delhi and with respect 
to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in  
relation to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.  
29. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Delhi and the Judges and 
division courts th ereof, shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh.  
30. Transfer of proceedings from High Court of Delhi to High Court of Himachal            
Pradesh .—(1) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court o f Delhi shall, on and from the appointed 
day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the territories comprised in the State of Himachal Pradesh.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Delhi immediately before the appointed day as are 
certified, whet her before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that  High Court, having regard to the 
place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard 
and decided by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh shall, as soon as may be after such certifica tion, be 
transferre d to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section or in section 23, but 
save as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Delhi shall have, and the High Court of Himachal Pradesh 
shall  not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief 
in respect of any order passed by the High Cou rt of Delhi before the appointed day : 
Provided that if, after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Delhi, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh,  he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon 
be transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order m ade by the High Court of Delhi — 
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Himachal 
Pradesh by virtue of sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court Delhi retains jurisdiction by virtue of 
sub-section ( 3),  
shall, for all purposes , have effect not only as an order of the High Court of Delhi, but also as an order 
made by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disp osed of all issues 
between the parties including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the pro ceedings 
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs;  11 
 (b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
court thereof, and references to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or  decree passed or made by that court or Judge.  
31. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to High Court of Himachal             
Pradesh .—Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practice in 
the High Court of Delhi and was authorised to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred from that 
High Court to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh under sect ion 30 shall have the right t o appear or to 
act, as the case  may be, in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh in relation to those proceedings.  
32. Savings .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Himachal Pradesh 
of any provisi ons of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be 
made on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority 
having power to make such provision.   
PART  V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
33. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature .—(1) The President may, 
at any time before the appointed day, authorise by  order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State 
of Himachal Pradesh as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the appointed 
day, pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of  Himachal Pradesh : 
Provided that the Gover nor of  Himachal Pradesh may, after the appointed day, authorise by  order such 
further expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of  Himachal Pradesh for any 
period not extending beyond the said period of six months.  
(2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of  Himachal Pradesh  shall make separate  orders 
under  sub-section ( 1) in respect of periods falling in different financial years.  
34. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Himachal               
Pradesh .—(1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India referred to in section  49 of the 
Govern ment of Union Territories Act,  1963 (20 of 1963) , relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory 
of Himachal Pradesh in  respect of any period prior to the appointed day,  shall be  submitted to the Governor 
of Himachal Pradesh who  shall cause them to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State.  
(2) The Governor may, by  order,— 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of the existing Union territory 
of Himachal Pradesh on any service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial 
year 1970-71 or in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount grante d for that service and for 
that year as disclosed in the reports referred to in  sub-section ( 1) to have been duly authorised, and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said reports.  
35. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Himachal Pradesh .—The allowances and privi leges 
of the Governor of  Himachal Pradesh  shall, until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under 
clause (3) of article  158, be such as the President may, by  order, determine.  
36. Distribution of revenues .—The President  shall, by  order, determine the grants -in-aid of the revenues 
of the State of  Himachal Pradesh and the  share of that State in the Union duties of excise, estate duty and taxes on 
income and for that purpose amend thereby the relevant provisions of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) 
Act, 1962 (3 of 1962) , the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act,  1957 (58 of 1957) , the 
Estate Duty (Distribution) Act,  1962 (9 of 1962) , and the Constitution (Distribution of Rev enues)  Order,  1969 
(C.O. 87) , in such manner as he thinks fit.   
PART  VI 
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
37. Property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc .—(1) All such property and assets within the 
existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh as are held immediately before the appointed day by the 12 
 Union for purposes of governance of that Union territory shall, on and from that day, pass to the State of 
Himach al Pradesh, unless the purposes for which such property and assets are so held are Union 
purposes:  
Provided that the cash balances in the treasuries in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh before the 
appointed day shall, as from that day, vest in the St ate of Himachal Pradesh.  
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligation (other than those relatable to, or in connection with, a Union 
purpose), whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, which are, immedia tely before the appointed 
day,— 
(a) the rights,  liabilities and obligations of the Central Government arising out of, or in 
connection with , the governance of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh; or  
(b) the  rights, liabilities and obligations of the Administrator of the existing Union territory of 
Himachal Pradesh in his capacity as such, or of the Government of that Union territory,  
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities and oblig ations of the Government of the 
State of Himachal Pradesh.  
(3) The right to recover arrears of — 
(a) any tax or duty being a tax or duty enumerated in the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution, or  
(b) any duty referred to in article 268, or  
(c) any tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956  (74 of 1956) , 
which have fallen due in the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall pass to the State of 
Himachal Pradesh.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to or in rela tion to,— 
(a) any benefit or burden of any assets, rights, liabilities or obligations of the Union under the 
Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966) attributable to the transferred territories as defined in 
the said Act;  
(b) any institution, undertaking or pr oject the expenditure in relation to which is immediately          
before the appointed day met from out of the Consolidated Fund of India;  
(c) any property which has been placed by the Union at the disposal of the Administration of the 
existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh subject to the condition that the ownership thereof will 
continue to vest in the Union.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “liability ” includes liability in respect of any civil deposit, local fund deposit, cha ritable or 
other endowment, provident fund account, pension or actionable wrong;  
(b) “Union purposes ” mean the purposes of Government relatable to any of the matters mentioned 
in the Union List.  
38. Special provision as to transfer of assets, rights, liabilities, etc., of Union in relation to  
transferred territories under Act 31 of 1966 .—(1) In this section, the expression “successor States ” and 
“transferred territories ” have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the Punjab Reorganisa tion Act, 
1966.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, transfer to the State of Himachal Pradesh the benefit or 
burden of any assets rights, liabilities or obligations of the Union under the Punjab Reorganisation  Act, 
1966, in so far as such benefit or burden is, in the opinion of the Central Government, attributable to the 
transferred territories.  
(3) An order made under sub -section ( 2) may provide that the Stat e of Himachal Pradesh shall be 
successor State in re lation to the transferred territories for all or any of the purposes of the Punjab 13 
 Reorganisati on Act, 1966, or confer or impo se on the State of Himachal Pradesh rights and obligations 
which correspond so far as may be to the rights and obligations conferr ed or imposed on the successor 
States by or under that Act.  
(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 49, the Central Government may, for the pur pose of 
giving effect to the provisions of this section, by order, dir ect that the provisions of Part  VI, Part VII, Part 
VIII and Part IX and connected provisions of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, shall have effect 
subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the order.  
PART  VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
 39. Provisions relating to All -India Services .—(1) In this section , the expression “State cadre ”,— 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian 
Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;  
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Police 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;  
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service , has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Forest 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.  
(2) On a nd from the appointed day , there shall be constituted for the State of Himachal Pradesh a 
State cadre of the Indian Administrative Service, a State cadre of the Indian Police Service and a State 
cadre of the Indian Forest Service.  
(3) The initial strength and composition of each of the said State cadres shall be such as the Central 
Government may, by order, determine before the appointed day.  
(4) Such of the members of each of the said Services borne on the Union Territories cadre thereof 
immediately before  the appointed day, as the Central Government may, by order, specify, shall be             
allocated to the State cadre of Himachal Pradesh of the same Service with effect from such date or dates 
as may be specified in the order.  
(5) Nothing in this secti on shall be deemed to affect the operation after the appointed day of the           
All-India Services Act 1951  (61 of 1951) , or the rules or regulations made thereunder in relation to the 
State cadres of the said Services referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub-section ( 4) and in relation to the 
members of those services borne on the State cadres.  
40. Provision relating to certain Services .—(1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be 
constituted for the State of Himachal Pradesh th e following Services,  namely:— 
(a) the Himachal Pradesh Administrative Service; and  
(b) the Himachal Pradesh Police Service.  
(2) The initial strength and composition of the cadres of the said Services shall be such as the 
Administrator of the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, by order, determine before the appointed day.  
(3) On and from the appointed day, the existing Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands Civil Service (hereinafter referred to as the existing Civil Service) shall be known as the Delhi and 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Civil Service and Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands Police Service (hereinafter referred to as the existing Police Service) shall be known as t he Delhi 
and Andaman and Nicobar Islands Police Service.  
(4) Such members of the e xisting Civil Service as the Central Government may, by order, specify 
shall be allocated to the cadre of the Himachal Pradesh Administrative Service and such members of the 
existing Police Service as the Central Government may , by order, specify, shall be allocated to the cadre 
of the Himachal Pradesh Police Service and any such order may specify the date or dates from which the 
allocation made thereunder shall be effective.  14 
 (5) All persons who are allocated under sub -section ( 4) and who immediately before the date on 
which they are allocated, are borne on a Select List for promotion to a State cadre of an All -India Service, 
shall be deemed to have been included in the same or der as in that list in the Select List for promotion to 
the State cadre of the same Service constituted under sub -section ( 2) of section 39.  
(6) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, the rules and regulations applicable to or in 
relation to the members of the existing Civil Service and the existing Police Service as in force 
immeditefy before the appointed day shall, so far as may , be apply respectively to and in relation to the 
mem bers of the Himachal Pradesh Administrative Service and the Himachal Pradesh Police Service, until 
altered, repealed or amended by the competent authority.  
(7) Every member of the Central Health Service who immediately before the appointed day is holding 
any post in the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh being a post included in the authorised 
strength of that Service, shall, until otherwise directed by the Central Government, be deemed to be on 
deputation , on and from the appointed day , to the Government of the State of Himachal Pradesh on the 
same terms and conditions of service as are applicable to him under t he Central Health Service Rules,  
1963, b ut without any deputation allowance : 
Provided that the period of such deputation shall in no case extend beyond a period of three years 
from the appointed day.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, “Central Health Service ” means the Central Health Service 
constituted under the Central Health Service Rules, 1963.  
41. Provisions relating to other services .—(1) Every person who immediately before the ap pointed 
day is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under t he administrative control of the 
Administrator of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall, unless otherwise directed by an order of 
the Central Government , be deemed to have been allocated for service as from that day in connection with 
the affairs o f the State of Himachal Pradesh:  
Provided that no directions shall be issued under this section after the expiry of a period of one year 
from the appointed day : 
Provided further that nothing in this section shall affect the operation of section 82 of the P unjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966  (31 of 1966) . 
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to persons to whom the provisions of 
sections 39 and 40 apply.  
42. Other provisions as to services .—(1) Nothing in this section or sections 40 and 41 shall be 
deemed to affect on or after the appointed day the operations of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of 
the Constitution in relation to determination of the conditions of service of persons servi ng in connec tion 
with the affairs o f the State of Himachal Pradesh : 
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day in the case of 
any person referred to in section 40 or section 41 shall not be varied to his disadv antage except with the 
previous approval of the Central Government.  
(2) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person allocated under section 40 or deemed 
to have been allocated under section 41 in connection with the administration of Union  territory of 
Himachal Pradesh, shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the State of 
Himachal Pradesh for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditions of service.  
43. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same p osts.—Every person who immediately before 
the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the 
administration of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, shall continue to hold the same post or office 
in the S tate of Himachal Pradesh and shall be deemed, on and from that day, to have been duly appointed 
to the post or office by the Government of, or other appropriate authority in, the State of Himachal 
Pradesh;  15 
 Provided that nothing in this section shall be dee med to prevent a competent authority on or after the 
appointed day from passing in relation to such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or 
office.  
44. Advisory Committee s.—The Central Government may, by order establish one or more advisory 
committees for the purpos e of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the discharge of its functions under this Part; and  
(b) the  ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
Part and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons.  
45. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give s uch 
directions to the Government of the State of Himachal Pradesh as may appear to it to be necessary for the 
purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and also the provisions of Part IX of the 
Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966  (31 of  1966) , and the State Government shall comply with such 
directions.  
PART  VIII 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
46. Amendment  of article 210 and Article 239 A.—On and from the appointed day — 
(a) in article 210, in clause ( 2), the following proviso shall  be inserted at the end, namely ;— 
„Provided that in relation to the Legislature of the S tate of Himachal Pradesh this clause shall 
have effect as if for the words “fifteen years ” occurring therein, the words “twenty -five years ” 
were substituted. ‟; 
(b) in article 239A, in clause ( 1), the words “Himachal Pradesh ” shall be omitted.  
47. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 .—On and from the appointed day, in clause ( a) of section 15 of 
the St ates Reorganisation Act, 1956, — 
(i) for the word “Punjab ”, the words “Punjab, Himachal Pradesh ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) for the words “Himachal Pradesh and Chandigarh ”, the words “and Chandigarh ” shall be 
substituted.  
48. Amendment of Act 20 of 1963 .—On and from the appointed day, in the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963,  in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 and in sub -section ( 2) of section 44, the 
words “Himachal Pradesh ” shall be omitted.  
49. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptation .—(1) All laws in force, immediately before 
the appointed day, in the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall continue to be in force in the 
State of Himachal Pradesh until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other 
competent a uthority.  
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the a pplication in relation to the St ate of Himachal Pradesh of any 
law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, within two years from that day, by 
order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amend ment, as 
may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations 
and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legisl ature or other 
competent authority.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means, as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central 
Government; and as respects any other law, the Government of the State of Himachal Pradesh.  
50. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provisi on or insufficient provision has  been 
made under section 49 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority required or empowered to enforce su ch law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in 
relation to the State of Himachal Prad esh, construe the law in such manner not affecting the substance as 16 
 may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or author ity, as the case may 
be. 
51. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc .—All courts and tribunals a nd all authorities 
discharging lawful functions throughout the existing Union territory of Himachal Pradesh or any part 
thereof immediately before the appointed day shall, unless their continuance is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act or until ot her provision is made by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority, continue to exercise their respective functions.  
52. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
53. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may, by order , do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
54. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before such 
House of Parliament whil e it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session  or 1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,] both House s agree in making any modifica tion 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annul ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the sessions in 
which it is so laid or t he session immediately following” (w.e.f. 5 -5-1986).  17 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 19( 1)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED CASTES ) ORDER , 1950  
(1) In paragraph 2, for the figure “XIII”, the figure “XIV” shall be substituted, and in paragraph 4, for 
the portion beginning with the words, figures and letter “and any reference in Parts IVA and X of the 
Schedule ” and ending with the words and figures “the first day of November, 1966 ”, the followin g shall 
be substituted, namely :— 
“any reference in Parts IV A and X of the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial 
divisio n thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other territorial division 
constituted as from the first da y of November, 1966; and any  reference in Part XIV to a Stat e or to a 
district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or 
other territorial division constituted as from the day appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the 
State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970. ” 
(2) In the Schedule, after Part XIII, the following Pa rt shall be inserted, namely: — 
“PART XIV.—Himachal Pradesh  
1. Throughout the State except the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Punjab 
Reorgani sation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966): — 
1. Ad -dharmi  
2. Badhi or Nagalu  
3. Bandhela  
4. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi  
5. Bangali  
6. Banjara  
7. Bansi  
8. Barad  
9. Barar  
10. Batwal  
11. Bawaria  
12. Bazigar   
13. Bhanjra  
14. Chamar, Mochi , Ramdasi, Ravidasi or Ramdasia  
15. Chanal  
16. Chhimbe (Dhobi)  
17. Chuhre  
18. Dagi  
19. Daole  
20. Darai or Daryai  
21. Daule  
22. Dhaki or Toori  
23. Dhaogri or Dhuai  18 
 24. Doom or Doomna  
25. Dumme (Bhanjre)  
26. Hali  
27. Hesi  
28. Jogi  
29. Julahe  
30. Kabirpanthi , Julaha or Keer  
31. Kamoh or Dagoli  
32. Karoack  
33. Khatik  
34. Koli  
35. Lohar  
36. Mazhabi  
37. Megh  
38. Nat  
39. Od  
40. Pasi  
41. Phrera  
42. Rehar  
43. Rehara  
44. Sansi  
45. Sapel a 
46. Sarde, Sarare or Siryare  
47. Sarehde  
48. Sikligar  
49. Sipi  
50. Sirkiband  
51. Teli  
52. Thathiar or Thathera.  
2. In the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganis ation Act, 1966 
(31 of 1966): — 
1. Ad Dharmi  
2. Bangali  
3. Barar, Burar or Berar  
4. Bat wal 
5. Bauria or Bawari a 
6. Bazigar  19 
 7. Balmiki, Chura or Bhangi  
8. Bhanjra  
9. Charmar, Jatia Chamar, Rehg ar, Raigar, Ramdasi or Ravidasi  
10. Chanal  
11. Dagi  
12. Darain  
13. Dhanak  
14. Dhogri, Dhangri or Siggi  
15. Dumna, Mahasha or Doom  
16. Gagra  
17. Gandhila or Gandil Gondola  
18. Kabirpanthi or Julaha  
19. Khat ik 
20. Kori or Koli  
21. Marija or Mare cha 
22. Mazhabi  
23. Megh  
24. Nat  
25. Od  
26. Pasi  
27. Perna  
28. Pherera  
29. Sanhai  
30. Sanhal  
31. Sansoi  
32. Sansi, Bhedkut or Manesh  
33. Sapela  
34. Sarera  
35. Sikligar  
36. Sirkiband.”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 20 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 19( 2)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  CASTES ) (U NION TERRITORIES ) ORDER , 1951  
(1) In paragraph 4, for the words and figures “Parts II and V ” in both the places where they occur, the 
word and figure “Part V ” shall be substituted.  
(2) In the Schedule, Pa rt II shall be omit ted. 
________  
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 20  (1)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES ) ORDER , 1950  
(1) In paragraph 2 for the figure “XII”, the figure “XIII” shall be substituted, and in paragraph 3, for 
the portion beginning  with the words, figures and let ter “and an y reference in Parts IV and VII A” and 
ending with the words, figures and letters “as from the 1st day of May, I960 ”, the followi ng shall be 
subst ituted, namely: — 
“any reference in Part s IV and VII A of the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial 
division thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other territorial division 
constituted as from the 1st day of  May, 1960; and any reference in Part XIII to a State or to a district 
or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as a reference to the  State, district or other 
territ orial division constituted as from the day appointed under clause ( b) of se ction 2 of the State of 
Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970. ”. 
(2) In the Schedule, after Part XII, the following Part shall be inserted, namely :— 
“PART XIII.—Himachal Pradesh  
1. Throughout the State, except the territories specified in sub -section (1) of section 5 of the Punjab 
Reorganis ation Act,  1966 (31 of 1966): — 
 
1. Gaddi  
2. Gujjar  
3. Jad,  Lamba, Khampa and Bhot or Bodh  
4. Kanaura or Kinnara  
5. Lahaula  
6. Pangwala  
2. In Lahaul and Spiti district: — 
1. Gaddi  
2. Swangla  
3. Bhot or Bodh. ”. 
  21 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 20  (2)] 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  TRIBES ) (U NION  TERRITORIES ) ORDER, 1951  
(1) For paragraph 3, the following paragra ph shall be substituted, namely: — 
“3. Any reference in this Order t o a Union Territory shall be constituted  as a reference to the 
territory constituted as a Union Territory as from the 1st day of November, 1956. ”. 
(2) In the Schedule, Part I shall be omitted.  
 
 
--------------------------The Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970--------------------------
1 
 THE SUPREME COURT (ENLARGEMENT OF CRIMINAL APPELLATE  
JURISDICTION) ACT, 1970  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1970  
[9th August, 1970.]  
An Act to enlarge the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Cour t in regard to criminal matters.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal 
Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. 
2. Enlarged appellate jurisdiction of Supreme Court in regard to criminal matters. —Without 
prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution, 
an appeal shall lie to  the Supreme Court from any judgment, final order o r sentence in a criminal 
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court — 
(a) has  on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to 
imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a period of  not less than ten years;  
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court subordinate to its autho rity and 
has in such trial convicted the accused person and sentenced him to imprisonment for life or to 
imprisonment for a period of not less than ten years . 
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 37 of 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -8-1972).  
