--------------------------The Asian Refractories Limited (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE ASIAN REFRACTORIES LIMITED (ACQUISITION OF UNDERTAKING)  
ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 65 OF 1971  
[23rd December, 1971 .] 
An Act  to provide for the acquisition of the undertaking of the Asian Refractories Limited for the 
purpose of augmenting supplies of refractories to meet the essential requirements of the iron 
and steel industry.  
WHEREAS  the Asian Refractories Limited is in liquidation and has stopped its production;  
AND WHEREAS the total production of refractories in India is inadequate and insufficien t to meet the 
essential requirements of the iron and steel industry;  
AND WHEREAS the supplies of refractories can be augmented by speedily bringing the Asian 
Refractories Limited into operation and expanding its capacity thereafter;  
BE it enacted by Parlia ment in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Asian Refractories Limited 
(Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1971.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 17th day of October, 1971.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 17th day of October, 1971;  
(b) “company” means the Asian Refractories Limited, being a company as defined in the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), having its registered office in the State of West Bengal;  
(c) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                  
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Undertaking of the company to vest in the Central Government .—On and from the appointed 
day, the undertaking of the company shall, by virtue of this Act, be transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Central Government, free from all incumbrances.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertaking of the company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, cash balances, 
reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were 
immediately before t he appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the company, 
whether within or outside India, and all books of accounts, registers and all other documents of whatever 
nature relating thereto.  
(2) All property included as aforesaid in the  undertaking which has vested in the Central Government 
under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trusts, obligations, 
mortgages, charges, liens and other incumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction or any 
decree or order of any court restricting the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to have 
been withdrawn.  
(3) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
business of the undertaking  of the company is pending by or against the company, the same shall not 
abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the 
undertaking of the company or of anything contained in this Act but the suit, appeal or other proceeding 
may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the company.  
5. Duty to deliver possession of the undertaking and documents relating                          
thereto .—(1) Notwithstanding any decree, judgment or order of any court or anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, the Official Liquidator of the company or any other person, in 
whose possession or custody or under whose control the undertaki ng of the company or any part thereof 2 
 may be, shall deliver possession of the undertaking of the company or such part thereof, as the case may 
be, to the Central Government forthwith.  
(2) The Official Liquidator or any other person who has, on the appointe d day, in his possession or 
under his control any books, documents or other papers relating to the undertaking of the company which 
has vested, under section 3, in the Central Government, shall be liable to account for the said books, 
documents or other pa pers to the Central Government and shall deliver them up to the Central 
Government or to such person as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.  
(3) The Central Government may take, or cause to be taken, all necessary steps for securing 
possessio n of the undertaking which has vested in it under section 3.  
6. Duty to furnish particulars .—The company shall, within such period as the Central Government 
may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all the properties and  assets 
of the company, as on the appointed day, pertaining to the undertaking which has vested in the Central 
Government under section 3.  
7. Payment of compensation .—(1) The Central Government shall deposit, in Court, in cash, to the 
credit of the company  a sum of rupees eighty -one lakhs as compensation in respect of the transfer, under 
section 3, to the Central Government of the undertaking of the company.  
(2) Out of the total amount of compensation referred to in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) a sum of rupees eig ht lakhs shall be deposited by the Central Government, within three 
months from the appointed day, to the credit of the company;  
(b) the balance of the amount of compensation shall be deposited in Court by the Central 
Government in ten equal annual instalm ents, the first of which shall become due on the date on which 
a period of one year expires from the appointed day and the subsequent instalments shall become due 
accordingly; and  
(c) each instalment of the compensation, referred to in clause ( b), shall ca rry interest at the rate of 
seven per cent.  per annum from the commencement of this Act.  
(3) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the compensation referred to in                 
sub-section ( 1) represents the realisable  value of the assets of the undertaking, which has vested in the 
Central Government under section 3, and the liabilities of the undertaking shall be met from the said 
amount of compensation.  
(4) In meeting the liabilities of the undertaking which has veste d in the Central Government under 
section 3, the Court, by which the company owning such undertaking is being wound up, shall distribute, 
in due course of administration, the amount of the compensation amongst the creditors and, if there is any 
surplus lef t after such distribution, amongst the contributories of the company in accordance with their 
rights and interest s. 
8. Management and administration of the under taking .—The undertaking, which has vested in 
the Central Government under section 3, shall be m anaged on behalf of the Central Government by such 
person or body of persons as may be nominated by the Central Government in this behalf, and such 
person or body or persons shall carry on the management in accordance with such regulations as may be 
made b y the Central Government.  
9. Penalties .—(1) Any person who — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertaking of 
the company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government; or  
(b) wrongfully  obtains possession of any property forming part of the undertaking of the company 
which has vested in the Central Government under this Act; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or any person specified by 
that Government  as required by sub -section ( 2) of section 5 any document which may be in his 
possession, custody or control; or  3 
 (d) wilfully fails to furnish an inventory as required under section 6; or  
(e) when  required to furnish such inventory, furnishes any particulars therein which are false and 
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with  fine, or with 
both:  
Provided that the court trying any offence under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this             
sub-section may, at the time of convicting the accused person, order him to deliver up or refund within a 
time to be fixed by the court any property wrongfully withheld or wrongfully obtained or any document 
wilfully withheld or not furnished:  
Provided fur ther that nothing contained in this section or any other provision of this Act shall render 
any person liable to be convicted of an offence in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by him 
before the appointed day.  
(2) No court shall take cognizanc e of an offence punishable under this section except with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government or of an officer authorised by that Government in this 
behalf.  
10. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proce eding shall 
lie against the Central Government or an officer or other employee serving in connection with the affairs 
of the undertaking of the company which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
11. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Asian  Refractories Limited (Acquisition of Undertaking) 
Ordinance, 1971 (Ord.13 of 1971), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the  corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) (Delhi Validation of Appointments and Proceedings) Act, 1971--------------------------
1 THE BENGAL FINANCE (SALES TAX) (DELHI VALIDATION OF APPOINTMENTS AND 
PROCEEDINGS)  ACT, 1971  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Validation of certain appointments, assessments, etc . 
4. Repeal and saving . 
  2 THE BENGAL FINANCE (SALES TAX) (DELHI VALIDATION OF APPOINTMENTS AND 
PROCEEDINGS)  ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1971  
[23rd June , 1971 .] 
An Act to validate appointments of certain officers under the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 
1941, as in force in the Union territory of Delhi and to validate proceedings taken by such 
officers under that Act and the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the  Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) (Delhi Validation of 
Appointments and Proceedings) Act, 1971.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator of the Union territory of Delhi appointed by the 
President under article 239 of the Constitu tion; 
(b) “appointment” means appointment as — 
(a) Commissioner of Sales Tax; or  
(b) Additional Commissioner of Sales Tax; or  
(c) Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax; or  
(d) Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax; or  
(e) Sales Tax Officer; or  
(f) Assistant Sales Tax Officer; or  
(g) Inspector.  
3.Validation of certain appointments, assessments, etc. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any judgment, decree or order of any court , tribunal or other authority, — 
(a) no appointment of any person made or purporting to ha ve been made under or for the 
purposes of the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941 (Bengal Act VI of 1941), as in force in the 
Union territory of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) before the commencement of 
this Act shall be deemed to be  illegal or invalid or ever to have been illegal or invalid merely on the 
ground that such appointment was not made in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the 
principal Act or on the ground that such appointment was not made under that section o r on both 
those grounds; and  
(b) no assessment, re -assessment, levy or collection of any tax made or purporting to have been 
made under the principal Act or under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956), as the case may 
be, before the commencement of this Act and no jurisdiction exercised, no order made and no other 
act or proceeding or thing done or taken by, or before, a person referred to in clause ( a) in relation to 
such assessment, re -assessment, levy or collection shall be deemed to be illegal or invalid or ever to 
have been illegal or invalid merely on the ground that such jurisdiction was exercised or such order 
had been made or such other act or proceeding or thing had been done or taken by, or before, a person 
whose appointment was not made in accordance with or under the provisions of section 3 of the 
principal Act, and accordingly — 
(i) all appointments made or purporting to have been made under  or for the purposes of the 
principal Act before the commencement of this Act shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be, and 
to have been, made in accordance with law;  3 (ii) the jurisdiction exercised, orders made and all other acts, proceedings or things do ne or 
taken by the Administrator or by a person whose appointment had been made as aforesaid or by 
any other officer of Government or by any tribunal or other authority in connection with the said 
appointments or in connection with the assessment, re -asses sment, levy or collection of tax under 
the principal Act or under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956), as the case may be, shall, 
for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have been exercised, made, done or taken in accordance 
with law; and  
(iii) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court or before any 
tribunal or other authority whatsoever on the ground that any such appointment was illegal or 
invalid or any such jurisdiction, order or other act, proceeding or thing was not exercised, made, 
done or taken in accordance with law.  
4. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) (Delhi Validation of Appointments and 
Proceedings) Ordinance, 1971 (7 of 1971), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under this Act, as if this Act had commenced on the 18th day of May, 
1971.  
--------------------------The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Amendment and Validation Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT) AMENDMENT 
AND  VALIDATION ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1971  
[11th December, 1971. ] 
An Act further to amend the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957, and 
to validate certain acquisitions of land or rights in or over land under the said Act.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) 
Amendment and Valida tion Act, 1971.  
1*                                     *                                      *                                     *                                    * 
8. Validation of certain acquisitions. —(1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree  or order of any 
court to the contrary, — 
(a) no acquisition of land or of rights in or over land made or purporting to have been made under 
the principal Act before the commencement of this Act, and no action taken or thing done (including 
any order made, agreement entered into or notification published) in connection with such acquisition 
shall be  deemed to be invalid or ever to have become invalid merely on the ground — 
(i) that one or more competent authorities have performed the functions of competent 
authority under the principal Act in respect of the land covered by the same notification under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the principal Act ; 
(ii) that one or more reports h ave been made under sub -section ( 2) of section 8 of the 
principal Act, whether i n respect of the entire land covered by the same notification under        
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the principal Act or rights in or over such land, or in respect of 
different parcels of such land or of rights in or over such land;  
(iii) that one o r more declarations have been made under section 9 of the principal Act in 
respect of different parcels of the land covered by the same notification under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 7 of the principal Act or in respect of rights in or over such land,  
(b) any acquisition in pursuance of any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 of 
the principal Act before the commencement of this Act may be made after such commencement and 
no such acquisition and no action taken or thing done (including any order made, agreement entered 
into or notification published) whether before or after such commencement, in connection with such 
acquisition shall be deemed to be invalid merely on the grounds referred to in clause ( a) or any of 
them.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything cont ained in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), no declaration under       
section 9 of the principal Act in respect of any land, or rights in or over such land, which has been 
notified before the commencement of this Act, under sub -section ( 1) of sec tion 7 of the principal Act, 
shall be made after the expiry of two years from the commencement of this Act.  
(3) Where acquisition of any part icular land (not being acquisi tion of rights in or over such land) 
covered by a notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 of the principal Act, issued before the 
commencement of this Act, is or has been made in pursuance of any declaration under section 9 of the 
principal Act, whether made before or after such commencement, and such declaration is or has been 
made after the expiry of three years from the date of issue of such notification, there shall be paid simple 
interest, calculated at the rate of six per centum per annum on the market value of such land, as 
determined under sub -section ( 5) of section 13 of th e principal Act, from the date of expiry of the said 
period of three years to the date of tender of payment of compensation payable for the acquisition of such 
land:  
                                                           
1. Sections  2 to 7 rep. Act 38 of 1978 , s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  2 
 Provided that no such interest shall be payable for any period during which the proceeding s for the 
acquisition of any land were held up on account of stay or injunction by order of a court:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the acquisition of any land where the 
amount of compensation has been paid to the persons interested befor e the commencement of this Act.  
--------------------------The Comptroller Auditor-Generals (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971--------------------------
1 THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR -GENERAL’S (DUTIES, POWERS AND 
CONDITIONS  OF SERVICE) ACT, 1971  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
SALARY AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR -GENERAL  
3. Salary.  
4. Term of office.  
5. Leave.  
6. Pension.  
7. [Omitted .] 
8. Right to subscribe to General Provident Fund . 
9. Other conditions of service.  
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR -GENERAL  
10. Comptroller and Auditor -General to compile accounts of Union and States.  
11. Comptroller and Auditor -General to prepare and submit accounts to the President, Governors of 
States and Administrators  of Union territories having Legislative Assemblies.  
12. Comptroller and Auditor -General to give information and render assistance to the Union and  
States.  
13. General provisions relating to audit.  
14. Audit of receipts and expenditure of  bodies or autho rities substantially financed from Union o r 
State Revenues.  
15. Functions of Comptroller and Auditor -General in the case of grants or loans given to other 
authorities or bodies.  
16. Audit of receipts of Union or of States.  
17. Audit of accounts of stores a nd stock . 
18. Powers of Comptroller and Auditor -General in connection with audit of accounts.  
19. Audit of Government companies and corporations . 
19A. Laying of reports in relation to accounts of Government companies and corporations.  
20. Audit of accounts  of certain authorities or bodies.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Delegation of power of Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
22. Power to make rules.  
23. Power to make regulations.  
24. Power to dispense with detailed audit.  
25. Repeal.  
26. Removal of doubts.  2 THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR -GENERAL ’S (DUTIES, POWERS AND 
CONDITIONS  OF SERVICE) ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1971  
[15th December , 1971.]  
An Act to determine the conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
and to prescribe his duties and powers and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of I ndia as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Comptroller and Auditor -General ’s (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “ “”accounts ”, in relation to  commercial undertakings of a Government, includes trading, 
manufacturing and profit and loss accounts and balance -sheets and other subsidiary accounts ; 
(b) “appropriation accounts ” means accounts which relate the expenditure brought to acc ount 
during a financial year, to the several items specified in the law made in accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution or of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963  (20 of 1963 ), for 
the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fun d of India or of a State, or of a Union 
territory having a Legislativ e Assembly, as the case may be;  
(c) “Comptroller and Auditor -General ” means the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
appointed under article 148 of the Constitution;  
(d) “State ” means  a State spec ified in the First Schedule to the Constitution ; 
(e) “Union ” includes a Union territory, whether having a Legislative Assembly or not.  
CHAPTER I I 
SALARY AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR -GENERAL  
3. Salary.—There shall be paid to the Comptroller and Auditor -General a salary which is equal to the 
salary of the Judge of the Supreme Court:  
Provided that if a person who , immediately before the date of assuming office as the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General, was in receipt of, or, being eligible so to do, had elected to draw, a pension (other than a 
disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the G overnment of the Union or any 
of its predecessor Governments, or under the Government of a State or any of its predecessor 
Governments, his salary in res pect of service as Comp troller and A uditor -General shall be reduced — 
(a) by the amount of that pension;  and 
(b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion of the pension due to him in 
respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the 
pension ; 1*** 
2*   *   *   *  * 
4. Term of office. —The Comptroller and Auditor -General shall hold office for a term of six years 
from the date o n which he assumes such office:  
Provided that where he attains the age of sixty -five years before the expiry of the said term of six 
years, he shall vacate such of fice on the date on  which he attains the said age:  
                                                           
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 51 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -3-1990).  
2. Clause ( c) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-3-1990 ). 3 Provided further that he may, at any time, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign 
his office.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, the term of six years in respect of the Com ptroller and 
Auditor -General holding office immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be computed 
from the date on which he had assumed office . 
5. Leave.—(1) A person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General, was in the service of Government may be granted during his tenure of office but not 
thereafter, leave in accordance with the rules for the time being applicable to the Service to which he 
belonged before such date and he shall be entitled t o carry forward the amount of leave standing at his 
credit on such date, notwithstanding anything contained in section 6.  
(2) Any other person who is appointed as the Comptroller and Auditor -General may be granted leave 
in accordance with such rules as are  for the time being applicable to a member of the Indian 
Administrative Service.  
(3) The power to grant or refuse leave to the Comptroller and Auditor -General and to revoke or 
curtail leave granted to him, shall vest in the President.  
6. Pension.—(1) A person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General, was in the service of Government shall be deemed to have retired from service on 
the date on which he enters upon office as the Comptroller and Auditor -Gener al but his service as the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General shall be reckoned as continuing approved service counting for pension 
in the Service to which he belonged.  
(2) Every person who enters upon office as the Comptroller and Auditor -General shall, on de mitting 
the said office, be eligible to a pension of a sum of fifteen thousand rupees per annum which sum shall 
include the aggregate of all pensions payable to him and the commuted portion, if any, of his pension, and 
the pension equivalent of the retirem ent gratuity, if any, which may have been admissible to him under 
the rules for the time being applicable to the Service to which he belonged:  
Provided that if such a person is or becomes eligible, at any time, under the rules for the time being 
governing the Service to which he belonged, to a pension higher than the said sum of fifteen thousand 
rupees, he shall be eligible to draw, as pension, the said higher amount.  
(3) A person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Comptroller and                   
Auditor -General, was in receipt of, or, had become eligible for receiving, a pension in respect of any 
previous service under Government, shall, on demitting office as the Comp troller and Auditor -General, 
be eligible to a pension of fifteen  thousand rupees per annum which sum shall include the aggregate of all 
pensions payable to him and the commuted portion, if any, of his pension, and the pension equivalent of 
the retirement gratuity, if any, which may have been admissible to him under the  rules for the time being 
applicable to th e Service to which he belonged:  
Provided that if such a person is or becomes eligible, at any time, under the rules for the time being 
governing the Service to which he belonged, to a pension higher than the said s um of fifteen thousand 
rupees, he shall be eligible to draw, as pension, the said higher amount.  
(4) Any other person who is appointed as the Comptroller  and Auditor -General shall, on demitting the 
said office, be eligible to a pension of fif teen thousand rupees per annum.  
(5) The person holding office immediately before the commencement of this Act as the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General shall be eligible to draw, at his option, pension at the rate at which it would be 
admissible to  him if this Act had not come into force or at the rate specified in this section.  
(6) A person who demits office as the Comptroller and Auditor -General by resignation shall, on such 
demission, be eligible to a pen sion at the rate of two thousand rupees per annum for each complete d year 
of his service as the Comptroller and Auditor -General:  4 Provided that in the case of a person referred to in sub -section  (1) or sub -section ( 3), the aggregate 
amount of pension admissible under this sub -section together with the amount of pension inc luding                   
the commuted portion, if any, of his pension, and the pension equivalent of the retirement gratuity, if             
any, which may have been admissible to him under the rules for the time being applicable to the Service 
to which he b elonged immediately before he assumed office as the Comptroller and Auditor -General, 
shall not exceed fifteen thousand rupees per annum or the higher pension referred to in proviso to                 
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be.  
1[(6A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, a person 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) who demits office [whether in any manner specified in sub -section ( 8) or by 
resignation] as the Comptroller and Auditor -General after the commencement of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General’ s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1984  (2 of 1984) , shall, 
on such demission, be entitled to — 
(a) the pensio n to which he would have been entitled under the rules of the Service to which he 
belonged by reckoning his service as the Comptroller and Auditor -General as continuing approved 
service counting for pension in such Service; and  
(b) a special pens ion of sev en hundred rupees per  annum in respect of each completed year of 
service as the Comptroll er and Auditor -General : 
2*   *   *   *  * 
(6B) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, a person referred 
to in sub -section ( 3) who demits office [whether in any manner specified in sub -section ( 8) or by 
resignation] as the Comptroller and Auditor -General after the commencement of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General’ s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1984  (2 of 1984) , shall, 
on such demission, be entitled to — 
(a) the pension payable to him in respect of any previous service under Government; and  
(b) a special pension of seven hundred rupees per annum in respect of each completed year of 
service as the C omptr oller and Auditor -General : 
2*   *   *   *  *] 
3[(6C) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, a person who 
demits office [whether in any manner specified in sub -section ( 8) or by resignation] as the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General after the commencement of the Comptroller and Auditor -General’ s (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1987  (50 of 1987) , shall, on  such demission, be entitled to — 
(a) a pension  which is equal to the pension payable t o a Judge of the Supreme Court, — 
(i) if such person is a person referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3), in accordance 
with the provisions of Part III of the Schedule to the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1958 (41 of 1958) (hereafter in this Act referred to as the Supreme Court Judges 
Act), as amended from time to time ; and 
(ii) if such person is a person referred to in sub -section ( 4), in accordance  with the provisions 
of Part I of the Schedule to the Supreme Court Judges Act, as amended from time to time;  
(b) such pension (including commutation of pension), family pension and gratuity a s are 
admissible to a Judge of Supreme Court under the Supreme Court Judges Act and the rules made 
thereunde r, as amended from time to time. ] 
4[(6D) Notwithstanding anything cont ained in the forgoing provisions of this section, a person who 
demitted office  [whether in any manner specified in sub -section (8) or by re signation] as the Comptroller 
and Audit or-General, at any time before the 16th day  of December,  1987, shall be entitled to the pension 
specified in  sub-section (6C) on and from th at date.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -3-1984).  
2. The proviso omitted by Act 50 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1986).  
3. Ins. by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  
4. Ins. by Act 51 of 1994, s. 3  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  5 (7) If a person who demits office as the Comptroller and Auditor -General is not eligible to                        
any pension under this section but is eligible to a pe nsion under the rules for the time being applicable to 
the Service to which he belonged i mmediately before be assumed  office as the Comptroller and Auditor -
General, he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this section, be eligible to draw such pension as 
is admissib le to him under the said rules.  
(8) Except where he demits office by re signation, a person holding office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to have demitted such office as such if, and 
only if, — 
(a) he has completed the term of of fice specified in section 4, or  
(b) he has at tained the age of sixty -five years, or  
(c) his demission of office is medically certified to  be necessitated by ill health.  
1*   *   *   *   *  
8. Right to subscribe to General Provident Fund. —Every person holding office as the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General shall be entitled to subscribe to the General Provident Fund (Central Services).  
9. Other conditions of service. —2[Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the conditions of             
service relating to travelling allowance, provision of rent -free residence and exemption from payment of 
income - tax on the value of such rent -free residence, conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance, medical 
facilities and such other conditions of servi ce as are for the time being applicable to a Judge of the 
Supreme Court under Chapter IV of the Supreme Court Judges Act, and the rules made thereunder, shall, 
so far as may be, apply to a serving or retired Comptroller and Auditor -General as the case may be:] 
Provided that nothing in this section shall have effect so as to give a person, who immediately before 
the date of assuming office as the Comptroller and Auditor -General, was in the service of Government, 
less favourable terms in respect of any of the  matters aforesaid than those to which he would be entitled 
as a member of the Service to which he belonged, his service as Comptroller and Auditor -General being 
treated for the purpose of this proviso as continuing service in the Service to which he belon ged. 
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR -GENERAL  
10. Comptroller and Auditor -General to compil e accounts of Union and States. —(1) The 
Comptroller and Audit or-General shall be responsible — 
(a) for compiling the accounts of the Union  and of each State from the initial and subsidiary 
accounts rendered to the audit and accounts offices under his control by treasuries, offices or 
departments responsible for th e keeping of such accounts; and  
(b) for keeping such accounts in relation to an y of the matters specified in clause ( a) as may be 
necessary:  
3[Provided that the President may, after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, by 
order, relieve him from the responsibility for compiling — 
(i) the said accounts of the Union (either at once or gradually by the issue of several orders) ; or 
(ii) the accounts of any particular services or departments of the  Union:  
Provided further that the Governor of a State may, with the previous approval of the  President and 
after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, by order, relieve him from t he responsibility 
for compiling — 
(i) the said accounts of the State (either at once or gradually by the issue of several orders) ; or 
(ii) the accounts o f any particular servi ces or departments of the State :] 
                                                           
1. Section 7 omitted by Act 50 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).   
3. Subs. by Act 58 of 1976, s. 2, for the first proviso (w.e.f. 1 -3-1976).  6 1[Provided also] that the President may, after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, 
by order, relieve him from the responsibility for keeping the accounts of any particular class or character.  
(2) Where, under any arrangemen t, a person other than the Comp troller and Auditor -General has, 
before the commencemen t of this Act, been responsible — 
(i) for compiling the accounts of any particular service or department  of the Union or of a State, 
or 
(ii) for keeping the accounts of any particular class or character,  
such arrangement  shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), continue to be in force 
unless, after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, it is revoked in the case referred to 
in clause ( i), by an order of the President or the Governor of the State, as the case may be, and in the case 
referred to in clause ( ii), by an order of the President.  
11. Comptroller and Auditor -General to prepare and submit accounts to the President, 
Governors of States and Administrators of Union territories having Legislative Assemblies. —The 
Comptroller and Auditor -General shall, from t he accounts comp iled by him or 2[by the Government or 
any other person responsible i n that behalf], prepare in each year accounts (including, in the case of 
accounts compiled by him, appropriation accounts) showing under the respective heads the annual 
receipts and disbursements for the purpose of the Unio n, of each State and of each Union territory having 
a Legislative Assembly, and shall submit those accounts to the President or the Governor of a State or 
Administrator of the Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, on or before such 
dates as he may, with the concurrence of the G overnment concerned, determine:  
3[Provided that the President may, after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, by 
order, relieve him from the responsibility for the preparation and submiss ion of the accounts relating to 
annual receipts and disbursements for the purpose of the Union or of a Union territory having a 
Legislative Assembly:  
Provided further that the Governor of a State may, with the previous approval of the President and 
after c onsultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, by order, relieve him from the responsibility 
for the preparation and submission of the accounts relating to annual receipts and disbursements for the 
purpose of the State.]  
12. Comptroller and Auditor -General to give information and render assi stance to the Union 
and  States. —The Comptroller and Auditor -General shall, in so far as the accounts, for the compilation 
or keeping of which he is responsible, enable him so to do, give to the Union Government, to the State 
Governments or to the Governments of Union territories having Legislative Assemblies, as the case may 
be, such information as they may, from time to time, require, and render such assistance in the preparation 
of their annual financial stateme nts as they may reasonably ask for.  
13. Genera l provisions relating to audit. —It shall be the duty of the Comptroller and                    
Auditor -General — 
(a) to audit all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India and of each State and of each 
Union territory having a Legislative Assembly and to ascertain whether the moneys shown in the 
accounts as having been disbursed were legally available for and applicable to the service or purpose 
to which they have been applied or charged and whether the exp enditure conforms to the authority 
which governs it;  
(b) to audit all transactions of the Union and of the States relating to Contingency Funds and 
Public Accounts ; 
(c) to audit all trading, manufacturing, profit and loss accounts and balance -sheets and other 
subsidiary accounts kept in any depart ment of the Union or of a State ; 
and in each case to report on the expenditure, transactions or accounts so audited by him.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1976, s. 2, for “Provided further” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “by any other person responsible in that behalf”  (w.e.f. 1 -3-1976).  
3. The provisos ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -3-1976).   7 14. Audit of receipts and expenditure of  bodies or authorities subs tantially financed f rom 
Union or  State Revenues. —1[(1)] Where any body or authority is substantially financed by grants or 
loans from the Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union territory having a Legislative 
Assembly, the Comptroller  and Auditor -General shall, subject to the provisions of any law for  the time 
being in force applicable to the body or authority, as the case may be, audit all receipts and expenditure of 
that body or authority and to report on the receipts and expenditure aud ited by him.  
Explanation .—Where the grant or loan to a body or authority from the Consolidated Fund of India or 
of any St ate or of any Union territory having a Legislative Assembly in a financial year is not less than 
2[rupees twenty -five lakhs] and the amount of such grant o r loan is not less than seventy -five per cent of 
the total expenditure of that body or authority, such body or authority shall be deemed, for  the purposes of 
3[this sub -section] to be substantially financed by such grants or loans , as the case may be.  
4[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1) the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
may, with the previous approval of the President or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a 
Union territory having a Legislative Ass embly, as the case may be, audit all receipts and expenditure of 
any body or authority where the grant or loan to such body or authority from the Consolidated Fund of 
India or of any State, or of any Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the ca se may be, in a 
financial year is not less than rupees one crore.  
(3) Where the receipts and expenditure of any body or authori ty are, by virtue of the fulfil ment                         
of the conditions specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), audited by the Comptroller and             
Auditor -General in a financial year, he shall continue to audit the receipts and expenditure of that body or 
authority for a further period of two years notwithstanding that the conditions specified in sub -section ( 1) 
or sub -section ( 2) are not fulfilled during any of the two subsequent years. ] 
15. Functions of Comptroller and Auditor -General in the case of grants or loans given to other 
authorities or bodies. —(1) Where any grant or loan is given for any specific purpose from the 
Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union territory having a Legislative Assembly to 
any authority or body, not being a foreign State or international organisation, the C omptroller and 
Auditor -General shall scrutinise the procedures by which the sanctioning authority satisfies itself as to the 
fulfilment of the conditions subject to which such grants or loans were given and shall for this purpose 
have right of access, afte r giving reasonable previous notice, to the books and accounts of that authority 
or body:  
Provided that the President, the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory having a 
Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, may, where he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do in the 
public interest, by order, relieve the Comptroller and Auditor -General, after consultation with him, from 
making any such scrutiny in respect of any body or authority receiving such grant or loan.  
(2) Except whe re he is authorised so to do by the President, the Governor of a State or                                 
the Administrator of a Union territory having  a Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General shall not have, while ex ercising the powers conferred on him by          
sub-section ( 1), right of access to the books and accounts of an y corporation to which any such grant or 
loan as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) is given if the law  by or under which such corpora tion has b een 
established provides for the audit of the accounts of such corporation by an agency other than the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General:  
Provided that no such authorisation shall be made except after consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General and  except after giving the concerned corporation a reasonable opportunity of making 
representations with regard to the proposal to give to the Comptroller and Auditor -General right of access 
to its books and accounts.  
                                                           
1. Section 14 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 2  of 19 84, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 6-3-1984). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “rupees five lakhs” (w.e.f. 16 -3-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “this section” (w.e.f. 16 -3-1984).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -3-1984).  8 16. Audit of receipts of Union or of States.—It shall be the duty of the Comptroller and                 
Auditor -General to audit all receipts which are payable into the Consolidated Fund of India and of each 
State and of each Union territory having a Legislative Assembly and to satisfy himse lf that the rules and 
procedures in that behalf are designed to secure an effective check on the assessment, collection and 
proper allocation of revenue and are being duly observed and to make for this purpose such examination 
of the accounts as he thinks fit and report thereon.  
17. Audit of accounts of  stores and stock. —The Comptroller and Auditor -General shall have 
authority to audit and report on the accounts of stores and stock kept in any office or department of the 
Union or of a State.  
18. Powers of C omptroller and Auditor -General in connection with audit of accounts. —(1) The 
Comptroller and Auditor -General shall in connection with the performance of his duties  under this Act, 
have authority — 
(a) to inspect any office of accounts under the control of the Union or of a State, including 
treasuries and such offices responsible for the keeping of initial or subsidiary accounts, as submit 
accounts to him;  
(b) to require that, any accounts, books, papers and other documents which deal with or from the 
basis of or are otherwise relevant to the transactions to which his duties in respect of audit extend, 
shall be sent to such place as he  may appoint for his inspection;  
(c) to put such questions or make such observations as he may consider necessary, to the person 
in charge of the office and to call for such information as he may require for the preparation of any 
account or report w hich it is his duty to prepare.  
(2) The person in charge of any office or department, the accounts of which have to be inspected  and 
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General, shall afford all facilities for such inspection and comply 
with requests for information in as complete a form as possible and with all reasonable expedition.  
19. Audit of Government companies and corpor ations.—(1) The duties and powers                                  
of the Comptroller and Auditor -General in relation to the audit of the accounts of Government companies 
shall be performed and exercised by him in accordance with the provisions of the Compa nies                              
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
(2) The duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor -General in relation to the audit of the 
accounts of corporations (not being companies) established by or under law made by Parliament shall be  
performed and exercised by him in accordance with the provisions of the respective legislations.  
(3) The Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly 
may, where he is of opinion that it is necessary in the pu blic interest so to do, request the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General to audit the accounts of a corporation established by law made by the Legislature of the 
State or of the Union territory, as the case may be, and where such request has been made, the 
Comp troller and Auditor -General shall audit the accounts of such corporation and shall have, for the 
purposes of such audit, right of access to the books and accounts of such corporation:  
Provided that no such request shall be made except after consultation wi th the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General and except after giving reasonable opportunity to the corporation to m ake 
representa tions with regard to the proposal for such audit.  
1[19A.  Laying of reports in relation to accounts of Governm ent companies and corporations. —
(1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor -General, in relation to the accounts of a Government 
company or a corporation referred to in section 19, shall be submitted to the Gover nment or Governments 
concerned.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause every report received by it under sub -section ( 1) to be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is received, b efore each House of Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 16 -3-1984).  9 (3) The State Government shall cause every re port received by it under  sub-section ( 1) to be laid as , 
soon as may be after it is received, befor e the Legislature of the State.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “Government ” or “State Government ”, in relation to a 
Union territory having a Legis lative Assembly, means the Administrator of the Uni on territory. ] 
20. Audit of accounts of certain authorities or bodies. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in                 
section 19, where the audit of the accounts of any body or authority has not been entrusted to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General by or under any law made by Parliament, he shall, if requested so to do 
by the President or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory having a Legislative 
Assembly, as the case may be, undertake the audit of the accounts of such body o r authori ty on such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between him and the concerned Government and shall have, 
for the purposes of such audit, right of access to the books and accounts of that body or authority : 
Provided that no such request shall  be made except after consultation with the C omptroller and 
Auditor -General.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General may propose to the President or the Governor of a State or 
the Administrator of a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the cas e may be, that he may be 
authorised to undertake the audit of the accounts of any body or authority, the audit of the accounts of 
which has not been entrusted to him by law, if he is of opinion that such audit is necessary because a 
substantial amount has been invested in, or advanced to, such body or authority by the Central or State 
Government or by the Government of a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, and on such 
request being made, the President or the Governor or the Administrator, as the case may be, may 
empower the Comptroller and Auditor -General to undertake the audit of the acco unts of such body or 
authority.  
(3) The audit referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not be entrusted to the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General exc ept where the President or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a 
Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, is satisfied that it is expedient so to do 
in the public interest and except after giving a reasonable opportuni ty to the concerned body or authority 
to make representations with regard to the proposal for such audit.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Delegation of power of C omptroller and Auditor -General.—Any power exercisable by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General under the provisions of this Act, or any other law may be exercised by 
such officer of his department as may be authorised by him in this beh alf by general or special order : 
Provided that except during the absence of the Comptroller and Auditor -General on leave or 
otherwise, no officer shall be authorised to submit on behalf of the Comptroller and Auditor -General any 
report which the Comptroller and Auditor -Gene ral is required by the Constitu tion or the Government of 
Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)  to submit to the President or the Governor of a State or the 
Administrator of a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, as the case may be.  
22. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government m ay, after consultation with the  
Comptroller and Auditor -General, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act in so far as they relate to the maintenance of accounts.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the for egoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which initial and subsidiary accounts shall be kept by the treasuries, offices and 
departments rendering accounts to audit and accounts o ffices;  
(b) the manner in which the accounts of 1[the Union or of a State or of] any particular service or 
department or of any particular class or character, in respect of which the Comptroller and                  
Auditor -General has been relieved from the responsibil ity of compiling or keeping the accou nts, shall 
be compiled or kept;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1976).  10 (c) the manner in which the accounts of stores and stock shall be kept in any office or department 
of the Union or  of a State, as the case may be;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed by rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days  which may b e comprised in 
one session or 1[in two or more successive sessions],  and if, before the expiry of 2[the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the ru le should not be made, the rule  shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
23. Power to make regulations. —The Comptroller and Auditor -General is here by authorised to 
make re gulations for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act in so far as they relate to the scope and 
extent of audit, including laying down for the guidance of the Government Departments the general 
principles of Government accounting and the broad principles in regard to audit of receipts and 
expenditure.  
24. Power to dispense with detailed audit. —The Comptroller and Auditor -General is hereby 
authorised to dispense with, when circumstances so warrant, any part of detailed audit of any accounts or 
class of transactions and to apply such limited check in relation to such accounts or transactions as he 
may determine.  
25. Repeal. —The Comptroller and Auditor -General (Conditions of Service)  Act, 1953  (21 of 1953 ), 
is hereby repealed.  
26. Removal of doubts. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that on the commencement 
of this Act the Government of India (Audit and Accounts) Order, 1936, as adapted by the India 
(Provisional Constitution) Order, 1947, shall cease to be in force except as respects anything done or any 
action taken thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1976, s. 4, for “in two successive sessions” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1976).  
--------------------------The Contempt of Courts Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE CONTEMPT OF COURTS ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 70 OF 1971  
[24th December, 1971 .] 
An Act to define and limit the powers of certain courts in punishing contempt s of courts and to 
regulate their procedure  in relation thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent to which the 
provisions of this Act  relate to contempt of the Supreme Court.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “contempt of court ” means civil contempt or criminal contempt;  
(b) “civil contempt ” means wilful disobedience to any judgment, decree, direction, order, writ or 
other process of a court  or wilful breach of an undertaking given to a court;  
(c)  “criminal contempt ” means the p ublication (whether by words, spoken or written, or by signs, 
or by visible   representation s, or otherwise) of any matter or the doing of any other act whatsoever 
which— 
(i) scandalises or tends to scandalise , or lowers or tends to lower the authority of, any     
court; or  
(ii) prejudices, or interferes or tends to interfere with, the due course of any judicial 
proceeding; or  
(iii) interferes or tends to interfere with, or obstructs or tends to obstruct, the a dministration of 
justice in any other manner;  
(d) “High Court ” means the High Court for a State or a Union territory, and includes the court of 
the Judicial Commissioner in any Union territory.  
3. Innocent publication and distribution of matter not contempt .—(1) A person shall not be guilty 
of contempt of court on the ground that he has published (whether by words, spoken or written, or by 
signs, or by visible representations, or otherwise) any mat ter which interferes or tends to interfere with, or 
obstructs or tends to obstruct, the course of justice in connection with any civil or criminal proceeding 
pending at that time of publication, if at that time he had no reasonable grounds for believing th at the 
proceeding was pending.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force, the publication of any such matter as is mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in connection with any civil 
or criminal p roceeding which is not pending at the time of publication shall not be deemed to constitute 
contempt of court.  
(3) A person shall not be guilty of contempt of court on the ground that he has distributed a 
publication containing any such mat ter as is mentio ned in sub -section ( 1), if at the time of distribution he 
had no reasonable grounds for believing that it contained or was likely to contain any such matter as 
aforesaid:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply in respect of the distribution of — 
(i) any publication which is a book or paper printed or published otherwise than in conformity 
with the rules contained in section 3 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867);  
(ii) any publication which is a newspaper published otherwise t han in conformity with the rules 
contained in section 5 of the said Act.  2 
 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, a judicial proceeding — 
(a) is said to be pending — 
(A) in the case of a civil proceeding, when it is instituted by the filing of a plaint  or otherwise,  
(B) in the case of a criminal proceeding under the Code of Criminal                           
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) , or any other law — 
(i) where it relates to the commission of an offence, when the charge -sheet or challan  is 
filed, or when the court issues summons or warrant, as the case may be, against the accused, 
and 
(ii) in any other case, when the court takes cognizance of the matter to which the 
proceeding relates, and  
in the case of a civil or criminal proceeding, shall be deemed to continue to be pending until it is 
heard and finally decided, that is to say, in a case where an appeal or revision is competent, until the 
appeal or revision is heard and finally decided or, where no appeal or revision is preferred, unt il the 
period of limitation prescribed for such appeal or revision has expired;  
(b) which has been heard and finally decided shall not be deemed to be pending merely by reason 
of the fact that proceedings for the execution of the decree, order or sentence passed therein are 
pending.  
4. Fair and accurate report of judicial proceeding not contempt .—Subject to the provisions 
contained in section 7, a person  shall not be guilty of contempt of court for publishing a fair and accurate 
report of a judicial proceed ing or any stage thereof.  
5. Fair criticism of judicial act not contempt .—A person shall not be guilty of contempt of court 
for publishing any fair  comment on the merits of any case which has been heard and finally decided.  
6. Complaint against presiding o fficers of subordinate courts when not contempt .—A person 
shall not be guilty of contempt of  court in respect of any statement made by him in good faith concerning 
the presiding officer of any subordinate court to — 
(a) any other subordinate court, or  
(b) the High Court,  
to which it is subordinate.  
Explanation .—In this section, “subordinate court ” means any court subordinate to a High Court.  
7. Publication of information relating to proceeding s in chambers or in camera  not contempt 
except in certain cases .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a person shall not be guilty 
of contempt of court for publishing a fair and accurate  report of a judicial proceeding before any court 
sitting in chambers or in camera  except in the following cases, that is  to say,— 
(a) where the publication is contrary to the provisions of any enactment for the time being in 
force;  
(b) where the court, on ground s of public policy or in exercise of any power vested in it, expressly 
prohibits the publication of all information relating to the proceeding or of information of the 
description which is published;  
(c) where the court sits in chambers or in camera  for rea sons connected with public order or the 
security of the State, the publication of information relating to those proceedings;  
(d) where the information relates to a secret process, discovery or invention which is an issue in 
proceedings.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), a person shall not be guilty of 
contempt of court for  publishing the text or a fair and accurate summary of the whole , or any part, of an 
order made by a court sitting in chambers or in  camera , unl ess the court has expressly prohibited the 3 
 publication thereof on grounds of public policy, or for reasons connected  with public order or the security 
of the State, or on the ground that it contains information relating to a secret process, discovery  or 
invention, or in exercise of any power vested in it.  
8. Other defences not affected .—Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as implying that 
any other defence  which would have been a valid defence  in any proceedings for contempt of court has 
ceased to be available merely by reason  of the provisions of this Act.  
9. Act not to imply enlargement of scope of contempt .—Nothing contained in this Act shall be 
construed as implying that  any disobedience, b reach, publication or other act is punishable as contempt of 
court which would not be so punishable apart from  this Act.  
10. Power of High Court to punish contempt s of subordinate courts .—Every High Court shall 
have and exercise the same  jurisdiction, powe rs and authority, in accordance with the same procedure and 
practice, in respect of contempt s of courts subordinate  to it as it has and exercises in respect of contempt s 
of itself:  
Provided that no High C ourt shall take cognizance of a contempt alleged to have been committed in 
respect of a court subordinate  to it where such contempt is an offence punishable under the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
11. Power of High Court to try offences committed or offenders found outside jurisdiction .—A 
High Court shall  have  jurisdiction to inquire into or try a contempt of itself or of any court subordinate to 
it, whether the contempt is alleged to have been  committed within or outside the local limits of its 
jurisdiction, and whether the person alleged to be guilty of contempt is within or  outside such limits.  
12. Punishment for contempt of court .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act or in 
any other law, a contempt  of court may be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two  thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that the accused may be discharged or the punishment awarded may be remitted on apology 
being made to the  satisfaction of the Court. 
Explanation. —An apology shall not be r ejected merely on the ground that it is qualified or 
conditional if the accused makes it  bona fide . 
(2) Notwithstanding  anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no court shall impose a 
sentence in excess of  that specified in sub -section ( 1) for any contempt either in respect of itself or of a 
court subordinate to it.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where a person is found guilty  of a civil 
contempt, the court , if it  considers that a fine will not meet the ends of justice and that a sentence of 
imprisonment is necessary shall, instead of sentencing  him to simple imprisonment, direct that he be 
detained in a civil prison for such period not exceeding six months as it may think fit.  
(4) Where the person found guilty o f contempt of court in respect of any undertaking given to a court 
is a company, every  person who, at the time the contempt was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of  business of the company, as well as the comp any, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the contempt and the punishment may be enforced,  with the leave of the court, by 
the detention in civil prison of each such person:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable  to such 
punishment if he proves that  the contempt was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent its commission.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), where the contempt of court referred to 
therein has been committed  by a company and it is proved that the contempt has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect  on the part of, any director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall  also be deemed to 
be guilty of the contempt and the punishment may be enforced, with the leave of the court, by the 
detention in civil  prison of such director, manager, secretary or other officer.  4 
 Explanation. —For the purpose of sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5),— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
1[13. Contempts  not punishable in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law 
for the time being in force, — 
(a) no court shall impose a sentence under this Act for a contempt of court unless it is satisfied 
that the contempt is of such a nature that it s ubstantially interferes, or tends substantially to interfere 
with the due course of justice;  
(b) the court may permit, in any proceeding for contempt of court, justification by truth as a valid 
defence if it is satisfied that it is in public interest and t he request for inv oking the said defence is 
bona  fide.] 
14. Procedure where contempt is in the face of the Supreme Court or a High Court .—(1) When 
it is alleged, or appears to  the Supreme Court or the High Court upon its own view, that a person has been 
guilty of contempt committed in its presence or hearing,  the Court may cause such person to be detained 
in custody, and, at any time before the rising of the Court, on the same day, or as early  as possible 
thereafter, shall — 
(a) cause him to be informed in  writing of the contempt with which he is charged;  
(b) afford him an opportunity to make his defence to the charge;  
(c) after taking such evidence as may be necessary or as may be offered by such person and after 
hearing him, proceed, either forthwith or a fter adjournment, to determine the matter of the charge; 
and 
(d) make such order for the punishment or discharge of such person as may be just.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a person charged with contempt 
under that sub-section  applies, whether orally or in writing, to have the charge against him tried by some 
judge other than the Judge or Judges in whose  presence or hearing the offence is alleged t o have been 
committed, and the C ourt is of opinion that it is practica ble to do so and that  in the interests of proper 
administration of justice the application should be allowed, it shall cause the matter to be placed, 
together  with a statement of the facts of the case, before the Chief Justice for such directions as he may  
think fit to issue as respects the trial  thereof.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, in any trial of a person charged with 
contempt under sub -section ( 1)  which is held, in pursuance of a direction given under sub -section ( 2), by 
a Judge other than the Judge or Judges in whose presence  or hearing the offence is alleged to have been 
committed, it shall not be necessary for the Judge or Judges in whose presence or hearing  the offence is 
alleged to have been committed to appear as a witn ess and the statement placed before the Chief Justice 
under sub -section ( 2) shall be treated as evidence in the case.  
(4) Pending the determination of the charge, the Court may direct that a person charged with 
contempt under this section  shall be detained  in such custody as it may specify:  
Provided that he shall be released on bail, if a bond for such sum of money as the Court thinks 
sufficient is executed with  or without sureties conditioned that the person charged shall attend at the time 
and place menti oned in the bond and shall continue  to so attend until otherwise directed by the Court: 
Provided further that the Court may, if it thinks fit , instead of taking bail from such person, discharge 
him on his executing a  bond without sureties for his attendanc e as aforesaid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2006, s. 2, for section 13 (w.e.f. 17 -3-2006).  5 
 15. Cognizance of criminal contempt in other cases .—(1) In the case of a criminal contempt, other 
than a contempt referred  to in section 14, the Supreme Court or the High Court may take action on its 
own motion or on a motion made by — 
(a) the Advocate -General, or  
(b) any other person, with the consent in writing of the Advocate -General,  1[or] 
1[(c) in relation to the High Court for the Union territory of Delhi, such Law Officer as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, or any other 
person, with the consent in writing of such Law Officer.]  
(2) In the case of any criminal contempt of a subordinate court, the High Court may take action on a 
reference made to  it by the subordinate court or on  a motion made by the Advocate -General or, in relation 
to a Union territory, by such Law Officer  as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf.  
(3) Every motion or reference made under this section shall spe cify the contempt of which the person 
charged is alleged to be guilty.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “Advocate -General” means ,— 
(a) in relation to the Supreme Court, the Attorney -General or the Solicitor -General;  
(b) in relation to the High Court, the Advocate -General of the State or any of the States for which 
the High Court has been established;  
(c) in relation to the court of a Judicial Commissioner, such Law Officer as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, s pecify in this behalf.  
16. Contempt by judge, magistrate or other person acting judicially .—(1) Subject to the 
provisions of any law for the time  being in force, a judge, magistrate or other person acting judicially 
shall also be liable for contempt of his  own court or of any other  court in the same manner as any other 
individual is liable and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any observation s or remarks made by a judge, magistr ate or 
other person acting  judicially, regarding a subordinate court in an appeal or revision pending before such 
judge, magistrate or other person against the  order or judgment of the subordinate court.  
17. Procedure after cognizance .—(1) Notice of every proceeding under section l5 shall be served 
personally on the person  charged, unless the Court for reasons to be recorded directs otherwise.  
(2) The notice shall be accompanied ,— 
(a) in the case of proceedings commenced on a motion, by a copy of the motion as also copies of 
the affidavits, if any, on  which such motion is founded; and  
(b) in case of proceedings commenced on a reference by a subordinate court, by a copy of the 
reference.  
(3) The Court may, if it is satisfied that a person ch arged under section 15 is likely to abscond or keep 
out of the way to  avoid service of the notice, order the attachment of his property of such value or amount 
as it may deem reasonable.  
(4) Every attachment under sub -section ( 3) shall be effected in the m anner provided in the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), for the attachment of property in execution of a decree for payment of 
money, and if, after such attachment, the  person charged appears and shows to the satisfaction of the 
Court that he did not abscond or keep out of the way to avoid  service of the notice, the Court shall order 
the release of his property from attachment upon such terms as to costs or otherwise  as it may think fit.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -3-1976).  6 
 (5) Any person charged with contempt under section 15 may fil e an affidavit in support of his 
defence, and the Court may  determine the matter of the charge either on the affidavits filed or after taking 
such further evidence as may be necessary, and pass  such order as the justice of the case requires.  
18. Hearing of cases of criminal contempt to be by Benches .—(1) Every case of criminal contempt 
under section 15  shall be heard and determined by a Bench of not less than two judges.  
(2) Sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to the Court of a Judicial Commissioner.  
19. Appeals .—(1) An appeal shall lie as of right from any order or decision of the High Court in the 
exercise of its  jurisdiction to punish for contempt — 
(a) where  the order or decision is that of a single judge, to a Bench of not less than two judges of 
the Court; 
(b) where the order or decision is that of a Bench, to the Supreme Court:  
Provided that where the order or decision is that of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner in any 
Union territory, such  appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court.  
(2) Pending any appeal, the appellate Court may order that — 
(a) the execution of the punishment or order appealed against be suspended;  
(b) if the appellant is in confinement,  he be released on bail; and  
(c) the appeal be heard notwithstanding that the appellant has not purged his contempt.  
(3) Where any person aggrieved by any order against which an appeal may be filed satisfies the High 
Court that he intends  to prefer an appe al, the High Court may also exercise all or any of the powers 
conferred by sub -section ( 2). 
(4) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed — 
(a) in the case of an appeal to a Bench of the High Court, within thirty days;  
(b) in the case of an appeal to t he Supreme Court, within sixty days,  
from the date of the order appealed against.  
20. Limitation for actions for contempt .—No court shall initiate any proceedings of contempt, 
either on its own motion  or otherwise, after the expiry of a period of one year from the date on which the 
contempt is alleged to have been committed.  
21. Act not to apply to Nyaya Panchayats  or other village courts .—Nothing contained in this Act 
shall apply in relation to  contempt of Nyaya Panchayats  or other village courts, by whate ver name 
known, for the administration of justice, established under  any law.  
22. Act to be in addition to, and not in derogation of, other laws relating to contempt .—The 
provisions of this Act shall be  in addition to, and not in derogation of , the provisi ons of any other law 
relating to contempt of courts.  
23. Power of Supreme Court and High Courts to make rules .—The Supreme Court or, as the case 
may be, any High Court, may  make rules, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, providing for 
any matter relating to its procedure.  
24. Repeal .—The Contempt of Courts Act, 1952 (32 of 1952), is hereby repealed.  
--------------------------The Delhi Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1971--------------------------
1 THE DELHI SIKH GURDWARAS ACT, 1971  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PART I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
THE COMMITTEE  
3. Incorporation of the Committee.  
4. Composition of the Committee.  
5. Term of office.  
6. Delimitation of wards.  
7. Electoral roll.  
8. Qualifications of elector.  
9. Right to vote.  
10. Qualifications of member.  
11. Elections . 
12. Publication of results.  
13. Director Gurdwara Elections.  
14. First meeting of the elected membe rs. 
15. First meeting of the Committee.  
16. Election of office bearers.  
16A.  Power to convene another meeting for election of office -bearers . 
17. Vacation, resignation an d removal of members and office -bearers.  
18. Fees and allowances of members.  
19. Meeti ngs of the Committee and the Executive Board.  
20. Sub -committees.  
21. Powers of the Executive Board and its office -bearers.  
22. Validity of acts of Committee, Executive Board or sub -committees not to be questioned by reason 
of vacancy, etc.  
23. Officers and other employees of the Committee.  
PART III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
24. Powers and functions of the Committee.  
PART IV  
GURDWARA  FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
25. Gurdwara Fund.  
26. Prohibition regarding making of contributions for political purposes.  
27. Budget.  
28. Maintenance of accounts.  
29. Audit of Accounts.  2 SECTIONS  
30. Consideration of the auditor ’s report by the Committee.  
PART V  
SETTLEMENT OF ELECTIONS AND OTHER DISPUTES  
31. Election disputes, electoral offences etc.  
32. Jurisdiction  of District Court in other matters.  
33. Appeals.  
PART VI  
MISCELANEOUS  
34. Procedure for affiliation of local Gurdwaras.  
35. Act not to affect rites and practices of Sikh religion.  
36. Members, officers and other employees to be public servants.  
37. Salary, etc., of the Director Gurdwara Elections to be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India in the first instance.  
38. Protection of action taken.  
39. Power to make rules.  
40. Power of Committee to make regulations.  
41. Repeal and Saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . 3 THE DELHI SIKH GURDWARAS ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 82 OF 1971  
[30th December , 1971 .] 
An Act to provide for the proper management of the Sikh Gurdwaras and Gurdwara property in 
Delhi and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Sikh Gurdwaras 
Act, 1971.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act,  unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act shall come into force;  
(b) “Board ” means the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Board constituted under section 3 of the Delhi Sikh 
Gurdwaras (Management) Act, 1971 (24 of 1971);  
(c) “Committee ” means the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee established under             
section 3;  
(d) “Delhi ” means the Union territory of Delhi;  
(e) “Director Gurdwara Elections ” means the Director Gurdwara Elections appointed by the 
Central Government under section 13;  
(f) “Gurdwaras ” means the Sikh Gurdwaras situated in Delhi as were, immediately before the 
appointed day, being managed by or affiliated to the Board and includes such other local Gurdwaras 
as may, after the appointed day, be affiliated to or managed by the Committee;  
(g) “Gurdwara property ” means,— 
(i) all movable and immovable property which, im mediately before the appointed day, vested 
or was kept in deposit in the name of the Board;  
(ii) all property which stands in the name of the Gurdwaras or in the name of the Board or the 
present or old managers of the historic Gurdwaras;  
(iii) all offerings in cash or kind made in various Gurdwaras or institutions managed or 
controlled by the Committee;  
(iv) all property in cash or kind, movable as well as immovable that may be acquired by 
purchase, exchange or otherwise by the Gurdwaras, or the Com mittee, from time to time;  
(v) all grants, donations or contributions made, from time to time, by any person or authority 
to the Gurdwaras or the Committee,  
and includes any actionable claim with respect to such Gurdwara property;  
(h) “local Gurdwara ” mean s a Gurdwara in Delhi, other than a Gurdwara under the control or 
management of the Board immediately before the appointed day;  
                                                           
1. 7th April, 1972, vide notification No. G.S.R. 2 41(E) , dated 7th April , 1972, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 ( i). 4 (i) a person shall not be deemed to be “ordinarily resident ” in a ward on the ground only that he 
owns or is in possession of a dwelling -house therein and a person absenting himself temporarily from 
his place of ordinary residence shall not by reason thereof cease to be ordinarily resident therein;  
(j) “patit” mean s a Sikh who trims or shaves his beard or hair ( keshas ) or who after taking Amrit  
commits any one or more of the four Kurahitis ; 
(k) “registered Singh Sabha ” means a Singh Sabha registered as a society under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860 ), which is managing or controlling a local Gurdwara in Delhi;  
(l) “regulation ” means a regulation made under this Act by the Committee;  
(m) “rule” means a rule made under this Act by the Central Government;  
(n) “Sikh” means a person who professes the Sikh religion, believes and follows the teachings of 
Sri Guru Granth Sahib and the ten Gurus only and keeps unshorn hair ( Keshas ). For the purposes of  if 
any question arises as to whether any living person is or is not a S ikh, he shall be deemed respectively 
to be or not to be a Sikh according as he makes or refuses to make in the manner prescribed by ru les 
the following declaration: — 
“I solemnly affirm that I am a Keshadhari  Sikh, that I believe in and follow the teachings  of Sri 
Guru Granth Sahib and the ten Gurus only, and that I have no other religion. ”; 
(o) “Amritdhari  Sikh” means and includes every Sikh who has taken Khande ka Amrit  or Khanda 
Pahul , prepared and administered according to the tenets of Sikh religion and  rites at the hands of five 
Pyaras  or “beloved ones ”. 
PART II  
THE COMMITTEE  
3. Incorporation of the Committee .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established a Committee to be called 
the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management Committee for the proper management and control of the 
Gurdwaras and Gurdwara property.  
(2) The Committee shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession 
and a common seal and shall by such name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Committee shall have its head office in Delhi.  
4. Composition of the Committee .—The Committee shall consist of — 
(a) forty -six members to be elected from various wards into which Delhi shall be divided in  
accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
(b) nine members to be co -opted by the elected members of the Committee referred to in                 
clause ( a) in the  manner hereinafter appearing, — 
(i) two members to represent the registered Singh Sabhas of  Delhi who shall be chosen by 
drawing of lots out of the Presidents of those registered Singh Sabhas;  
(ii) four members, each being the head priest of the ( 1) Sri Akal Takhat Sahib, Amritsar,               
(2) Sri Takhat Kesgarh Sahib, Anandpur, ( 3) Sri Ta khat Patna Sahib, Patna, and ( 4) Sri Takhat 
Hazur Sahib, Nanded:  
Provided that the head priest shall have no right to vote for the purpose of election of               
office -bearers and other members of the Executive Board under sub -section ( 1) and sub -section 
(2) of section 16;  
(iii) one member, being the nominee of the Shromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, 
Amritsar;  
(iv) two members to represent the Sikh community of Delhi, other than those referred to in 
sub-clause ( i), sub -clause ( ii) and sub -clause (iii), to be chosen in accordance with the system of 
proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote.  5 5. Term of office .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office o f a member of 
the Committee shall be four years and shall commence from the date on which the first meeting of the 
Committee is held under section 15, and no longer.  
(2) When a vacancy occurs in the Committee owing to death, resignation, removal or otherwis e of a 
member, a new member shall be elected or co -opted, as the case may be, in the manner in which the 
member whose seat is to be filled was elected or co -opted and every such member shall continue to hold 
office so long only as the member in whose place  he is elected or co -opted would have been entitled to 
hold office, if the vacancy had not occurred.  
(3) An outgoing member shall continue in office until the notification of election or co -option of his 
successor is published under section 12.  
6. Delimita tion of wards .—(1) For the purpose of election of members of the Committee, Delhi shall 
be divided into single member wards.  
(2) The Director Gurdwara Elec tions shall by order determine — 
(a) the number of wards; and  
(b) the extent of each ward.  
(3) The Director Gurdwara Elections may, from time to time, in consultation with the Committee, 
alter or amend any order made under sub -section ( 2). 
7. Electoral roll .—(1) An electoral roll shall be prepared in such manner as may be prescribed by 
rules for every ward notified under section 6 on which shall be entered the names of all persons entitled to 
be registered as voters in that ward.  
(2) No person shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for any ward more than once.  
(3) No person shall be en titled to be registered in the electoral roll for more than one ward.  
8. Qualifications of elector .—Every person who — 
(a) has been ordinarily resident in a ward for not less than one hundred and eighty days during the 
qualifying period,  
(b) is a Sikh of not less than twenty -one years of age on the qualifying date,  
shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that ward:  
Provided that no person shall be  registered as an elector who — 
(a) trims or shaves his beard or keshas ; 
(b) smokes;  
(c) takes alcoholic drinks.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, the “qualifying date ” and the “qualifying period ”— 
(i) in the case of electoral rolls first prepared under this Act, shall be the 1st day of January, 1972, 
and the period beginning on the 1st day of January, 1971 and ending on the 31st day of                 
December, 1971, respectively; and  
(ii) in the case of every electoral roll subsequently prepared under this Act, shall be the 1st day of 
January of the year in which it is prepared a nd the year immediately preceding that year respectively.  
9. Right to vote .—Every person registered on the electoral roll for the time being in force for any 
ward for the election of a member of the Committee, shall be entitled while so registered to vote at an 
election of a member for that ward, provided that no person shall be entitled to vote at an election in more 
than one ward.  
10. Qualifications of member .—(1) A person shall not be qualified to be chosen or co -opted as a 
member of the Committee if  such person — 
(a) has not attained the age of twenty -five years;  6 (b) is not a citizen of India;  
(c) in the case of an elected member, if he is not registered as an elector in the electoral roll for 
any ward;  
(d) is not an Amritdhari  Sikh;  
(e) being an Amri tdhari  Sikh, trims or shaves his beard or keshas ; 
(f) takes alcoholic drinks;  
(g) smokes;  
(h) is a patit; 
(i) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  
(j) is an undischarged insolvent;  
(k) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude or has been dismissed from 
service by Government, Board, Committee or any local authority, on account of moral turpitude;  
(l) is a paid servant of any Gurdwara or a local Gurdwara;  
(m) not being a blind person cannot 1[read and write ] Gurmu khi. 
Explanation .—A person shall be deemed to — 
(i) be able to read Gurmukhi  if he is able to recite Sri Guru  Granth Sahib, in Gurmukhi , and  
(ii) write Gurmukhi  if he fills his nomination paper for election to the Committee in Gurmukhi  in 
his own handwriting.  
If any question arises whether a candidate is or is not able to read and write Gurmukhi , the question 
shall be decided in such manner as may be 2[prescribed by rule s]. 
(2) If a person sits or votes as a member of the Committee when  he knows that he is not qualified for 
such membership, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of 
three hundred rupees which shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.  
11. Elections .—Election of members under clause ( a) of section 4 whether for the purpose of initial 
constitution of the Committee under section 3, or for filling vacancies arising by efflux of time or a casual 
vacancy, shall be conducted by the Director Gurdwara Elections in accordance with  the rules made in this 
behalf:  
Provided that no election shall be held to fill a casual vacancy occurring within four months prior to 
the holding of a general election under this section.  
12. Publication of results .—(1) The names of all persons elected as  members of the Committee 
shall, as soon as may be, after such election be published by the Director Gurdwara Elections in the 
manner prescribed by rules.  
(2) The names of all persons co -opted as members under clause ( b) of section 4 shall likewise be 
published by the Director Gurdwara Elections in the manner prescribed by rules.  
13. Director Gurdwara Elections .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint a suitable person to be the Director Gurdwara Elections in whom sh all vest the 
superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, 
elections of members of the Committee.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Director Gurdwara Elections unless he is a 
citizen of India and possesses judicial or administrative experience for a period of not less than ten years.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1974, s. 2, for “read or write” (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974).  
2. Subs. by  s. 2, ibid., for “prescribed by regulations ” (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974).  7 (3) Subject to the provisions of section 37, the term of office, and the terms and conditions of service 
of the Director Gurdwara Elections shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.  
14. First meeting of the elected members .—(1) The persons to be co -opted as members of the 
Committee under clause ( b), of section 4 shall be chosen at the first meeting of the elected members 
which shall be convened by the Director Gurdwara Elections as early as possible and not later than fifteen 
days after publication of the results of the election under sub -section ( 1) of section 12.  
(2) The Director Gurdwara Elections may adjourn the first meeting of the elected members to any 
other date or dates, being not later than fifteen days from the date of the first meeting aforesaid, if the 
elected members are unable to choose  all persons to be co -opted at that first meeting.  
15. First meeting of the Committee .—(1) The Director Gurdwara Elections shall summon the first 
meeting of the Committee to meet on such date, not being later than fifteen days after the publication of 
the names of the members co -opted under sub -section ( 2) of section 12, as he thinks fit.  
(2) The first meeting shall be held at such time and place as the Director Gurdwara Elections may 
appoint and shall be presided by him:  
Provided that while so presiding at  the meeting of the Committee, the Director Gurdwara Elections 
shall have no right to vote.  
(3) Every member of the Committee shall, before taking his seat make and subscribe before the 
Director Gurdwara Elections an oath according to the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule.  
(4) The members of the Committee shall proceed thereafter to elect from amongst themselves a                
pro tempore  Chairman in such manner as may be prescribed by rules, who shall preside at the meeting 
until the Committee elects the President.  
16. Election of office bearers .—(1) The Committee shall, at its first meeting after the election of the 
pro tempore  Chairman under sub -section ( 4) of section 15, elect from amongst its members a President, 
who shall conduct the election of other office -bearers and members of the Executive Board under this 
section.  
(2) The Committee shall also at its first meeting elect from amon gst its members a Senior                       
Vice -President, Junior Vice -President, General Secretary and a Joint Secretary (hereinafter referred to as 
office -bearers of the Committee), and shall also at the same meeting in like manner elect ten of its 
members to be members of the Executive Board of the Committee, and the office -bearers and members so 
elected shall be the Executive Board of the Committee.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(4) No member of the Committee shall, at the same time, hold any of the offices referred to in                  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) in more than one capacity.  
(5) The President and other members of the Executive Board elected under sub -section  (1) or          
sub-section ( 2) shall hold office for a term of one year but shall be eligible for re -election for one more 
term only:  
Provided that an outgoing office -bearer or member shall continue in office until election of his 
successor is held.  
(6) The election of the President and other office -bearers and members of the Executive Board under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or any subsequent annual election to any of those offices shall be held 
in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.  
(7) The  provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 5 shall apply so far as may be to the filling of a casual 
vacancy in the 2[office of the President, any other office -bearer or member of the Executive Board ] as 
they apply in relation to casual vacancies in the mem bership of the Committee.  
                                                           
1. Sub-section ( 3) omitted by Act 6 of 1981, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -1-1961).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1974, s. 3, for “ membership of the Executive Board ” (w.e.f. 2 3-9-1974). 8 1[16A.  Power to convene another meeting for election of office -bearers .—If the Committee at its 
first meeting is unable to elect a pro tempore  Chairman or a President or any other office -bearer or 
member of the Executive Board under sub -section ( 4) of section 15 or sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) 
of section 16, the Director Gurdwara Elections shall summon another meeting of the Committee, bei ng 
not later than fifteen days from the date of the first meeting, for the election of the pro tempore  Chairman, 
the President or the remaining office -bearers or members of the Executive Board, as the case may be.  
(2) The provisions of sections 15 and 16 s hall, so far as may be, apply to the conduct of election 
under sub -section ( 1).] 
17. Vacation, resignation and removal of members and office -bearers .—(1) A member of the 
Committee may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the President.  
(2) An office -bearer or any other  member of the Executive Board — 
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Committee;  
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed to the Committee resign his office; and  
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Committee passed by a three -fourth 
majority of the total members thereof:  
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause ( c) shall be moved unless it is supported by not 
less than seventeen members of the Commi ttee and fourteen days ’ notice has been given of their intention 
to move the resolution.  
(3) The resignation of office under sub -section ( 1) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) shall be effective 
from the date from which it is accepted by the Executive Board or the Committee, as the case may be.  
18. Fees and allowances of members .—Any office -bearer or other member of the Executive Board 
or any other member of the Committee may, if he so desires, draw such fees and allowances for attending 
the meetings of the E xecutive Board or the Committee and for attending to any other work of the 
Executive Board or the Committee, as the case may be, as may be prescribed by regulations.  
19. Meetings of the Committee and the Executive Board .—(1) The annual general meeting of the 
Committee shall be held in every year.  
(2) The Executive Board shall meet at least once in every fortnight or at such intervals as may be 
prescribed by regulations.  
(3) The President, or in his absence the Senior Vice -President and in the absence of bo th, the Junior 
Vice -President, and in the absence of all the three, any other member elected from amongst themselves 
shall preside at any meeting of the Committee or of the Executive Board.  
(4) The Committee or the Executive Board shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to 
transaction of the business at its meetings as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided, all questions which come up before any meeting of the Committee or 
the Executive Board shall be decided by a majority  of votes of the members present and voting and in the 
event of equality of votes, the person presiding shall have a second or casting vote.  
(6) All proceedings of the meetings of the Committee or the Executive Board shall be recorded in 
Punjabi in Gurmukh i script.  
20. Sub-committees .—(1) The Executive Board may constitute such number of sub -committees from 
amongst the members of the Committee as it thinks fit and for such purpose as it may decide.  
(2) A sub -committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall  meet at such time and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
prescribed by regulations.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1974, s. 4 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974).  9 (3) A member of a sub -committee may, if he so desires, draw such fees and allowances for a ttending 
its meetings and for attending to any other work of the sub -committee, as may be prescribed by 
regulations.  
21. Powers of the Executive Board and its office -bearers .—(1) The Executive Board shall exercise 
on behalf of the Committee all powers conf erred on the Committee by the provisions of this Act which 
are not expressly reserved to be exercised by the Committee in general meeting.  
(2) The President or any other office -bearer of the Executive Board may exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be prescribed by regulations or as may, from time to time, be delegated by the 
Executive Board.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the President may, on 
his own motion or otherwise, after calling the record  of any case, revise any order passed by any authority 
to whom such powers have been delegated by the Executive  Board and — 
(i) confirm, modify or set aside the order,  
(ii) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, confirm or enhance the penalty imposed upon  any 
employee of the Committee,  
(iii) remit the case to the authority which made the order or to any other authority directing such 
further action or inquiry as considered proper in the circumstances of the case, or  
(iv) pass such other orders as he deems fit. 
(4) No order passed by the President under sub -section ( 3) shall be enforced unless and until it is 
confirmed by the Executive Board.  
22. Validity of acts of Committee, Executive Board or sub -committees not to be questioned by 
reason of vacancy, etc. —No act or proceeding of the Committee or the Executive Board or any                     
sub-committee shall be invalidated by reason only of the existence of any vacancy amongst its members 
or any defect in the constitution thereof.  
23. Officers and other e mployees of the Committee .—(1) The Committee may appoint such 
number of officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its 
functions, and may, from time to time, determine the number, designations, grades and scales  of pay or 
other remuneration of the officers and other employees, and may at any time reduce, suspend, remove or 
dismiss or impose any other penalty on any officer or other employee for carelessness, unfitness, neglect 
of duty or other misconduct.  
(2) The  officers and other employees appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be prescribed by regulations or as may, from time to time, be delegated by the 
Committee.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the  officers and other employees shall be such as may be 
prescribed by regulations.  
PART III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
24. Powers and functions of the Committee .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder, the control, dir ection and general superintendence over all the Gurdwaras and Gurdwara 
property in Delhi shall vest in the Committee, and it shall be the duty  of the Committee — 
(i) to arrange for the proper performance of the religious rites and ceremonies in the Gurdwara s, 
(ii) to provide facilities for worship by the devotees at the Gurdwaras,  
(iii) to ensure safe custody of its funds, movable and immovable properties, deposits, offerings in 
cash or kind,  
(iv) to do all such things as may be incidental and conducive to the efficient management of the 
affairs of Gurdwaras, educational and other institutions under the Committee and their properties or 
to the convenience of devotees,  10 (v) to provide suitable accommodation and facilities for pilgrims,  
(vi) to maintain free langars , 
(vii) to manage the historic and other Gurdwaras, educational and other institutions and their 
properties in such a way as to make them inspiring centres of the Sikh tradition, culture and religion,  
(viii) to ensure maintenance of order, discipline and proper hygienic conditions in Gurdwaras, 
educational and other institutions under its management,  
(ix) to open free dispensaries,  
(x) to spread education, especially the knowledge of Punjabi , in Gurmukhi  script,  
(xi) to establish educational institutions, research centres and libraries.  
(xii) to render financial assistance to religious and educational institutions, societies and needy 
persons,  
(xiii) to give stipends to needy and deserving students,  
(xiv) to render help in the case of the uplift of the Sikh community and propagation of Sikh 
religion,  
(xv) to perform such other functions and to do such religious or charitable acts, as may be 
prescribed by regulations for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
PART IV  
GURDWARA  FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
25. Gurdwara Fund .—(1) There shall be a Gurdwara Fund and all receipts and income of the 
Gurdwaras and of the Gurdwara property (including all amounts comprised for the time being in 
Gurdwara property) shall be credited thereto.  
(2) The Gurdwara Fund shall be held by the Committee in trust for the purposes of this Act subject to 
the provisions herein contained and shall not be utilised for any purpose other than the one authorised by 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(3) All ex penses incurred or payments or disbursements to be made, by the Committee in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act shall be made from the Gurdwara Fund.  
26. Prohibition regarding making of contributions for political purposes .—Nothing contained in 
this Act shall, or shall be deemed to authorise the Committee to co ntribute any amount or amounts — 
(a) to any political party, or  
(b) for the benefit of any political party, or  
(c) for any political purpose to any individual or body.  
27. Budget .—(1) In respect of every financial year, budget (annual financial statement) of the 
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Committee for the year shall be placed before the Committee 
and duly passed.  
(2) No moneys out of the Gurdwara Fund shall be appropriated except as passed and approved by the 
Committee.  
28. Maintenance of accounts .—(1) The Committee shall maintain proper accounts showing receipts 
on account of and expenditure out of Gurdwara Fund.  
(2) At the end of each calendar month, a statement of income and expenditure relating to that month 
shall be  prepared and placed before the  Committee and it shall be pasted at prominent places outside all 
Gurdwaras; and a consolidated annual statement, showing income and expenditure relating to a financial 
year shal l likewise be prepared and placed before the Committee and outside the Gurdwaras at the end of 
each financial year.  11 29. Audit of Accounts .—(1) The accounts of the Committee including those of the Gurdwaras, and 
Gurdwara property including educational and o ther charitable institutions administered by the Committee, 
shall be audited by one or more auditors duly qualified to act as auditor under sub -section ( 1) of                
section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) (hereinafter referred to as the  auditor), who shall be 
appointed by the Committee within sixty days of the  close of every financial year and shall receive such 
remuneration as the Committee may fix:  
Provided that the first appointment of auditors shall be made by the Committee within si xty days 
from the date of its first meeting held under section 15.  
(2) For the purpose of any such audit and examination of accounts the auditors may, by a demand in 
writing, require from the Committee or any office -bearer or member or employee of the Committee or 
any Gurdwara, educational or other institution of the Committee, the production before him of all books, 
deeds, vouchers and all other documents and papers which he deems necessary, and may require any 
person holding or accountable for any suc h books, deeds, vouchers, documents and papers to appear 
before him at any audit and examination, to answer all questions which may be put to him with respect to 
the same or to prepare and submit any further statement which such auditor may consider necess ary. 
(3) Within thirty days after the audit and examination have been completed, the auditor shall submit a 
report to the Committee upon each account audited and examined.  
(4) The audit report shall be published in, at least two daily papers of Delhi (one in English and one in 
Punjabi) as well as in Gurdwara Journal, if any, within thirty days of its receipt.  
(5) The report of the auditor shall, among other matters, specify all items of expenditure which in his 
opinion are illegal, irregular or improper, al l cases of failure of recoveries of money or property due to the 
Committee, all instances of loss or wasteful expenditure of money or property due to negligence or 
misconduct and all instances in which any money or property has been devoted to any purpose not 
authori sed by this Act.  
30. Consideration of the auditor ’s report by the Committee .—The Committee, in meeting next 
following the  date of receipt of the auditor’ s report, shall consider such report and satisfy itself that no 
expenditure shown therein has been incurred otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and shall pass such orders as are, in its opinion, necessary and proper to rectify the illegal, unauthorised or 
improper expenditure and may also pass such further orders upon t he report, as it may deem proper:  
Provided that if the next meeting falls on a day earlier than two months after the receipt of the report 
it may be considered in the meeting next following which shall be convened before the expiry of a period 
of three mon ths from the date of receipt of the said report.  
PART V  
SETTLEMENT OF ELECTIONS AND OTHER DISPUTES  
31. Election disputes, electoral offences , etc.—The provisions of sections 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 
23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29 and 30 of the Delhi Municipal C orporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957), shall mutatis 
mutandis  apply, subject to such modifications as the Central Government may by order direct, in relation 
to settlement of disputes regarding elections, corrupt practices and electoral offences in respect of election 
or co -option of members of the Committee.  
32. Jurisdiction of District Court in other matters .—The Court of the District Judge in Delhi shall 
also have jurisdiction in respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(c) Petitions regarding complaints, irregularities, breach of trust, mismanagement in any 
Gurdwara, educational or other institutions against any member, office -bearer or officer or other 
employee of the Committee.  
(d) Petitions arising out of any type of disputes betwe en the Committee and its employees 
including past employees.  
                                                           
1. Clause s (a) and ( b) omitted by Act 46 of 1974, s. 5 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974) .  12 (e) Applications regarding failure of publication of, or non -implementation or non -clearance of 
the objections raised in, any annual report of the auditors of the Committee.  
33. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the District Judge may, within sixty 
days of the order, prefer an appeal to the High Court at Delhi and the orders of the High Court on such 
appeal shall be final and conclusive.  
(2) The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, so far as may 
be, apply to appeals under this section.  
PART VI  
MISCELANEOUS  
34. Procedure for affiliation of local Gurdwaras .—(1) A registered Singh Sabha may, in relation to 
any local Gurdwara under its control, decide by a resolution adopted by three -fourth majority of its total 
membership for affiliating that local Gurdwara to the Committee and if the Committee consents thereto, 
the said local Gurdwara shall be deemed to be affiliated to the Committee.  
(2) All assets and liabilities of the local Gurdwara so affiliated and of the registered Singh Sabha shall 
thereafter vest in the Committee.  
35. Act not to affect rites and practices of Sikh religion .—Nothing contained in this Act or any 
other law for  the time being in force shall — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, 
affect any honour, emolument or perquisite to which any person is entitled by custom or otherwise in 
any Gurdwara;  
(b) authorise an y interference with the religious or spiritual functions performed in any 
Gurdwara.  
36. Members, officers and other employees to be public servants .—Every member of the 
Committee, the Executive Board, or any sub -committee, the Director Gurdwara Elections a nd every other 
officer and employee of the Committee shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
37. Salary, etc., of the Director Gurdwara Elections to be defrayed out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India in the first instance .—(1) The salaries and allowances payable to the Director Gurdwara 
Elections or to the officers and other employees engaged for the conduct of elections to the Committee, 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India in the first instance, but shall be recoverable from 
the Committee by debit to the Gurdwara Fund after the close of each financial year.  
(2) Any sum due to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall, if not paid within three 
months after the demand has been made, be recoverable as arrears of land revenue.  
38. Protection of action taken .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any 
member of the Committee, the Executive Board or any sub -committee, the Director Gurdwara Elections 
or any other officer or employee of the Committee for anything which is in good faith d one or intended to 
be done under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder.  
39. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for or regulate all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the manner in which a declaration for the purpose of clause ( n) of section 2 shall be made;  
1[(aa) the manner and the criterion for deciding whether a candidate for election as a member of 
the Committee is able to read and write Gurmukhi ;] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1974, s. 6 (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974).  13 (b) the particulars to be entered in the electoral rolls;  
(c) the preliminary publication of electoral rolls;  
(d) the manner in which and the time within which claims and objections as to entries in electoral 
rolls may be preferred;  
(e) the manner in which notices of claims or objections shall be published;  
(f) the place, date and time at which claims or objections s hall be heard and the manner in which 
claims or objections shall be heard and disposed of;  
(g) the final publication of electoral rolls;  
(h) the revision and correction of electoral rolls and inclusion of names therein;  
(i) the appointment of returning officers, assistant returning Officers, Presiding officers and 
polling officers for the conduct of elections;  
(j) the nomination of candidates, form of nomination papers, objections to nominations and 
scrutiny of nominations;  
(k) the deposits to be made by  candidates, time and manner of making such deposits and the 
circumstances under which such deposits may be refunded to candidates or forfeited to the 
Committee ; 
(l) the withdrawal of candidatures;  
(m) the appointment of agents of candidates;  
(n) the proce dure in contested and uncontested elections;  
(o) the date, time and place for poll and other matters relating to the conduct of elections 
including — 
(i) the appointment of polling stations for each ward,  
(ii) the hours during which the polling station shall be kept open for the casting of votes,  
(iii) the printing and issue of ballot papers,  
(iv) the checking of voters by reference to the electoral roll,  
(v) the marking with indelible ink of the left forefinger or any other finger or limb of the voter 
and prohibition of the delivery of any ballot paper to any person if at the time such person applies 
for such paper he has already such mark so as to prevent personati on of voters,  
(vi) the manner in which votes are to be given and in particular in the case  of illiterate voters 
or of voters under physical or other disability,  
(vii) the procedure to be followed in respect of challenging votes and tendered votes,  
(viii) the scrutiny of votes, counting of votes, the declaration of the results and the procedure 
in case of equality of votes or in the event of a member being elected to represent more than one 
ward,  
(ix) the custody and disposal of papers relating to elections,  
(x) the suspension of polls in case of any interruption by riot, violence or any other su fficient 
cause and the holding of a fresh poll,  
(xi) the holding of a fresh poll in the case of destruction of, or tampering with, ballot boxes 
before the count,  
(xii) the countermanding of the poll in the case of the death of a candidate before the poll;  
(p) the fee to be paid on an election petition;  
(q) the terms and conditions of service of the Director Gurdwara Elections;  14 (r) the procedure for the election of pro tempore  Chairman under sub -section ( 4) of section 15, 
and of the President and other office -bearers and members of the Executive Board under section 16;  
(s) any other matter in respect of which the Central Government deems it necessary to make rules 
under this section or in respect of which this Act makes no provision or makes insufficient  provision 
and provision is, in the opinion of the Central Government, necessary;  
(t) the manner in which results of election or co -option of members of the Committee shall be 
published, or the orders made under the rules shall be widely made known by affi xing copies thereof 
in conspicuous public places, by publishing the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in local 
newspapers.  
(3) In making any rule under this section the Central Government may provide that any contravention 
thereof shall be punishabl e with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or 
with both.  
(4) All rules made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after they are made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one 
session or in 1[two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, ] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rules or both Houses agree that the rules should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under those rules.  
40. Power of Committee to make regulations .—(1) The Committee may make regulations not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder for carrying out its functions 
under this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
2*  *   *   *   * 
(b) fees and allowances to which office -bearers and other members of the Executive Board or 
other members of the Committee or of a sub -committee shall be entitled for attending meetings or any 
other work of the Executive Board, Committee or sub -committee respectively;  
(c) the periods of interval at which meetings  of the Executive Board shall be held, the manner in 
which meetings of the Committee or the Executive Board or any sub -committee shall be convened, 
the quorum for the transaction of business thereat and the rules of procedure to be followed for 
transaction  of business at meetings of the Committee, the Executive Board or any sub -committee;  
(d) the manner in which a majority decision of the Executive Board shall be obtained by 
circulation to its office -bearers and members of any matter requiring decision;  
(e) the matters in respect of which powers may be exercised or duties performed by the President 
or other office -bearers of the Executive Board or by any officer or other employee of the Committee;  
(f) the terms and conditions of service of officers and other  employees of the Committee 
including recruitment, transfer, fixation of seniority, promotion of, and disciplinary action or 
punishment against, such officers and other employees;  
(g) any other functions or religious or charitable acts which, in addition t o those specified in 
section 24, may be performed or done by the Committee, and the conditions and restrictions subject 
to which those functions or acts shall be performed or done;  
(h) the manner in which cash or other moneys of the Gurdwara Fund shall be deposited or 
invested;  
(i) the form in which the budget of the Committee shall be presented;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1974, s. 6, for certain words  (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974).  
2. Clause ( a) omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -9-1974).  15 (j) the form in which the accounts of the Committee shall be maintained and the publication of 
such accounts;  
(k) the manner in which any regulations or orders mad e thereunder shall be published or widely 
made known by affixing copies thereof in conspicuous public places, by publishing the same by beat 
of drum or by advertisement in local newspapers;  
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
1[(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessio ns, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation. ] 
41. Repeal a nd Saving .—(1) As from the date of the establishment of the Committee, the Delhi Sikh 
Gurdwaras (Management) Act, 1971 (24 of 1971), shall stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) any appointment, notification, order or rule made or issued under the said Act shall, in so far 
as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force and be deemed to have been 
made or issued under the provisions of this Act unless and until it is superseded by any appointment, 
notification, order or rule made or issued under the said provisions;  
(b) all budget estimates made, all obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into 
and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Board shall be  
deemed to have been made, incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for the 
Committee under the provisions of this Act;  
(c) all Gurdwara property, movable and immovable and all interests of whatsoever nature and 
kind therein vested in, belo nging or due to, the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Board, immediately before such 
establishment, shall, with all rights, powers and privileges of whatsoever description, used, enjoyed or 
possessed by the Board, vest in the Committee;  
(d) all sums of money including rents due to the Board immediately before such establishment 
shall be deemed to be due to the Committee;  
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been instituted by or 
against the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Board may be continued o r instituted by or against the Committee;  
(f) any will deed or other instrument which contains any bequest, gifts or trusts in favour of the 
Board shall as from such establishment, be construed as if the Committee were therein named instead 
of the said Boa rd. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  16 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 15( 3)] 
FORM OF OATH 
I, AB, having been elected (or co -opted) a member of the Delhi Sikh Gurdwara Management 
Committee do swear in the presence of Sri Guru Granth Sahib that I will faithfully, honestly and 
conscientiously discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter in the best interest of the Sikh religion.  
 
--------------------------The Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE EMERGENCY RISKS (GOODS) INSURANCE ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 50 OF 1971  
[10th December, 1971 .] 
An Act to make certain provisions for the insurance of goods in India against damage arising 
from emergency risks and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the  Republic of India as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the Emergency Risks (Goods) 
Insurance Act, 1971.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall remain in force during the period of operation of the Proclamation of Emergency issued by 
the President under clause (1) of article 352 of the Constitution of India on the 3rd day of December, 
1971, and for such further per iod as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be the period of emergency for the purposes of this Act, but its expiry shall not affect anything 
done or omitted to be done before such expiry and section 6 of the Gene ral Clauses                               
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall apply upon the expiry of this Act as if it had been repealed by  a Central Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “emergency risks ” means such ris ks arising from, — 
(i) action taken by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy or in repelling an 
imagined attack by an enemy;  
(ii) any explosion or fire which involves explosives or munitions or other dangerous things 
required for the purposes of defence against any action of an enemy and which happens or is 
caused by, through, or in connection with, the manufacture, storage or transportation of any such 
explosives, munitions or other dangerous things;  
(iii) measures taken under proper authority to  avoid the spreading of or otherwise to mitigate, 
the consequences of damage occurring (whether accidentally or not) as a direct result of any such 
action as is described in sub -clause ( i) or of any such explosion or fire as is described in           
sub-clause ( ii); 
(iv) precautionary or preparatory measures taken under proper authority with a view to 
preventing or hindering the carrying out of any attack by an enemy, being measures involving a 
substantial degree of risk to property;  
(v) precautionary or p reparatory measures involving the doing of work on land and taken 
under proper authority in any way in anticipation of enemy action, being measures involving a 
substantial degree of risk to property;  
(vi) precautionary or preparatory measures taken under p roper authority with a view to 
denying facilities to an enemy, being measures involving a substantial degree of damage to or 
diminution of value of property;  
(b) “enemy” means— 
(i) any person or country committing external aggression against India;  
(ii) any person belonging to a country committing such aggression;  
  2 
 (iii) such other country as may be declared by the Central Government to be assisting the 
country committing such aggression;  
(iv) any person belonging to such other country;  
(c) “Fund” means th e Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Fund constituted under section 10;  
(d) “goods” means any materials, commodities or articles and includes materials, commodities or 
articles used in or for the construction or repair of any ship up to the time at which th e ship after 
completion of construction, or repair, is launched;  
(e) “insurable value ” means the value of goods as ascertained for the purposes of insurance under 
this Act;  
(f) “policy” or “policy of insurance ” means a contract of insurance issued under the Scheme and 
includes a policy of insurance and renewal endorsement;  
(g) “quarter” means a period of three months commencing on the first day of January, April, July 
or October;  
(h) “Scheme” means the Emergency  Risks (Goods) Insurance Scheme made under this Act;  
(i) “seller of goods ” includes a seller of goods acting as an agent;  
(j) “supplier of goods ” means a person carrying on a business in the course of which he supplies 
goods for the purpose of, or in pursu ance of, contracts made by him for work, labour or materials.  
CHAPTER I I 
INSURABLE GOODS AND INSURANCE SCHEME  
3. Goods insurable under this Act .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the following 
goods shall, in relation to any person carrying on  business in India as a seller or supplier of goods of any 
description, be deemed to be goods insurable under this Act, that is to say, all goods situated in India or, 
consigned from one place in India to another place in India and in transit, being either — 
(i) goods of that description, or  
(ii) goods used as material from which goods of that description are produced or as ingredients or 
component parts of goods of that description:  
Provided that no goods shall be deemed to be insurable under this Act — 
(a) in relation to any person, being the owner of the goods, who carries on business as a seller of 
goods, unless they are owned by him with a view to being sold, or to being used as material for the 
production of goods to be sold, or as ingredients or compone nt parts of goods to be sold;  
(b) in relation to any person, being the owner of the goods, who carries on business as a supplier 
of goods, unless they are owned by him with a view to being supplied for the purpose of, or in 
pursuance of, a contract made by  him for work, labour and materials or to being used as material for 
the production of goods to be supplied as aforesaid, or as ingredients or component parts of goods to 
be supplied;  
(c) in respect of a period in relation to any person carrying on busines s in India as a seller or 
supplier of goods of any description, if such goods are, before payment has been made of the 
premium under this Act for that period, in the custody, control or possession of the enemy.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notificati on in the Official Gazette, direct that goods of any 
description specified in the notification shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this section, be 
deemed not to be goods insurable under this Act and a copy of such notification shall be laid after  it is 
made, on the Table of each House of Parliament when such House is in session for a period of thirty days 
or for the duration of the session in which it is laid, whichever period is less.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply in relation to good s which are owned by Government or in 
respect of which the Government is the seller or supplier.  3 
 4. Ownership .—(1) Save in so far as is otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any goods shall, 
subject to the provisions of this section, be deemed, for the  purposes of this Act, to be owned, — 
(a) if the property in the goods is for the time being vested in a person in relation to whom they 
are insurable under this Act, by that person;  
(b) if the property in the goods is not so vested, by any person in relati on to whom the goods are 
insurable under this Act and who is for the time being entitled either unconditionally or conditionally, 
to have the property in the goods vested in him:  
Provided that where — 
(i) any goods would, under the foregoing provisions of t his section, be deemed to be owned by a 
person in whom the property therein is vested otherwise than in the course of a business carried on by 
him in India, or who is entitled to have the property therein vested in him otherwise than in the course 
of such business, and  
(ii) any person carrying on business in India is for the time being entitled to sell the goods as 
agent,  
the goods shall be deemed to be owned by the last mentioned person.  
(2) Where in the course of any business a ship is being, or has been,  constructed under contract, and 
the ship or any part thereof or any goods appropriated for the construction thereof — 
(a) would, apart from the provisions of this sub -section, have been deemed for the purposes of 
this Act to be owned at any time by the per son from time to time carrying on the business, or  
(b) have at any time been accepted, in pursuance of a contract made with him, by the person from 
time to time carrying on the business,  
then, notwithstanding that they would not, apart from the said provis ions, be deemed for the said purposes 
to be owned by the person from time to time carrying on the business, the ship and any part thereof and 
any goods so appropriated as aforesaid shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be deemed, in a 
case t o which clause ( a) of this sub -section applies, to continue to be owned by the person from time to 
time carrying on the business until the acceptance of the ship, in pursuance of the contract in question, by 
the person for whom it is being or has been, constructed, and in a case to which clause ( b) of this          
sub-section applies, to be owned by the person from time to time carrying on the business at all times 
between the acceptance referred to in the said clause ( b) and the acceptance of the ship as aforesaid by the 
person for whom it is being, or has been, constructed.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply in relation to the construction under contract in the 
course of a business of part of a ship, not being part of a ship which is bei ng, or has been, constructed by 
the person from time to time carrying on the business, as they apply in relation to the construction of a 
ship— 
(a) With the substitution for references to a ship of references to part of a ship;  
(b) where the contract for t he part of the ship is with the person for whom the ship is being 
constructed, with the substitution for references to the acceptance of the ship under the contract in 
question  of references to the acceptance of the ship under the contract for the construc tion thereof;  
(c) where the contract for the part of the ship is with any other person, with the substitution for 
references to the acceptance of the ship under the contract in question of references to the acceptance 
of the part of the ship under the cont ract for the construction of the part by the person for whom it is 
being, or has been, constructed.  
(4) Where the person from time to time carrying on a business receives any money, under a policy 
issued in pursuance of the Scheme, in respect of the loss o f or damage to a ship, part of a ship or goods 
which are deemed to be owned by him by virtue of sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), the money shall be 
held by him on trust for the person who, apart from the provisions of those sub -sections, would be 
deemed  for the purposes of this Act to be the owner of the ship, part or goods, subject, however, to any 
lien or charge which would otherwise be enforceable against the ship, part or goods and subject also to 4 
 the right to retain out of the money the amount of an y expenses reasonably incurred by the first mentioned 
person in making good any part of the loss or damage which he is liable to make good.  
5. Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette , put into operation a scheme to be called the Emergency Risks (Goods) 
Insurance Scheme, whereby the Central Government undertakes in relation to persons carrying on 
business in India as sellers or suppliers of goods, the liability of insurance of such per sons against 
emergency risks, to the extent provided by or under this Act, in respect of goods insurable under this Act 
which are from time to time owned by such persons in the course of such business.  
(2) The Scheme may also extend — 
(a) to the undertaking  by the Central Government, in relation to any person carrying on business 
in India as seller or supplier of goods, of the liability of insuring such a person against emergency 
risks in respect of goods insurable under this Act which are not owned by him b ut in which he has an 
interest arising in the course of that business;  
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a) of this sub -section, to the undertaking by the 
Central Government, in relation to a person carrying on any business in India, of the liability of 
insuring such a person against emergency risks in respect of — 
(i) any goods situated in India which are in his possession, otherwise than under a hire 
purchase agreement, for the purposes of that business,  
(ii) any goods situated in India which are subject to a mortgage, pledge or charge in his 
favour held by him in the course of that business,  
being in either case goods which are not owned by him but which are insurable under this Act in 
relation to the person  by whom they are owned;  
(c) to the undertaking by the Central Government, in relation to a person carrying on any business 
in India, of the liability of insuring such person against emergency risks in respect of any goods 
situated in India, which having b een sold in India, for export from India,  are in his possession for the 
purpose of such export and are goods which were prior to such sale insurable under this Act in 
relation to the person by whom they were then owned;  
(d) to the undertaking by the Centra l Government, in relation to any person carrying on any 
business in India as a seller or supplier of goods, of the liability of insuring such a person against 
emergency risks in respect of goods imported into India through any port of India, while such goo ds 
are situated at such port or are in transit to a place in India.  
(3) The Scheme shall be such as to secure — 
(a) that the liability of the Central Government as insurer shall not exten d to more than eighty    
per cent. of the insurable value of the prope rty insurable;  
(b) that any liability of the Central Government as insurer under the Scheme is determined by a 
policy of insurance issued, in the form and in respect of a period not exceeding the period specified in 
the Scheme, by a person acting on behalf  of the Central Government:  
Provided that the form of policy may be such as to limit the extent and nature of the indemnity 
provided by the Central Government and to impose conditions subject to which the indemnity is 
provided:  
Provided further that the fo rm of policy shall be such as to provide that no liability shall arise 
thereunder unless the premium in relation to the period in which any loss or damage occurs has been 
paid before the occurrence of such loss or damage;  
(c) that any premium under a polic y so issued is payable at a rate not exceeding three per cent. per 
annum of the sum insured as may be specified in the Scheme; and  
(d) that the amount of any one premium payable under a policy so issued is not less than such 
sum as may be specified in the Scheme.  5 
 (4) Different forms of policies may be specified under sub -section ( 3) in relation to different 
descriptions of goods.  
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, amend or vary any 
Scheme made under this Act.  
(6) Every Scheme shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Scheme or both Houses 
agree that the Scheme should not be made, the Scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or b e of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the Scheme.  
6. Employment of agents by Central Government .—The Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, employ or authorise the employment of any person to act as its agent for the issue 
of policies, and making recommendations for the settlement of claims, under the Scheme, and may pay to 
the person so employed such remuneration as it may think fit.  
CHAPTER III  
COMPUL SORY INSURANCE  
7. Power to make insurance compulsory .—(1) While the Scheme is in operation, no person shall, 
after such date as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Go vernment by notification in the Official 
Gazette, carry on any business in India as a seller or supplier of goods, unless, in respect of any goods 
insurable under this Act which are for the time being owned by him in the course of that business, there is 
in force a policy of insurance against emergency risks issued in accordance with the Scheme, whereby he 
is insured in respect of such goods for a sum not less than the value thereof for the time being:  
Provided that the Scheme shall not restrict the carrying on of business as aforesaid by any person, if 
and so long as the value of all goods insurable under this Act which are for the time being owned by him 
within one and the same Presidency town or district in the course of that business does not exce ed fifty 
thousand rupees.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees and with further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every 
day after the first on which the contravention continues.  
8. Omission to insure or to insure up to the full amount .—(1) Where any person has failed to 
insure as, or to the full amount, required by this Act, and has thereby evaded the payment by way of 
premium of any money which he would h ave had to pay but for such failure, an officer authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government may determine the amount of payment of which has been so evaded, 
and thereupon such person shall be liable, without prejudice to any other action that may b e taken against 
him under this Act, to pay to the Central Government, as penalty, an amount equal to the amount so 
determined, and if no such payment is made on demand by the authorised officer, the amount of the 
penalty shall be recoverable from such pers on as an arrear of land revenue.  
(2) A person against whom a determination is made under sub -section ( 1) may, within the period 
specified in the Scheme, appeal against such determination to the Central Government whose decision 
thereon shall be final.  
9. Restrictions on carrying on of certain insurance business .—(1) After the date on which the 
Scheme is put into operation, no person shall, except as a person authorised by the Central Government as 
its agent to issue policies in pursuance of the Scheme, carr y on any business of insuring persons carrying 
on business in India as sellers or suppliers of goods against emergency risks in respect of goods insurable 
under this Act which are from time to time owned by such persons in the course of such business as is  last 
mentioned.  6 
 (2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees and with further fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for every 
day after the first on which the contr avention continues.  
10. Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Fund .—(1) The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, transfer in each financial year to a fund to be 
called the Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance F und such sums, as may be considered necessary, not 
exceeding the sums received by the Central Government by way of insurance premiums under the 
Scheme, or by way of payment made on composition of offences under section 15 or by way of    
expenses or compen sation awarded by a court, under section 545 of the Code of Criminal                           
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), out of any fine imposed in any prosecution under this Act.  
(2) There shall be paid from out of the Fund all sums required for the di scharge by the Central 
Government of any of its liabilities under the Scheme or for the payment by the Central Government of 
the remuneration and expenses of agents employed for the purposes of the Scheme.  
(3) If at any time when a payment is to be made out of the Fund, the sum standing to the credit of the 
Fund is less than the sum required for the making of that payment, an amount equal to the deficiency 
shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by la w, be paid into the Fund as an advance out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  
(4) If at any time the amount standing to the credit of the Fund exceeds the sum which, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, is likely to be required for the making of payme nts out of the Fund, the excess 
shall be disposed of in such manner as the Central Government may think fit.  
(5) The Central Government shall prepare, in such form and manner as may be specified in the 
Scheme and shall publish either annually or at such sh orter intervals as may be specified therein, an 
account of all sums received into and paid out of the Fund.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
11. Power of Central Government to obtain information .—(1) Any person authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government m ay, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the requirements of 
this Act have been complied with, — 
(a) require any person carrying on in India the business of fire insurance or of a seller or supplier 
of goods to submit to him such accounts, books or other documents or to furnish to him such 
information as he may reasonably think necessary, or  
(b) at any reasonable time, enter any premises occupied by any person carrying on in India the 
business of a seller or supplier of goods for the purposes of t hat business and may inspect the 
premises and require any person found therein who is for the time being in charge thereof, or in 
control of the business carried on therein, to produce to him and allow him to examine such accounts , 
books or other documents  as may relate to the business carried on in the premises and to furnish to 
him such other information as he may reasonably require for the purpose of ascertaining whether or 
not and, if so, to what extent, the person carrying on the business is insured un der the Scheme in 
respect of goods owned by him in the course of that business, and of ascertaining the value of any 
goods insurable under the Scheme which are, or were at any relevant  time, owned by him in the 
course of that business and the maximum amoun t which would be recoverable in respect of any such 
goods under a policy issued under this Act.  
(2) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in the exercise of his powers under this section or fails 
without any reasonable excuse to comply with a demand made t hereunder, shall, in respect of each 
occasion on which any such obstruction or failure takes place, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees.  
(3) Whoever, in purporting to comply with his obligations under this section, knowingly or recklessly 
makes a statement which is false in a material particular, shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees.  7 
 (4) Where in any proceedin gs in respect of a contravention of section 7 in relation to any business, it 
is proved, in relation to that business, — 
(a) that a demand for the production of a policy of insurance issued in accordance with the 
Scheme insuring the person carrying on the b usiness was duly made under this section and was not 
complied with, and  
(b) that the person making the demand was not satisfied that there was such a policy in existence,  
it shall be presumed, except in so far as the contrary is proved, that the said secti on 7 was being 
contravened in relation to that business at the time when the demand was made and continued to be 
contravened in relation to that business at all times thereafter.  
12. Punishment for giving false information .—If any person, for the purpose o f obtaining for 
himself or any other person any payment in respect of any damage due to the action of the enemy or 
under a policy issued in pursuance of the Scheme, — 
(a) furnishes any information which he knows to be false in a material particular, or reck lessly 
furnishes any information which is false in a material particular, or  
(b) with intent to deceive, produces, furnishes, sends or otherwise makes use of any book, 
account or other document which is false in a material particular, or  
(c) with intent to  deceive, withholds any material information,  
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding three months, or with both.  
13. Refund of premiums in certain cases .—(1) Where goods of any description have been insured 
by a seller or supplier of goods for any period, and before that period has elapsed the goods of that 
description have ceased, by virtue of a notification under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 to be goods 
insurable under  this Act, the person who has insured such goods shall be entitled to a proportionate refund 
of the premium.  
(2) Where a policy of insurance has been taken out in relation to goods which are not insurable under 
this Act and premium has been paid in relation to such policy, or where any premium has been paid in 
respect of goods which have ceased to be insurable under this Act, or where, in relation to goods insurable 
under this Act, premium has been made in excess of the amount due under the policy, the person ma king 
such payment or excess payment, as the case may be, shall be entitled to a refund of the whole of the 
amount so paid or paid in excess, as the case may be.  
(3) If it is established to the satisfaction of the Central Government that a policy of insuran ce under 
the Scheme has been taken out separately by two or more persons in respect of the same goods, the policy 
taken out by any one such person may, on an application made by him and after such inquiry as the 
Central Government may think fit, be cancell ed and thereupon the premium paid on such policy shall be 
refunded to the person by whom it was paid unless such person has recovered the premium from any 
other person, in which case, the refund shall be made to that other person:  
Provided that no refund shall be made under this section unless the application for the refund is made 
before the expiry of six months from the date when the premium was paid.  
(4) No suit shall be maintainable in any civil court against the Central Government or any person 
acting  as the agent of the Central Government under section 6 for the refund of money paid or purporting 
to have been paid as premium in respect of any policy issued or purporting to have been issued under this 
Act. 
14. Limitation on prosecution .—No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be 
instituted against any person except by, or with the consent of, the Central Government or an authority 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.  
  8 
 15. Composition of offences .—Any offence punis hable under sub -section ( 2) of section 7, or        
sub-section ( 2) of section 9 may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded 
by the Central Government or by any authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Government , on 
payment for credit to the Fund of such sum as the Central Government or such authority, as the case may 
be, thinks fit.  
16. Bar of legal proceedings .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
17. Removal of doubts .—If any doubt arises as to whether a person is insurable in respect of any 
goods under this Act, the Central Government may, by order, make suc h provision or give such direction, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the 
removal of such doubt.  
 
--------------------------The Emergency Risks (Undertakings) Insurance Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE EMERGENCY RISKS (UNDERTAKINGS) INSURANCE ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 51 OF 1971  
[10th December, 1971 .] 
An Act to make certain provisions for the insurance of certain property in India against damage 
arising from emergency risks and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the Emergency Risks 
(Undertakings) Insurance Act, 1971.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall remain in force during the period of operation of the Proclamation of Emergency issued by 
the President under clause ( 1) of article 352 of the Constitution on the 3rd day of December, 1971 , and for 
such further period as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be 
the period of emergency for the purposes of this Act, but its expiry shall not affect anything done or 
omitted to be done before such expiry and s ection 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall 
apply upon the expiry of this Act as if it had been repealed by a Central Act.  
2. Defin itions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “building” includes foundations, plinths, floors, staircases , tanks, engine and boiler beds, 
chimneys, flues and boundary walls;  
(b) “emergency risks ” means such risks arising from — 
(i) action taken by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy or in repelling an 
imagined attack by an enemy;  
(ii) any explosion or fire which involves any explosives or munitions or other dangerous 
things required for the purposes of defence against any action of an enemy and which happens or 
is caused by, through , or in connection with, the manufacture, storage o r transportation of any 
such explosives, munitions or other dangerous things;  
(iii) measures taken under proper authority to avoid the spreading of, or otherwise to mitigate, 
the consequences of damage occurring (whether accidentally or not) as the direct result of any 
such action as is described in sub -clause ( i) or of any such explosion or fire as is described in  
sub-clause ( ii); 
(iv) precautionary or preparatory measures taken under proper authority with a view to 
preventing or hindering the carrying ou t of any attack by an enemy, being measures involving 
risk to property;  
(v) precautionary or preparatory measures involving the doing of work on land and taken 
under proper authority in any way in anticipation of enemy action, being measures involving risk  
to property;  
(vi) precautionary or preparatory measures taken under proper authority with a view to 
denying facilities to an enemy, being measures involving damage to or diminution of the value of 
property;  
(c) “enemy” means— 
(i) any person or country com mitting external aggression against India;  
(ii) any person belonging to a country committing such aggression;  2 
 (iii) such other country as may be declared by the Central Government to be assisting the 
country committing such aggression;  
(iv) any person belo nging to such other country;  
(d) “factory” means a factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Factories                    
Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  
(e) “factory building ” includes all buildings comprised in the factory, and such other buildings 
(including residential buildings for staff and workmen, hospitals and welfare centres) w ithin a radius 
of three kilomet res from the main factory building as are in the same ownershi p or occupation as the 
factory and are used for the purposes of the factory;  
(f) “Fund” means the Emergency Risks (Undertakings) Insurance Fund constituted under     
section 7;  
(g) “inland vessel ” means a ve ssel not ordinarily plying outside the limits of the territorial waters 
surrounding India ; 
(h) “insurable value ” means the value of the property as ascertained for the purposes of insurance 
under this Act;  
(i) “occupier” of a factory has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( n) of section 2 of the Factories 
Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  
(j) “owner”, in relation to property insurable under this Act, means the owner of such property 
and includes, when parts of such property in relation to an undertaking to which this Act applies are 
owned by different perso ns, each such person in respect of the part owned by him;  
(k) “policy or policy of insurance ” means a contract of insurance issued under the Scheme and 
includes a policy of insurance or renewal endorsement;  
(l) “property insurable under this Act ” means— 
(i) in relation to any factory, factory buildings, and, except where they are for the time being 
goods insurable under the Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Act, 1971, all plant and 
machinery in the factory, all materials in the factory for use in the produc tion or transmission of 
motive power, or in the maintenance of plant and machinery (including lubricants) or in the 
maintenance of factory buildings;  
(ii) in relation to Electric Supply Undertakings, the stations, sub -stations, switch houses and 
transforme r houses, in addition to the insurable property referred to in sub -clause ( i) of this 
clause;  
(iii) in relation to hydro -electric supply undertakings, the whole of sluice houses, valve 
houses, water -pipe lines, penstocks and any other plant or machinery ap pertaining to the intake of 
hydraulic power;  
(iv) in relation to mines as defined in the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952), plant and machinery, 
whether above or below ground, buildings including inclines and situated within a radius of three 
kilometers from th e mine excavation and in relation to such plant, machinery and buildings and 
materials above ground as would, if the mine were a factory, be included in property insurable 
under this Act under sub -clause ( i) of this clause;  
(v) in relation to gas supply un dertakings, the whole of distribution systems, in addition to the 
insurable property referred to in sub -clause ( i) of this clause;  
(vi) in relation to any trading Corporation or any body  of Port Trustees or Commissioners, or 
any other person specified in this behalf by the Central Government, owning inland vessels and 
all inland vessels (including the hull, machinery and fittings thereof), fuel carried thereon and 
stores carried therein f or the use of the crew, owned by it or him, as the case may be, where such 
vessels, fuel and stores are not for the time being plant or materials insurable in relation to a 3 
 factory under this Act and the Scheme thereunder, or goods insurable under the Emergency Risks 
(Goods) Insurance Scheme made under the Emergency Risks (Goods) Insurance Act, 1971;  
(vii) in relation to oil mines and oil refineries, in addition to properties referred to in           
sub-clause ( i) or sub -clause ( iv) of this clause , as the case may be, derricks, drills and rigs and 
group gathering stations and storage tanks of oil mines, plant and machinery required for 
pumping, refining or processing any mineral oil, and pipe lines and all buildings of such 
installations within a radius  of three kilometr es thereof;  
(viii) in relation to tea estates, in addition to the properties referred to in sub -clause ( i) of this 
clause, standing tea crops in any garden belonging to the owner of any factory:  
Provided that no property shall be deemed t o be insurable under this Act in respect of a period if 
such property is, before payment has been made of the premium under this Act for that period, in the 
custody, control or possession of the enemy;  
(m) “quarter” means a period of three months commencin g on the first day of January, April, July 
or October;  
(n) “Scheme” means the Emergency Risks (Undertakings) Insurance Scheme made under          
this Act;  
(o) “undertaking to which this Act applies ” includes— 
(i) factories,  
(ii) electric  supply undertakings, hydro -electric supply undertakings and State Electricity 
Boards constituted under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 1948),  
(iii) mines, as defined in the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952),  
(iv) gas supply undertakings,  
(v) oil mine s and oil refineries , 
(vi) tea estates,  
(vii) any trading Corporation or any body of Port Trustees or Commissioners or any other 
person specified in this behalf by the Central Government, owning inland vessel,  
but does not include any undertaking which is  owned and depart mentally run by Government or any 
undertaking which is exempted under section 15 from the provisions of this Act;  
(p) “vessel” means a vessel the value of which including the hull, machinery and fittings but 
excluding cargo, fuel and stores  carried for the use of the crew, as ascertained for the purpose of 
insurance under the Scheme, exceeds two thousand and five hundred rupees, propelled wholly or in 
part by steam, electrical or mechanical power, or adapted for towing by a vessel so propell ed, and 
includes any such vessel while used as a place of habitation or for storage of goods but does not 
include a vessel of the type commonly called country craft.  
CHAPTER II  
EMER GENCY RISKS (UNDERTAKINGS ) INSURANCE SCHEME  
3. Emergency Risks (Undertakings) Insurance Scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, put into operation a scheme to be called the Emergency Risks 
(Undertakings) Insurance Scheme, whereby the Central Government  undertak es the liability of insuring 
property insurable under this Act against emergency risks, to the extent provided by or under this Act.  
(2) The Scheme may extend to the undertaking by the Central Government in relation to any person 
in India of the liability of insuring such person against emergency risks in respect of any property 
insurable under this Act which is not owned by him but in which he has an interest, up to the extent of 
such interest.  
  4 
 (3) The Scheme shall be such as to secure — 
(a) that the liab ility of the Central Government insurer shall not extend to more than eighty per 
cent. of the insurable value of the property insurable;  
(b) that any liability of the Central Government as insurer under the Scheme is determined by a 
policy of insurance issued, in the form and in respect of a period not exceeding the period specified in 
the Scheme, by a person acting on behalf of the Central Government:  
Provided that the form of policy may be such as to limit the extent and nature of the indemnity 
provide d by the Central Government and to impose conditions subject to which the indemnity is 
provided:  
Provided further that the form of policy shall be such as to provide that no liability shall arise 
thereunder unless the premium in relation to the period in w hich any loss or damage occurs has been 
paid before the occurrence of such loss or damage;  
(c) that any premium under a policy so issued is payable at a rate not exceeding three per cent . per 
annum of the sum insured as may be specified in the Scheme:  
Prov ided that  nothing  in this clause shall prevent the securing by the Scheme of different rates of 
premium in relation to properties of different descriptions insurable under this Act owned by any 
undertaking to which this Act applies;  
(d) that the amount of any one premium payable under a policy so issued is not less than such 
sum as may be specified in the Scheme.  
(4) The Scheme may provide — 
(a) for undertaking in relation to works in course of construction which, when completed, will 
become properties insur able under the Act and such plant and machinery appertaining to such works 
as may be specified in the Scheme, the same liabilities as are undertaken by the Scheme in relation to 
the undertakings;  
(b) that the payments due under a policy of insurance issued  under the Scheme, may at the option 
of the Central Government take either of the following forms, namely: — 
(i) payment, within the limits of the liability assumed by the Central Government and in such 
manner and by such instalments as the Central Governme nt may think fit, of the cost necessary to 
restore the property as far as practicable to the condition in which it existed before the occurrence 
of the damage, or  
(ii) compensation, within the aforesaid limits, for the loss in value, ascertained on the bas is of 
values and prices ruling at the time at which the policy of insurance was taken out, or at which the 
loss occurred, whichever is less, suffered by the property as a result of the damage, after due 
allowance has been made for depreciation during the p eriod of insurance cover;  
(c) that  payments due under a policy of insurance under the Scheme may be postponed to any 
time before the expiry of one year from the date on which this Act ceases to be in force, or, subject to 
payment of interest at the rate of two per cent. per annum from the expiry of the said year, to any later 
date;  
(d) for making it an express or implied condition of any policy of insurance issued under the 
Scheme— 
(i) that the owner or occupier of a factory or owner of other undertakings mentioned in      
sub-section ( 1), as the case may be, shall comply with all regulations or instructions made or 
issued under the authority of Government for safeguarding the property against damage from 
emergency risks, or  
(ii) that, where the Central Government exercises its option to pay the cost necessary to 
restore the property to its original condition the owner of the undertaking shall if so required by 5 
 the Central Government, reconstruct the property or remove the property  to and reconstruct it in 
another locality.  
(5) Different forms of policies may be specified in the Scheme under sub -section ( 3) in relation to 
different classes of undertakings.  
(6) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, amend or vary any 
Scheme made under this Act.  
(7) Every Scheme shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Scheme or both Houses 
agree that the Scheme should not be made, the Scheme shall th ereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the Scheme.  
4. Employment of agents by  the Central Government .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette , employ or authorise the employment of any person to act as its agent 
for the issue of policies and making recommendations for the settlement of claims under the S cheme, and 
may pay to the person so employed such remuneration as it may think fit.  
5. Duty of owners of undertakings to insure against emergency risks .—(1) While the Scheme is 
in operation, every owner of an undertaking to which this Act applies, shall ,— 
(a) by such date as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in 
the Official Gazette, or  
(b) in respect of property becoming property insurable under this Act after the date specified 
under clause ( a), or in a case to which  sub-section ( 2) refers, before the commencement of the quarte r 
next following that in which, — 
(i) the property becomes insurable under this Act, or  
(ii) the reconstruction of the property is completed,  
take out a policy of insurance against emergency risk s issued in accordance with the Scheme whereby he 
is insured in respect of all property insurable under this Act which appertains to the undertaking for a sum 
which is not less than the insurable value of such property:  
Provided that where the undertaking is a factory and the owner thereof is not himself the occupier of 
the factory, the occupier of the factory shall, unless the owner has already taken out a policy of insurance 
as required by this sub -section, himself take out the policy, and in such a case the occupier shall be 
deemed to act as the agent of the owner and shall be entitled to receive from the owner all sums paid as 
premiums on the policy:  
Provided further that in the case of a trading Corporation or body of Port Trustees or Commissioners 
or any other person whose inland vessels become insurable under this Act, the Policy of insurance taken 
out shall be for a sum not less than the insurable value of such vessels, fuel and stores; and this obligation 
shall in the case of a trading Corporation in corporated outside India rest upon the manager of the principal 
place of business in India of the Corporation.  
(2) The obligation imposed by sub -section ( 1) includes, when the owner of the undertaking is 
required by the Central Government to reconstruct th e property which has suffered damage, an obligation 
to take out an additional policy of insurance as required by the sub -section in respect of the reconstructed 
property.  
(3) When an undertaking in respect of which a policy of insurance against emergency r isks has been 
taken out as required by this section is transferred from one owner to another or there is a change of 
occupier of an undertaking which is a factory, the policy may be transferred to the new owner or occupier 
and such new owner or occupier sh all succeed to all rights and liabilities under and in relation to the 
policy as if the policy had been in the first instance taken out by him.  6 
 (4) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or the proviso thereto, or, having taken out 
a policy of insurance as required by that sub -section, fails to pay any premium which is due thereon, shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and with a further fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees for every day after the first  on which the contravention or failure continues, 
and such punishment shall be without prejudice to any other penalty or liability incurred in consequence 
of such contravention or failure.  
(5) Where any offence under sub -section ( 4) is tried by a Presidenc y Magistrate or a magistrate of the 
first class, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1898 (5 of 1898), 
the magistrate trying the offence may pass any sentence authorised by that sub -section . 
6. Restrictions on carryi ng on certain insurance business .—(1) After the date on which the 
Scheme is put into operation, no person shall, except as a person authorised by the Central Government as 
its agent to issue policies in pursuance of the Scheme, carry on the business of ins uring undertakings to 
which this Act applies in India against emergency risks in respect of property insurable under this Act.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees and with a further fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for every 
day after the first on which the contravention continues.  
7. Emergency Risks (Undertakings) Insurance Fund .—(1) The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament  by law in this behalf, transfer in each financial year, to a fund to be 
called the Emergency Risks (Undertakings) Insurance Fund such sums, as may be considered necessary, 
not exceeding the sums received by the Central Government by way of insurance premi ums under the 
Scheme, or by way of payments made on composition of offences under section 13 or by way of   
expenses or compensation awarded by a Court, under section 545 of the Code of Criminal                          
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), out of any fine imposed in any prosecution under this Act.  
(2) There shall be paid from out of the Fund all sums required for the discharge by the Central 
Government of any of its liabilities under the Scheme, or for payments by the Central Government under 
section 10, or for the payment by the Central Government of the remuneration and expenses of agents 
employed for the purposes of the Scheme.  
(3) If at any time when a payment is to be made out of the Fund the sum standing to the credit of the 
Fund is less than the sum required for the making of that payment, an amount equal to the deficiency 
shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law, be paid into the Fund as an advance out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  
(4) If at any time the amount standing to the credit of the Fund exceeds the sum which, in the opinion 
of the  Central Government, is likely to be required for the making of payments out of the Fund, the excess 
shall be disposed of in such manner as the Central Government may think fit.  
(5) The Central Government shall prepare in such form and manner as may be specified in the 
Scheme and shall publish either annually or at such shorter intervals as may be specified therein, an 
account of all sums received into and paid out of the Fund.  
CHAPTER II I 
MISCELLANEOUS  
8. Power of Central Government to obtain information .—(1) Any person authorised in this behalf 
by the Central Government may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the owner or occupier of 
any property required to be insured under this Act has taken out a policy of insurance as required by this 
Act in respect of such property, or for the purpose of investigating the insurable value of any property 
insured, or required to be insured, or proposed for insurance  under this Act, or for t he purpose of 
estimating the damage suffered by any property insured under this Act, — 
(a) require the owner or occupier of the property, or any person carrying on in India the business 
of fire insurance in respect of the property, to submit to him such acc ounts, books or other documents 
or to furnish to him such information as he may reasonably think necessary, or  7 
 (b) at any reasonable time, enter any premises comprising or containing the property, inspect such 
premises or property, and require any person f ound on such premises, who is for the time being in 
charge thereof, or in control thereof, or whom he believes to be in possession of information relevant 
to his investigation, to produce to him and allow him to examine such accounts, books or other 
docume nts as he may think necessary, or to furnish to him such other information as he may 
reasonably think necessary.  
(2) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in the exercise of his powers under this section or fails 
without reasonable excuse to comply with an y demand made thereunder shall, in respect of each occasion 
on which any such obstruction or failure takes place, be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
(3) Whoever, in purporting to comply with his obligations under this section,  knowingly or recklessly 
makes a statement false in a material particular shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
(4) Where in any proceedings in respect of a contravention of section 5 in relation to any undertaking, 
it is p roved, in relation to that undertaking — 
(a) that a demand for the production of a policy of insurance issued in accordance with the 
Scheme insuring the owner or occupier of the insurable property was duly made under this section 
and was not complied with, and 
(b) that the person making the demand was not satisfied that there was such a policy in existence,  
it shall be presumed, except in so far as the contrary is proved , that the said section 5 was being 
contravened in relation to that undertaking at the ti me when the demand was made and continued to be 
contravened in relation to that undertaking at all times thereafter.  
9. Punishment for giving false information .—If any person, for the purpose of obtaining for 
himself or any other person any payment in resp ect of any damage due to any action of the enemy or 
under a policy issued in pursuance of the Scheme, — 
(a) furnishes any information which he knows to be false in a material particular, or recklessly 
furnishes any information which is false in a material p articular, or  
(b) with intent to deceive, produces, furnishes, sends or otherwise makes use of any book, 
account or other document which is false in a material particular, or  
(c) with intent to deceive, withholds any material information, he shall be punis hable with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three 
months, or with both.  
10. Payment towards cost of removal and reconstruction of insurable property .—Where the 
Central Government requires the owne r of an undertaking to remove the insurable property and to 
reconstruct it in another locality, the Central Government shall make to such owner, out of the Fund, such 
payments, in addition to any sum payable under policy of insurance, as it considers suffi cient to defray 
the cost of the removal and, if necessary, the replacement of any part of the property in respect of which 
no compensation is payable.  
11. Determination of premiums unpaid .—(1) Where any person has failed to insure as, or to the 
full amount , required by this Act, and has thereby evaded the payment by way of premium of any money 
which he would have had to pay but for such failure, an officer authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government may determine the amount, payment of which has bee n so evaded, and thereupon such 
person shall be liable, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against him under this Act, 
to pay to the Central Government, as penalty, an amount equal to the amount so determined, and if no 
such payment is  made on demand by the authorised officer, the amount of the penalty shall be recoverable 
from such person as an arrear of land revenue.  
(2) A person against whom a determination is made under sub -section ( 1) may, within the period 
specified in the Scheme,  appeal against such determination to the Central Government whose decision 
thereon shall be final.  8 
 12. Limitation on prosecutions .—No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be 
instituted against any person except by, or with the conse nt of, the Central Government or an authority 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.  
13. Composition of offences .—Any offence punishable under sub -section ( 4) of section 5 may, 
either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be com pounded by the Central Government, or by 
any authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Government, on payment for credit to the Fund of 
such sum as the Central Government or such authority, as the case may be, thinks fit.  
14. Bar of legal pro ceedi ngs.—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit shall be maintainable in any civil court against the Central Government, or a person acting 
as its agent under section 4, for the refund of any money paid or purporting to have been paid as premium 
on a policy of insurance taken out or purporting to have been taken out under this Act.  
15. Power to exempt undertaking s.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, exempt any class or description of undertakings from the provisions of this Act requiring 
properties insurable in relation to such undertakings to be insured or to continue to be insured unde r this 
Act; but  such exemption shall not prejudice the infliction of any penalty or the accrual of any liability 
incurred before the date on which the exemption takes effect.  
(2) In granting any exemption under this section the Central Government may direc t that the 
exemption shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect on a specified date after or before the date 
of the notification.  
16. Refund of premiums in certain cases .—(1) Where any property has been insured by any owner 
or occupier thereof for  any period, and before that period has elapsed the property or the property of that 
description has ceased, by virtue of a notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 15, to be insurable 
under this Act, the person who has insured the property shall be e ntitled to a proportionate refund of the 
premium.  
(2) Where a policy of insurance has been taken out in relation to a property which is not insurable 
under this Act and premium has been paid in relation to such policy, or where any premium has been paid 
in respect of a property which has ceased to be insurable under this Act, or where, in relation to a property 
insurable under this Act, premium has been paid in excess of the amount due under the policy, the person 
making such payment or excess payment, as t he case may be, shall be entitled to a refund of the whole of 
the amount so paid or paid in excess as the case may be.  
(3) If it is established to the satisfaction of the Central Government that a policy of insurance under 
the Scheme has been taken out separately by two or more persons in respect of the same property, the 
policy taken out by any one such person may, on an application made by him and after such inquiry as the 
Central Government may think fit, be cancelled and thereupon the premium paid on  such policy shall be 
refunded to the person by whom it was paid unless such person has recovered the premium from any 
other person, in which case, the refund shall be made to that other person:  
Provided that no refund shall be made under this section unle ss the application for the refund is made 
before the expiry of six months from the date when the premium was paid.  
17. Removal of doubts .—If any doubt arises as to whether a person is insurable in respect of any 
property insurable under this Act, the Centr al Government may, by order, make such directions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of 
such doubt.  
18. Notification under section 15 to be laid before Parliament .—A copy of every  notification 
made by the Central Government under section 15, shall be laid after it has been made, on the Table of 
each House of Parliament when such House is in session for a period of thirty days or for the duration of 
the session in which it is so lai d, whichever period is less.  
 
--------------------------The Gold (Control) Amendment Act, 1971--------------------------
 
1 THE GOLD (CONTROL) AMENDMENT ACT, 1971  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. Reopening of past confiscations.  
5. Validation.  
6. [Repealed .] 
 
   
2  THE GOLD (CONTROL) AMENDMENT ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 21 OF 1971  
[24th June , 1971.]  
An Act further to amend the Gold (Control) Act, 1968.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title  and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Gold (Control)  Amendment Act, 
1971.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of May, 1971.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
4. Reopening of past confiscations. —(1) Where any order made, before the commencement of this 
Act, for the confiscation of any gold or other thing or giving option to pay fine in lieu thereof is such that 
it could not have been made if the principal Act, as amended by this Act, were in force on the date on 
which the said order was made, the officer competent under section 78 to adjudge su ch confiscation shall, 
on an application made to him by the person aggrieved by such order, set aside the order of confiscation 
or, as the case may be, the order giving option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation, and also any order 
imposing penalty in addi tion to confiscation or giving option to pay fine in lieu thereof, and make a fresh 
adjudication in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act.  
(2) The power referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be exercised by the officer specified therein in 
relation to the final order of adjudication of confiscation or giving option to pay fine in lieu thereof or 
imposing any penalty, whether or not such final order was made in appeal under section 80 or in revision 
under section 81 or se ction 82.  
(3) Every application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be made within ninety days from the 
commencement of this Act or within such further time, not exceeding ninety days, as the officer specified 
in that sub -section may, on sufficient cause being shown, allow.  
(4) Where, and in so far as, any order for the confiscation of any gold or other thing, or any option 
given to pay fine in lieu of confiscation, or imposing any penalty is modified or reversed, the officer 
specified in sub -section ( 1) shall make an order for such refund or restitution as the circumstances of the 
case may require:  
Provided that where the restitution of any gold or other thing is not practicable, the said authority 
shall make an order for the payment to the person to whom  such restitution is to be made, the market 
value of such gold or other thing, as on the date on which the fresh adjudication is made.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall apply to any confiscation made, option given to pay fine in lieu of 
confiscation, or pe nalty imposed under Part XII -A of the Defence of India Rules, 1962.  
5. Validation. —Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of an y court, any confiscation made, 
penalty imposed or fine levied under the Gold (Control) Act, 1968  (45 of 1968) , before the 
commencement of this Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to have been made, imposed or levied in accordance with the provisions of the Gold (Control) 
Act, 1968  (45 of 1968) , as amended by t his Act.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 and 3 rep. by Act 38 of 1978 , s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
2. Section 6 rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
--------------------------The Manipur (Hill Areas) District Councils Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE MANIPUR (HILL AREAS) DISTRICT COUNCILS ACT, 1971  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF DISTRICT COUNCILS  
3. Division of Hill Areas into autonomous districts.  
4. Constitution of District Councils and their composition.  
5. Delimitation of constituencies.  
6. Power to alter or amend delimitation orders.  
7. Qualifications for membership.  
8. Disqualifications for membership.  
9. Electors on electoral rolls.  
10. Right to vote.  
11. Election of members.  
12. Notification of results of elections . 
13. Term of office of members.  
14. Disputes as to elections.  
15. Relief that may be claimed by petitioner.  
16. Grounds on which an election may be called in question.  
17. Procedure to be followed by the District Judge . 
18. Decision of the District Judge.  
19. Procedure in case of equality of votes.  
20. Finality of decisions.  
21. Power to make rules regulating the election of members.  
22. Incorporation of District Councils.  
23. Chairman and Vice -Chairman.  
24. Oath or affirmation by members.  
25. Vacation of seats.  
26. Allowances of members.  
27. Liability of members.  
28. Members to be deemed to be public servants.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF DISTRICT  COUNCILS  
29. Functions of District Councils . 
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE AND STAFF OF DISTRICT COUNCILS  
SECTIONS  
30. Conduct of  business.  
31. Committees.  
32. Officers and staff.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE OF DISTRICT  COUNCILS AND VESTING OF PROPERTY  
33. Powers of taxation.  
34. Levy of fees.  
35. Procedure for imposing taxes.  
36. Abolition or reduction of taxes.  
37. Recovery of taxes and fees.  
38. Assessment and collection  of taxes and fees.  
39. Appeals.  
40. Instalments of taxes and fees.  
41. Power to exempt from taxation.  
42. Recoveries of moneys claimable by the Council.  
43. Council Fund.  
44. Property vested in District Council.  
45. Budget.  
CHAPTER VI  
CONTROL  
46. Control.  
47. Supersession of District Council.  
48. Effect of certain provisions during the period when the Hill Areas Committee is not functioning.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
49. Penalty for obstruction.  
50. Penalty for entering into any contract with the Council . 
CHAPTER VIII  
RULES AND BYE -LAWS  
51. Power of Administrator to make rules.  
52. Power to make bye -laws.  
53. Penalty for infringement of rules or bye -laws.  
 
  3 
 THE MANIPUR (HILL ARE AS) DISTRICT COUNCILS ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 76 OF 1971  
[26th December , 1971.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of District Councils in the Hill Areas in the Union territory of 
Manipur.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Manipur (Hill Area s) District Councils 
Act, 1971.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Manipur.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator of the Union territory of Manipur appointed under 
article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “autonomous district ” means an autonomous district referred to i n sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(c) “building” includes a house, out -house, stab le, latrine, urinal, shed, hut, wall (other than 
boundary wall) and any other structure (whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud or other material) but 
does not include any  portable or temporary shelter;  
(d) “constituency ” means a District Council constituen cy provided by order made under section 5 
for the purpose of ele ctions to the District Council;  
(e) “Deputy Commissioner ”, in relation to any District Council, means the officer appointed as 
such by the Administrator, by notification in the Official Gazett e, to perform the functions of the 
Deputy Commissioner under this Act in the autonomous district for which such Distric t Council has 
been constituted;  
(f) “Hill Areas ” means the Hill Areas determined by the President by any notification issued 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 52 of the Government of Union Ter ritories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)  
and in force immediately befor e the commencement of this Act;  
(g) “Hill Areas Committee ” means the Standing Committee referred to in section 52 of the 
Government of Union Terr itories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963);  
(h) “market” includes any place where persons assemble for the sale of, or for the purpose of 
exposing for sale of, meat, fish, fruit, ve getables, animals intended for human food or any other 
articles of human food whatsoever with or without the consent of the owner of such place 
notwithstanding that there may be no common regulation for the concourse of buyers and sellers and 
whether or no t any control is exercised over the business of, or the persons frequenting, the market by 
the owner of the  place or by any other persons;  
(i) “member” means a member of a District Coun cil constituted under this Act;  
(j) “Official Gazette ” means the Gazett e of the Union territory of Manipur;  
(k) “person” does not include a body of persons;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “Scheduled Tribes ” has the same meaning assigned to it in clause (25) of article 366 of t he 
Constitut ion; 
(n) “vehicle” includes a carriage, cart, hand -cart, bicycle, tricycle and every wheeled conveyance 
which is used or is capable of being used on a street but does not include a mechanically propelled 
vehicle.  4 
 CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF DISTRICT COUNCILS  
3. Division of Hill Areas into autonomous districts .—(1) As soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, the Administrator shall cause all the Hill Areas to be divided into not more 
than six autonomous districts.  
(2) The Administrator may, b y order noti fied in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) declare that any area in any autonomous district which is, or is intended to be, in cluded within 
the limits of any  municipality, cantonment or town committee shall cease to be a pa rt of such 
autonomous distric t; 
(b) increase the a rea of any autonomous district;  
(c) diminish the a rea of any autonomous district;  
(d) unite two or more autonomous districts or parts thereof so as to form one autonomous district;  
(e) define the boundar ies of any autonomous district;  
(f) alter the n ame of any autonomous district.  
(3) No order under sub -section ( 2) shall be made by the Administrator except after consultation  with 
the Hill Areas Committee.  
(4) Any order made by the Administrator under sub -section ( 2) may contain such incidental and 
consequential provisions as appear to the Administrator to be necessary for giving effect to the provisions 
of the order.  
4. Constitution of District Councils and their composition .—(1) For each autonomous district there 
shall be a District Council as from such date as the Administrator may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
(2) The total number of seats in the District Council to be filled by persons chosen by direct election 
on the basis of adult suffrage from  territorial constituencies s hall be not more than eighteen.  
(3) The Administrator may nominate not more than two persons, not being persons in the service of 
Government, to be members of any District Council.  
5. Delimitation of constituencies. —The Adminis trator shall, by order, determine — 
(a) the constituencies (which shall be single member constituencies) into which an autonomous 
district shall be divided for the purpose of election of members to the District Council of that district; 
and  
(b) the extent of each constituency.  
6. Power to alter or amend delimitation orders .—The Administrator may, from time to time, by 
order, alter or amend any order made under section 5.  
7. Qualifications for membership. —A person shall not be qualified to be chosen as a member of a 
District Council of any autonomous district unless he is an elector for any District Council constituency in 
that autonomous district.  
8. Disqualifications for membership .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as a 
member of  a District Council if he is for the time being disqualified for being chosen as a member of 
either House of Parliament or holds any office of pro fit under any District Council.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit under a 
District Council by reason only that he is a member thereof.  
9. Electors on electoral rolls. —(1) The persons entitled to vote at elections of members of a District 
Council shall be the persons entitled, by virtue of the provisions of the Constitution and the 5 
 Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), to be registered as voters at electi ons to the House 
of the People.  
(2) So much of the electoral roll for any parliamentary constituency for the time being in force as 
relates  to the areas comprised within a constituency formed under section 5 shall be deemed to be the 
electoral roll for that constituency for the purposes of this Act.  
10. Right to vote. —(1) Every person whose name is, for the time being, entered in the electora l roll 
of a constituency shall be entitled to vote at the election of a member of the District Council from that 
constituency.  
(2) Every person shall give one vote and no more to any one candidate at an election.  
11. El ection of members. —Election of member s of a District Council shall be held in accordance 
with the rules made under section 21 on such date or dates as the Administrator may, by notification i n 
the Official Gazette, direct:  
Provided that a casual vacancy shall be filled as soon as may be after  the occurrence of the vacancy:  
Provided further that no election shall be held to fill up a casual vacancy occurring within four 
months prior to the holding of a general election under this section.  
12. Notification of results of elections. —The names of all persons elected or nominated to be 
members of a District Council shall be published by the Administrator in the Official Gazette.  
13. Term of office of members. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of 
a member sh all be five years and shall commence from the date of the notification of his election or 
nomination under section 12 or from the date on which the vacancy in which he is elected or nominated 
has occurred, whichever date is  later:  
Provided that the Adminst rator may, when satisfied that it is necessary in order to avoid 
administrative difficulty, extend the term of office of all the members by such period not excee ding one 
year as he thinks fit.  
(2) The term of office of a member elected to fill a casual vac ancy shall commence from the date of 
the notification of his election and shall continue so long only as the member in whose place he is elected 
would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not occurred.  
14. Disputes as to elections. —(1) No e lection of a member shall be called in question except by an 
election petition presented to the court of the District Judge having jurisdiction in the area in which the 
constituency concerned is situated, within thirty days from the date of the notificatio n of the result of  the 
election under section 12.  
(2) An election petition calling in question any such election may be presented on one or more of the 
grounds specified in section 16 by any candidate at such election or by a ny elector of the constituency.  
(3) A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petition all the candidates at the election.  
(4) An election petition — 
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies;  
(b) shall, with sufficient particulars, set forth the ground or grounds on which the elec tion is 
called in question; and  
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the verification of pleadings.  
15. Relief that  may be claimed by petitioner. —A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a 
declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidates is void, claim a further declaration 
that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected.  
  6 
 16. Groun ds on which an elec tion may be called in question. —The election of a returned candidate 
may be called in question on any one or more of t he following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that on the date of his election the returned candidate was not qualified to be elec ted, or he 
was disqualified for being elected, as a member under this Act; or  
(b) that the nomination paper of any candidate at the election h as been improperly rejected; or  
(c) that the result of the election has been materially affected by the improper a cceptance of a 
nomination paper or by the improper acceptance or refusal of a vote or by any other cause.  
17. Procedure to be followed by the District Judge. —The procedure provided in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in regard to suits shall b e followed by the court of the District Judge, as far 
as it can be made applicable, in the trial and disposal of an election petition under this Act.  
18. Decision of the District Judge. —(1) At the conclusion of the trial of an election petition, the 
court of the Dis trict Judge shall make an order — 
(a) dismi ssing the election petition; or  
(b) declaring the election of all or any of the ret urned candidates to be void; or  
(c) declaring  the election of all or any of the returned candidates to be void and the petitioner or 
any other candi date to have been duly elected.  
(2) If any person who has filed an election petition has, in addition to calling in question the election 
of the returned  candidate, claimed a declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly 
elected and the court of the  District Judge is of opinion — 
(a) that in fact the petitioner or such other candidate received a majority of the valid votes; or  
(b) that bu t for the votes obtained by the returned candidate, the petitioner or such other candidate 
would have obtained a majority of the valid votes,  
the court of the District Judge shall, after declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void, 
declare the petitioner or such other candidate, as the case may be, to have been duly elected.  
19. Procedure in case of equality of votes .—(1) If during the trial of an election petition it appears 
that there is equality of votes between any candidates at the election and that the addition of a vote would 
entitle any of those candidates to be declared elected, then, the court of the District Judge shall de cide 
between them by lot and proceed as if the one on whom the lot falls had received an additional vote.  
20. Finality of decisions .—(1) An order of the court of the District Judge on an election petition  shall 
be final and conclusive.  
(2) An election of a  member not called in question in accordance with the foregoing provisions shall 
be deemed to b e a good and valid election.  
21. Power to make rules regulating the election of members. —The Administrator may make rules 
to regulate all or any of the following  matters for the purpose of the holding of elections of me mbers 
under this Act, namely: — 
(a) the manner of the splitting up of electoral rolls for parliamentary constituencies into parts for 
the purpose of constituting one or more of such parts into electo ral roll for a constituency; and the 
officer or authority by whom such spl itting up is to be carried out;  
(b) the drawing up of the pr ogramme of election;  
(c) the appointment of returning officers, presiding and  polling officers for election;  
(d) the nomin ation of candidates and t he scrutiny of such nomination;  
(e) the deposits to be made by candidates and the time and manner of making s uch deposits;  
(f) the withdrawal of candidatures;  
(g) the appoi ntment of agents of candidates;  7 
 (h) the time a nd manner of holding elections;  
(i) the general procedure at the elections including the time, place and hours of poll and the 
method by which vote s shall be cast;  
(j) the fee to b e paid on an election petition;  
(k) any other matter relating to elections or election di sputes in respect of which the 
Administrator deems it necessary to make rules under this section or in respect of which this Act 
makes no provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in the opinion of the 
Administrator, necessary.  
22. Incorporation of District Councils. —Each District Council shall be a body corporate by the 
name respectively of “the District Council of (name of autonomous district) ” and shall have perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and di spose of property and to contract and 
may by the said name sue and be sued.  
23. Chairman and Vice -Chairman. —(1) A District Council shall, as soon as may be, choose two 
members to be respectively Chairman and Vice -Chairman thereof and so often as the office  of Chairman 
or Vice -Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member to be Chairman or               
Vice -Chairman, as the case may be : 
Provided that the Administrator may nominate the first Chairman who shall hold office for a  period 
not exceeding one year.  
(2) If a resolution for the removal of an elected Chairman is passed by not less than two -thirds of the 
total membership of the Council at a meeting convened in accordance with the provisions of                
sub-section ( 3), such reso lution shall have the effect of removing the Chairman from his office as from 
the date on which the resolution is so passed and if such resolution is passed by less than two -thirds but 
not less than one -half of the total membership of the Council, the Admi nistrator may, by order in writing, 
remove, for reasons to be recorded, the Chairman from his office as from such date as  may be specified in 
the order:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be brought within one year from the da te of election of the 
Chairman:  
Provided further that if the resolution is not passed by not less than two -thirds of the total 
membership of the Council, no other resolution for the removal of the Chairman shall be allowed to be 
considered within one year from the date on which  such resolution was considered.  
(3) A notice in writing of the intention to move a resolution referred to in sub -section ( 2) signed by 
not less than one -third of the total membership of the Council together with a copy of the proposed 
resolution shall be delivered to the Deputy Commissioner in accordance with the rules made by the 
Deputy Commissioner in this behalf and the Deputy Commissioner shall, after giving not less than fifteen 
days' notice thereon, convene for consideration of the resolution a meeti ng of the Council to be held in the 
office of the Council on a date not later than thirty days from the date on which the notice was delivered 
to him and he shall pr eside over the meeting.  
(4) The Chairman of the Council shall be a whole -time functionary a nd shall be entitled to such salary 
or allowances as may be fixed by the Administrator.  
24. Oath or affirmation by members. —Every  member shall, before taking his seat, make and 
subscribe at a meeting of the District Council, an oath or affirmation in the prescribed form.  
25. Vacation of seats. —(1) No person shall be a member both of the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory of  Manipur and of a District Council and if a person is chosen a member both of the 
Legislative Assembly and of a District Council, then, at the expiration of fourteen days from the date of 
publication in the Official Gazette that he has been so chosen, that  person’s seat in the District Council 
shall become vacant unless he has previously resigned his se at in the Legislative Assembly.  
(2) If a member — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 8; or  8 
 (b) resigns his seat by writi ng under his hand addressed to the Ch airman of the District Council,  
his seat  shall thereupon become vacant.  
(3) If during the six successive months a member is, without the permission of the District Council, 
absent from all meetings thereof, the Council may declare his seat vacant.  
(4) If any question arises as to whether a member has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in section 8, it shall be referred to the District Judge having jurisdiction in the area in which 
the constituency c oncerned is situated and his decision shall be final.  
26. Allowances of members. —Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 23, every 
member shall be entitled to receive such allowances as may be determined by the Administrator.  
27. Liability of members .—Every person shall be liable for the loss, waste or misappropriation of 
any money or other property belonging to a District Council, if such loss, waste or misappropriation is a 
direct consequence of his neglect or misconduct while a member of the District Council and a suit for 
compensation may be instituted against him by the Council with the previous sanction of the Deputy 
Commissioner or by the Deputy Commissioner with the previous sanction of the Administrator.  
28. Members to be deemed to b e public servants. —Every member shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF DISTRICT  COUNCILS  
29. Functions of District Councils .—(1) Subject to such exceptions and  conditions as the 
Administrator may make and impose, the following matters shall be under the control and administration 
of a District Council, namely: — 
(i) the maintenance and management of such property, movable and immovable, and institutions 
as may be  transferred to that Council by the Administrator;  
(ii) the construction, repair and maintenance of such of the roads, bridges, channels and buildings 
as may be transferred to tha t Council by the Administrator;  
(iii) the establishment, maintenance and mana gement of primary schools and the construction and 
repair of all buildings connected with these institutions a nd institution of scholarships;  
(iv) the establishment, maintenance and management of dispensaries;  
(v) the establishment and maintenance of cattl e pounds including such functions under the         
Cattle -trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871) as may be transferred to tha t Council by the Administrator;  
(vi) the establishment, maintenance and management of markets and fairs and the construction, 
repair and m aintenance of all  buildings connected therewith;  
(vii) the supply, storage and prevention from pollution of water for drinking , cooking and bathing 
purposes;  
(viii) the construction, repair and maintenance of embankments and the supply, storage and 
control  of water for agricultural purposes;  
(ix) the preser vation and reclamation of soil;  
(x) the preservation, prot ection and improvement of live -stock and prevention of animal diseases;  
(xi) public health and sanitation;  
(xii) the  management of such ferries as may be entrusted to the charge of tha t Council by the 
Administrator;  
(xiii) the initiation, inspecti on and control of relief works;  
(xiv) the allotment, occupation or use, or the setting apart of land, other than land acquire d for any 
public purpose or land which is a reserved forest, for the purpose of agriculture or grazing or for 9 
 residential or other non -agricultural purposes or for any other purposes likely to promote the interests 
of the inhabitants of any village or town  situated within the autonomous district for whi ch that council 
is constituted;  
(xv) the management of any fore st not being a reserved forest;  
(xvi) the regulation of the practice of Jhum  or other fo rm of shifting cultivation; and  
(xvii) any other matter w hich the Administrator may, in consultation with the Hill Areas 
Committee, entrust to the District Council in the field of agriculture, animal husbandry, community 
development, social and tribal welfare, village planning or any other matter referred to in section 52 
of the Government of Union Terri tories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963).  
(2) It shall be competent for a District Council to recommend to the Government of the Union 
territory of Manipur legislation relating to the following matters in so far as they conc ern members of the 
Scheduled Tribes, namely: — 
(a) appointment or succession of Chiefs;  
(b) inheritance of property;  
(c) marriage and divorce; and  
(d) social customs.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE AND STAFF OF DISTRICT COUNCILS  
30. Conduct of business. —A District Council shall conduct its business in such manner and in 
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.  
31. Committees .—A District Council may, from time to time, appoint out of its own body such and 
so many committees for the efficient discharge of its duties as may be necessary.  
32. Officers and staff .—(1) For every District Council there shall be a Chief Executive Officer, who 
shall be a ppointed by the Administrator.  
(2) If a resolution for removal of the Chief Executive Officer is passed at a meeting of the District 
Council by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the total membership of the Council, the 
Administra tor shall remove him forthwith.  
(3) The District Council shall appoint such officers and staff as may be necessary for the prope r and 
efficient execution of its duties and make regulations f or their conditions of service.  
(4) The power of appointing officers and staff (whether temporary or permanent) shall be exercised in 
accordance with the rules framed for the purpose by the  Admi nistrator.  
(5) The conditions of service applicable to a person immediately before his appointment to a post 
under a District Council shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous  approval of the 
Administrator.  
(6) Every officer or membe r of staff of a District Council shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE OF DISTRICT  COUNCILS AND VESTING OF PROPERTY  
33. Powers of taxation .—Notwithstanding  anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, a District Council shall have the power to levy all or any of the following taxes within 
the autonomous district for which the Council i s constituted, that is to say — 
(a) taxes on professions, tr ades, callings and employments;  
(b) taxes on animals, vehicles (other than mechanically  propelled vehicles) and boats;  10 
 (c) taxes on entry of goods into a market for sale there in and tolls on passengers and goods 
carried in ferries;  
(d) taxes for the maintenance of scho ols, dispensaries or roads; and  
(e) any other tax falling under List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution which the 
Legislature of the Union territory of Manipur may, by law, empower the District Council to l evy. 
34. Levy of fees .—A Dist rict Council may fix and levy — 
(a) school fees; and  
(b) fees for the use of, or benefits derived from, any of the works done or services rendered under 
section 29.  
35. Procedure for imposing taxes. —(1) A District Council may re solve at a meeting specially 
convened for the purpose to propose the imposition of any of the  taxes mentioned in section 33.  
(2) When a resolution has been passed, the Council shall publish a notice in the Official Gazette and 
also in the prescribed manner , defining the class of persons or description of property proposed to be 
taxed, the amount or rate of tax to be imposed and the syst em of assessment to be adopted.  
(3) Any person, directly or indirectly affected by the proposed tax and objecting to it, ma y, within 
thirty days from the publication of the notice, send his objections in writing to the Council and the 
Council shall, at a specially convened meeting, take all such  objections into consideration.  
(4) If no objection is sent within the said period of thirty days or if the objections received are deemed 
insufficient, the Council may submit its proposals to the Administrator with the objections, if  any, and its 
decision thereon.  
(5) The Administrator may then sanction the proposals or refuse to sancti on them or return them to 
the Cou ncil for further consideration.  
(6) When the proposal in respect of a tax has been sanctioned, the Administrator shall notify its 
imposition in the Official Gazette and specify a date not later than three months from the date of 
notification on which the tax shall come into force.  
36. Abolition or reduction of taxes. —The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
and a District Council may with the previous approval of the Administrator by a resolution pas sed at a 
meeting specially convened for the purpose, abolish or reduce any tax imposed under section 33.  
37. Recovery of taxes and fees .—All arrears of taxes and fees levied under this Act may be 
recovered under the law for the time being in force for the recovery  of public dues as if such arrears were 
public dues.  
38. Assessment and collection of taxes and fees .—A District council may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, determine the person by whom any tax or fee shall be assessed and collected and m ake 
rules for the assessment and collection of such tax or fee and direct in what manner persons employed in 
the assessment or collection shall be remunerated.  
39. Appeals. —(1) In matters connected with the assessment and collection of any tax or fee levie d 
under this Act, an appeal shall lie from the order of any person authorised to make assessment or 
collections to such person as the Administrator may appoin t or designate for the purpose.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be presented within thir ty days from the date of the order.  
(3) The order passed o n the appeal shall be final.  
40. Instalments of taxes and fees. —A District Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
and with the previous approval of the Deputy Commissioner, prescribe by what instalments and at what 
times any tax or fee shall be payable.  
41. Power to exempt from taxation. —A District Council may, with the previous approval of the 
Administrator, by notification in the Official Gazette, remit or reduce any tax or fee or exempt any 11 
 persons or class of persons or any description of property, wholly or in part, from liability to any tax or 
fee and cancel any such remission, reduction or exemption.  
42. Recoveries of moneys claimable by the Council .—(1) Save as provided by section 37, all 
moneys claimable by a District Council may be recovered on an application to a Magistrate havin g 
jurisdiction in the area where the person from whom the money is claimable may, for the time being, be 
resident, by the distress and sale of any movable property or by the attachment and sale of any immovable 
property, within the limits of his jurisdicti on belonging to such person and the cost of such proceedings 
shall be recoverable in the same manner as the said moneys.  
(2) An application for recovery of money shall be in writing and shall be signed by an officer 
authorised in this behalf by order of th e Chairman of the Council.  
43. Council Fund .—(1) All moneys received by or on behalf of a District Council under the 
provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force shall be credited to a fund which shall 
be called the “Council Fund ” and it shall be held by the District Council in trust for the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) All expenditure of the Council shall be de frayed out of the Council Fund.  
(3) The Administrator may make rules for the management of the Council Fund and for the procedur e 
to be followed in respect of payment of money into the said Fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, 
the custody of moneys therein and any other matter connected with or ancillary to the matters aforesaid.  
(4) The accounts of a District Council shall b e kept in such form as may be prescribed.  
(5) The accounts of a District Council shall be audited in such manner as may be prescribed.  
44. Property vested in District Council. —Subject to any order of the Administrator, all property of 
the nature specified below and situated in the autonomous district shall vest in and belong to the District 
Council for which it is constituted and shall, with all other property which may become vested in the 
Council, be under its direction, management and control and shall b e held and applied  for the purposes of 
this Act— 
(a) all public buildings, constructed or main tained out of the Council Fund;  
(b) all public roads which have been constructed or are maintained out of the Council Fund and 
the stones and other materials ther eof and also all trees, erections, materials, implements and th ings 
provided for such roads;  
(c) all land or other property transferred to the District Council by the Administrator or by gift, 
sale or otherwise for public purposes.  
45. Budget .—(1) A District Council shall, on or before a prescribed day in each year submit to the 
Administrator an estimate of the income and expenditure of the Council for the next financial year in such 
form as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Administrator may, on or befo re a prescribed day, return the estimate of the Council with or 
without modifications.  
(3) When a budget is returne d with modifications under sub -section ( 2), the Council shall consider the 
proposed modifications, take a decision thereon and report the sam e to the Administrator.  
(4) The budget estimate finally adopted by the Council shall be the budget of the District Council.  
(5) Any subsequent alteration in the budget or reappropriation or transfer of provision within the 
estimate shall be made with the a pproval of the Administrator.  
CHAPTER VI  
CONTROL  
46. Control .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Chairman of a District Council to furnish to the Deputy 
Commissioner a copy of the proceedings of the meetings of the Council and such other information as the 
Deputy Commissioner may require.  12 
 (2) The Deputy Commissioner shall have the power to give to any District Council all such directions 
as he may consider necessary in res pect of subjects, curricula, text books and standards of teaching in 
schools vested whol ly or partly in the Council and in schools wholly or partly maintained by grants 
payable from the Council Fund and the Council sha ll comply with such directions.  
(3) The Deputy Commissioner may, by order, and for reasons to be recorded, suspend the executi on 
of any resolution or order of any District Council or prohibit the doing of any act which is about to be 
done, or is being done, in pursuance of or under cover of any provision of the law relating to the 
constitution or functions of the District Council , if, in his opinion, the resolution, order or act is in excess 
of the powers conferred by law or the execution of the resolution or order or the doing of the act is likely 
to lead to a breach of the peace, or to cause annoyance or injury to the public or to any class or body of 
persons:  
Provided that the Council may, within fifteen days of the date of the order of the Deputy 
Commissioner offer such explanation as it deems fit in relation to the execution of the resolution or order 
which has been suspended or the doing of the act has been prohibited.  
(4) When the Deputy Commissioner makes any order as aforesaid, he shall forthwith send a copy of it 
to the Administrator with a statement of the reasons for making it and forward in due course to the 
Administrat or the explanation, if any, offered by the Council and the Administrator may, thereupon, 
confirm, modify or rescind the order of the Deputy Commissioner.  
47. Supersession of District Council .—(1) If, on receipt of a report from the Deputy Commissioner 
or otherwise, the Adm inistrator is of opinion that — 
(a) any District Council is not competent to perform, or persistently makes default in the 
performance of, the duties imposed on it by or under  this Act or any other law; or  
(b) any District Council e xceeds o r abuses its powers; or  
(c) the financial position and credit position of any District Coun cil is seriously threatened; or  
(d) a situation has arisen in which the administration of any District Council cannot be carried on 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act,  
the Administrator may, by an order published, together with a statement of reasons therefor, in the 
Official Gaze tte, supersede such Council for such period, not exceeding one year, as  may be specified in 
the order:  
Provided that before making an order of supersession as aforesaid under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or 
clause ( c), reasonable opportunity shall be given to such Council to show cause why such order of 
supersession s hould not be made:  
Provided further that the period of supersession may be extended for any further period or periods not 
exceeding six months at a time in consultation  with the Hill Areas Committe e. 
(2) When any District Council is superseded by an order under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all the members of the Council (including the Chairman and Vice -Chairman thereof) shall, on 
such date as may be specified in the order, vacate their offices as such memb ers without prejudice to 
their eligibility for election or nomination under clause ( d); 
(b) during the period of supersession of the Council, all powers and duties conferred and imposed 
upon the Council by or under this Act or any other law shall be exerci sed and performed by such 
officer or authority as the Administra tor may appoint in this behalf;  
(c) all property vested in the Council shall, until it is reconstituted, vest in the Central 
Government;  
(d) before  the expiry of the period of supersession, election or nomination, as the case may be, of 
members to the Council shall be held or made for the purpose of reconstituting the Council.  
  13 
 48. Effect of certain provisions during the period when the Hill Areas Committee is not  
functioning. —Where at any time, consequent on the dissolution of the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory of Manipur, the Hill Areas Committee is not functionin g, then, during the period when 
such Committee is not functioning, — 
(i) section 3 shall have effect as if sub -section ( 3) thereof had been omitted;  
(ii) clause ( xvii) of section 29 and the second proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 47 have effect 
as if t he words “in consultation with the Hill Areas Committee ” had been omitted therefrom.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
49. Penalty for obstruction .—If any person wilfully  obstructs a District Council or any officer or 
servant of a District Council or any person authorised by the District Council in the exercise of its powers, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
50. Penalty for entering into a ny contract with the Council. —If any member, officer or other 
employee of a District Council enters into any contract with the Council, he shall be deemed to have 
committed an offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
CHAPTER VIII  
RULES AND BYE -LAWS  
51. Power of Administrator to make rules .—(1) Without prejudice to the power to make rules 
under any other provision of this Act, the Administrator may, after previous publication, make, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, rules for t he purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the f oregoing power, such rules may — 
(i) regulate the conduct of business of a District Council;  
(ii) prescribe  the forms in which the budget estimate is to be prepared and the dates for the 
various stages of its completion;  
(iii) determine the language in which the business of a Distr ict Council will be transacted;  
(iv) regulate  the powers of a District Council to transfer pr operty;  
(v) regulate the powers of a District Council to contract and do other things necessary for the 
purposes of its constitution and t he mode of executing contracts;  
(vi) regulate the employment, payment,  suspension and removal of officers and staff of  a District 
Council;  
(vii) protect the terms and conditions of service of Government servants tra nsferred to a District 
Council;  
(viii) prescribe the forms for statements, registers, estimates and accounts of  a District Council 
and regulate the keeping, checking an d publication of such accounts;  
(ix) prescribe the authority by whom and the manner in which the accounts of a Distric t Council 
shall be audited; and  
(x) provide for any other matter for which rules have to be made under this Act.  
52. Power to make bye -laws .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules made 
thereunder, a  District Council may make bye -laws to provide for all or any of the following matters in the 
autonomous district for w hich it is constituted or in any part the reof, namely: — 
(a) the maintenance and management of schools and grant s of stipends and scholarships;  
(b) control and administration of dispensaries, their construction and repairs, the supply of 
medicines and the m easures to be taken during the prevalenc e of diseases;  14 
 (c) the protection from pollution of such tanks, springs, wells or parts of rivers, streams, channels 
or water courses as are set apart for  drinking or culinary purposes;  
(d) any  other matter which is necessary for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act  
and the rules made thereunder.  
(2) A bye -law made under sub -section ( 1) shall not have effect until it has been confirmed by the 
Administrator and published i n such manner as he may direct.  
(3) The Administrator, in confirming a bye -law, may make any change therein which appears to him 
to be necessary.  
53. Penalty for infringement of rules or bye -laws .—(1) In making any rule, the Administrator, and 
in making any bye -law, a District Council, may direct that the breach of the same shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing breach with a further fine 
which may extend to ten rupees of every day during which the brea ch is continued after the offender has 
been convicted of such breach.  
(2) In default of payment of any fine, the defaulter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fifteen days.  
--------------------------The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971--------------------------
1 THE MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY ACT, 1971  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. When pregnancies may be terminated by registered medical practitioners . 
4. Place where pregnancy may be terminated . 
5. Sections 3 and 4 when not to apply . 
6. Power to make rules . 
7. Power to make regulations . 
8. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
  2 THE MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1971  
[10th August, 1971 .] 
An Act to provide for the termination of certain pregnancies by registered medical practitioners 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Medical Termination of 
Pregnancy Act, 1971 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “guardian ” means a person having the care of the person of a minor or a2[menta lly ill person] ; 
3[(b) “mentally ill person ” means a person who is in need of treatment by reason of any mental 
disorder  other than mental retardation;]  
(c) “minor ” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 
1875), is to be deemed not to have attained his majority;  
(d)“registered medical practitioner ” means a medical practitioner who possesses any recognised 
medical qualification as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 
(102 of 1956), whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register and who has such experienc e 
or training in gynaecology and obstetrics as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act . 
3. When pregnancies may be t erminated by registered medical practitioners .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a registered medical 
practitioner shall not be guilty of any offence under that Code or under any other law for the time being in 
force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him in acco rdance with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a re gistered 
medical practitioner, — 
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twelve weeks, if such medical practitioner 
is, or  
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twelve weeks but does not exceed twenty weeks, if 
not less than two registered medical practitioners are,  
of opin ion, formed in good faith, that — 
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk  to the life of the pregnant woman or of 
grave injury to her physical or mental health; or  
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer f rom such physical or 
mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.  
Explanation I.—Where any pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have been caused by 
rape, the anguish caused by such pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental 
health of the pregnant woman.  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1972 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 285, dated 1 9th February , 197 2, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec.  3 (i). 
2. Subs. by Act 64 of 2002, s. 2, for “lunatic” (w.e.f. 18 -6-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 18-6-2003 ). 3 Explanation II.—Where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device or method used by 
any married woman or her husband for the purpose of limiting the number of children, the anguish caused 
by such unwanted pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of t he 
pregnant woman.  
(3) In determining whether the continuance of a pregnancy would involve such risk of injury to the 
health as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2), account may be taken of the pregnant woman ’s actual or 
reasonably foreseeable environment.  
(4)(a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, or, who, having 
attained the age of eighteen years, is a1[menta lly ill person], shall be terminated except with the consent in 
writing of her guardian.  
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause ( a), no pregnancy shall be terminated except with the 
consent of the pregnant woman.  
2[4. Place where pregnancy may be terminated .—No termination of pregnancy shall be made in 
accordance with this Act at any place other than — 
(a) a hospital established or maintained by Government, or  
(b) a place for the time being approved for the purpose of this Act by Government or a District 
Level Committee constituted by that Government with the Chief Medical Officer or District Health 
Officer as  the Chairperson of the said Committee:  
Provided that the District Level Committee shall consist of not less than three and not more than five 
members including the Chairperson, as the Government may specify from time to time.]  
5. Sections 3 and 4 when not  to apply .—(1) The provisions of section 4, and so much of the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 as relate to the length of the pregnancy and the opinion of not 
less than two registered medical practitioners, shall not apply to t he termination of a pregnancy b y a 
registered medical practitioner in a case where he is of opinion, formed in good faith, that the termination 
of such pregnancy is immediately necessary to save the life of the pregnant woman.  
3[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the  Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , the termination of 
pregnancy by a person who is not a registered medical practitioner shall be an offence punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven  
years under that Code, and that Code shall, to this extent, stand modified.  
(3) Whoever terminates any pregnancy in a place other than that mentioned in section 4, shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may 
extend to seven years.  
(4) Any person being owner of a place which is not approved under clause ( b) of section 4 shall be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may 
extend to se ven years.  
Explanation 1 .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “owner ” in relation to a place means 
any person who is the administrative head or otherwise responsible for the working or maintenance of a 
hospital or place, by whatever name called, where the pregnancy may be terminated under this Act.  
Explanation 2 .—For the pu rposes of this section, so much of the provisions of clause ( d) of section 2 
as relate to the possession, by registered medical practitioner, of experience or training in gynaecology 
and obstetrics shall not apply.]  
6. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 64 of 2002, s. 3, for “lunatic” (w.e.f. 18-6-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 4 (w.e.f. 18-6-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) and the Explanation  (w.e.f. 18-6-2003 ). 4 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters , namely :— 
(a) the experience or training, or both, which a registered medical practitioner shall have if he 
intends to terminate any pregnancy under this Act; and  
(b) such other matters as are required to be or may be, provided by rules made under this Act . 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two succe ssive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
7. Power to make regulations .—(1) The State Government may, by regulations, — 
(a) require any such opinion as is referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 3 to be certified by a 
registered medical practitioner or practitioners concerned, in such form and at such time as may be 
specified i n such regulations, and the preservation or disposal of such certificates;  
(b) require any registered medical practitioner, who terminates a pregnancy, to give intimation of 
such termination and such other information relating to the termination as may be specified in such 
regulations;  
(c) prohibit the disclosure, except to such persons and for such purposes as may be specified in 
such regulations, of intimations given or information furnished in pursuance of such regulations.  
(2) The intimation given and t he information furnished in pursuance of regulations made by virtue of 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be given or furnished, as the case may be, to the Chief Medical Officer 
of the State.  
1[(2A) Every regulation made by the State Government under this  Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before the State Legislature.]  
(3) Any person who wi lfully contravenes or wi lfully fails to comply with the requirements of any 
regulation made under sub -section ( 1) shall be liable to be punished wit h fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
8. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding  shall lie against any 
registered medical practitioner for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
--------------------------The Naval and Aircraft Prize Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE NAVAL AND AIRCRAFT PRIZE ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1971  
[16th December, 1971 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment and procedure of Prize Courts and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Naval and Aircraft Prize Act, 1971.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aircraft” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( ii) of section 4 of the Air Force               
Act, 1950 (45 of 1950);  
(b) “aircraft papers ” includes all books, passes, charter parties, bills of lading, customs receipts, 
manifests, certificates, licences, list s, tickets, notes, letters and other documents and writings 
delivered up or found on board a captured aircraft;  
(c) “Armed Forces ” means the Army, Navy and Air Force or any part of any one or more of them 
and includes any other armed force in the service o f, or employed with, the Army, Navy or Air Force 
during hostilities;  
(d) “goods” includes all such things as may be subject to adjudication as prize, but in the case of a 
naval prize does not include any aircraft or boat unless the aircraft or boat is a pa rt of the cargo of a 
ship;  
(e) “Prize Court ” means a prize court established under section 3;  
(f) “Indian citizen ” includes a company registered in India and having its principal place of 
business in India;  
(g) “military aircraft ” means any aircraft belong ing to the Armed Forces and includes any armed 
aircraft in the service of the Armed Forces and any other aircraft used as a transport or auxiliary or in 
any other way for the purpose of prosecuting or aiding hostilities;  
(h) “prize” means anything which, s ubject to this Act and the rules made thereunder, may be 
subjected to adjudication and includes a ship or an aircraft and goods carried therein, irrespective of 
whether the ship is captured at sea or seized in port or whether the aircraft is on or over lan d or sea at 
the time of capture or seizure;  
(i) “ship” includes a vessel and a boat with the tackle, furniture and apparel of the ship, vessel or 
boat; 
(j) “ship-of-war” means any ship belonging to the Armed Forces and includes any armed ship in 
the service of the Armed Forces and any other ship used as transport or auxiliary or in any other way 
for the purpose of prosecuting or aiding hostilities;  
(k) “ship paper s” inclu des all books, passes, sea briefs, charter parties, bills of lading, customs 
receipts, manifests, certificates, licences, lists, tickets, notes, letters and other documents and writings 
delivered up or found on board a ship captured at sea or seized in por t. 
3. Establishment of Prize Courts .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute from time to time as many Prize Courts as the Central Government may determine to 
exercise the powers and discharge the functions conferred on  a Prize Court by this Act and every such 
Prize Court shall exercise jurisdiction within the local limits of such area or areas as may be specified by 
the Central Government in the said notification.  
(2) Every Prize Court shall consist of such one or more than one member as the Central Government 
may from time to time deem it necessary to appoint.  2 
 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of a Prize Court unless he is a citizen 
of India and has been or is qualified to be appointed as a Judge of a High Court.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 18, the conditions of service of a member of a Prize Court 
shall be such as the Central Government may by order determine.  
4. Jurisdiction of Prize Courts in prize cases .—(1) No twithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, every Prize Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction in respect of each 
prize and each proceeding for the condemnation of property as prize, whether such prize is taken before 
or after the commencement of this Act, if the prize is — 
(a) brought into or seized within the territory of India;  
(b) brought into or seized within a locality in the temporary or permanent possession of, or 
occupied by, the Armed Forces of the Union; or  
(c) appropriated for the use of the Central Government,  
and is brought within the territorial jurisdiction of that Prize Court:  
Provided that in the case of a Naval prize, the Prize Court shall have jurisdiction only if the prize 
captured or seized is brought to a port or place lying within the territorial jurisdiction of that Prize Court.  
(2) Every Prize Court shall also have exclusive jurisdiction in respect of a prize in which the prize 
property— 
(a) is lost or entirely destroyed; or  
(b) cannot  be brought in for adjudication because of its nature and condition.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1) , a Prize Court shall 
take cognizance of and judicially proceed upon all manners of captures, seizures, prizes and reprisals of 
all ships, vessels, aircrafts and goods that are captured or seized, and shall hear and determine the same, 
and in accordance with this Act and rules made thereunder, shall adjudge and condemn all such ships, 
vessels, aircrafts and goods belonging to any country or State or the nationals, citizens or subjects thereof, 
as may be captured or seized as prize during a war or as a measure of reprisal during an armed conflict or 
in the exercise of the right of self -defence.  
(4) Notwithstan ding anything contained in this section, the Prize Court may in respect of any matter 
for which no provision or insufficient provision is made, by or under this Act, apply the principles of the 
International Law regulating that matter.  
5. Transfer of cases .—(1) Where proceedings are pending in any Prize Court against any ship, 
aircraft or goods, the Prize Court may, at any stage of the proceedings, on application being made by the 
proper officer of the Central Government and upon being satisfied that the pr oceedings so far as they 
relate to the ship, aircraft or goods, or any part thereof, would be more conveniently conducted in another 
Prize Court, make an order remitting the proceedings or the proceedings so far as they relate to the ship, 
aircraft or good s, or any part of the goods, as the case may be, to such other Prize Court.  
(2) Where any proceedings have been so remitted to another Prize Court, that other Prize Court shall 
have the same jurisdiction to deal with the matter as if the subject matter of those proceedings had 
originally been seized within its jurisdiction or brought within its jurisdiction after capture or seizure, as 
the case may be, and any order made or action taken in those proceedings before the order of remission 
shall be deemed to h ave been made or taken by or in that Court.  
6. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decree of the Prize Court may prefer an appeal 
to the Central Government within a period of ninety days from the date on which such order or decree has 
been mad e. 
(2) The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall so far as may 
be, apply for computation of the period specified in sub -section ( 1). 
  3 
 7. General powers of Prize Courts .—(1) A Prize Court shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the 
same powers as are vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil   Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) summoning  and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing  commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by rules.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), every Prize Court shall have the power to 
enforce— 
(a) any order or decree of ano ther Prize Court passed in a prize proceeding under this Act;  
(b) any order of the Central Government passed in a prize appeal under section  6. 
8. Procedure on capture of prize .—(1) Every ship and every aircraft taken as prize and brought into 
port or to a  place within the jurisdiction of a Prize Court shall forthwith and without bulk broken, be 
delivered to the Marshal of the Court.  
(2) If there is no such Marshal then the ship or aircraft shall be in like manner delivered to such 
person as the Central Gov ernment may appoint in this behalf.  
(3) The ship or aircraft shall, subject to the orders of the Court, remain in the custody of the Marshal, 
or the person appointed under sub -section ( 2). 
9. Ship and aircraft papers to be brought in Registry .—(1) The capt ors shall with all convenient 
speed after the ship or aircraft is brought into port or to a place within the jurisdiction of a Prize Court 
bring the ship papers or the aircraft papers, as the case may be, into the Registry of the Prize Court.  
(2) The comma nding officer or the captain of the capturing ship or aircraft or the commanding officer 
of the capturing force, or any other officer or person seizing the ship or aircraft at any port or aerodrome 
or any officer designated by the commanding officer or his  superior authority as a Prize Officer or such 
other officer or person who was present at the capture and saw the ship papers or aircraft papers delivered 
up or found on board shall make oath that they are brought in as they were taken without fraud, addit ion, 
or subduction or alteration or else shall account on oath to the satisfaction of the Prize Court for the 
absence or altered condition of the ship papers or aircraft papers or any of them.  
(3) Where no ship papers or aircraft papers are delivered up or  found on board the captured ship or 
captured aircraft, the commanding officer or the captain of the capturing ship or aircraft or the 
commanding officer of the capturing force or any other officer or person seizing the ship or aircraft or the 
Prize Office r or such other officer or person who was present at the capture shall make an oath to that 
effect.  
10. Goods .—The provisions of se ctions 8 and 9 relating to ships and aircraft shall, so far as may be, 
extend and apply to goods taken as prize on board a ship or aircraft and the Prize Court may direct such 
goods to be unladen, inventoried and warehoused.  
11. Preemption .—Where a ship of a foreign State passing the seas  or an aircraft of a foreign State, 
laden with military or victualling stores intended to be carried to any place under the control of an enemy 
is taken in circumstances making it subject to adjudication as prize, and is brought under the control of 
the Go vernment of India, and the purchase of such stores for the service of the Central Government 
appears to the said Government expedient without the condemnation thereof in a Prize Court, then the 
Central Government may purchase on account or for the service of the Central Government all or any of 
such stores.  4 
 12. Prize proceedings not to apply to enemy warships and military aircraft .—Nothing in th is Act 
shall apply to a ship -of-war or military aircraft of the enemy or any other ship or aircraft owned by the 
enemy whether or not registered in the territory of the enemy or goods carried therein and no proceedings 
of prize shall be necessary for the condemnation of such ship -of-war or military aircraft or other ship or 
aircraft or goods carried therein.  
13. Capture to belong to Central Government .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), all 
prizes captured by the Armed Forces of the Union and condemned where necessary in the Prize Court 
shall be the exclusive property of the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, at its discretion, out of the proceeds of the prize, make a grant of 
such sum of money as it deems fit to the benevolent funds of the Armed Forces of the Union.  
14. Prize salvage .—(1) Where any ship or goods or aircraft belonging to an Indian citizen, after 
being taken as prize by the enemy is or are retaken from the enemy, the same shall be restored by decree 
of a Prize Court to the owner on his paying to the Central Government as prize salvage one -eight h part of 
the val ue of the prize to be decreed and ascertained by the Prize Court or such sum not exceeding         
one-eighth part of the estimated value of the prize as may be agreed upon between the owner and the 
Central Government and approved by the order of the Prize  Court : 
Provided that where the recapture is made in the circumstances of special difficulty or danger, the 
Prize Court may if it thinks fit award to the Central Government as prize salvage a larger part than       
one-eighth but not exceeding in any case one-fourth part of the value of the prize:  
Provided further that where a ship or aircraft after being so taken is set forth or used by the enemy as 
a ship -of-war or military aircraft, the aforesaid provision for restitution shall not apply and subject to s uch 
compensation to the owner as the Prize Court may determine, the ownership of such ship or aircraft shall 
vest in the Central Government.  
(2) Where a ship belonging to any Indian citizen, after being taken as prize, is retaken from the 
enemy, such ship may, with the consent of the recaptors, prosecute her voyage and it will not be 
necessary for the Central Government to proceed to adjudication till her return to a port in India.  
(3) The master or owner of the ship or his agent may, with the consent of th e Central Government, 
unload and dispose of the goods on board the ship before adjudication.  
(4) In case the ship does not return within six months to a port in India, the Central Government may 
nevertheless institute proceedings against the ship or goods in a Prize Court and the Prize Court may 
thereupon award prize salvage as aforesaid and may enforce payment thereof.  
(5) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) shall mutatis mutandis apply also to an aircraft 
belonging to any Indian citizen which,  after being taken as prize, is retaken from the enemy.  
15. Offences in respect of prize .—Every person who is guilty of a prize offence, that is to say, an 
offence which if committed by a person subject to naval law would be punishable under section 63, 
section 64, section 65, section 66 or section 67 of the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), shall be punished 
with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine or both.  
16. Indemnity against legal proceedings .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in an y other law 
for the time being in force, no suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer of 
the Armed Forces of the Union or any other person for anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done in pursuance of this  Act or any rules made thereunder.  
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, no suit or other legal proceedings shall lie 
against the Central Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made thereunder . 
17. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for regulating the practice and procedure of a Prize Court and for generally carr ying out the 
purposes of this Act . 5 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the institution of cases , issue and service of writs, summons and other processes, and entering 
appearance and making of claims;  
(b) affidavits concerning ship papers or aircraft papers and other affidavits to be or which may be 
made in a Prize Court or for the purpose of proceedi ngs in a Prize Court ; 
(c) pleadings, particulars, discovery and inspection of documents and facts, evidence and hearing;  
(d) issue of warrants for arrest of prize, and detention of prize;  
(e) sale, appraisement, safe custody and inspection of prize;  
(f) bail and release;  
(g) requisition by Central Government of ships, aircraft or goods in the custody of a Prize Court;  
(h) appointment of assessors and their fees;  
(i) enforcement and execution of decrees and orders;  
(j) stay of proceedings;  
(k) costs  of or incidental to any proceedings in the Prize Court and as to the fees to be charged in 
respect of proceedings therein and as to the taking of security of costs;  
(l) procedure for hearing appeals and other matters pertaining to appeals;  
(m) appointment, duties and conduct of the officers of a Prize Court and costs, charges and 
expenses to be allowed to petitioners therein;  
(n) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which the right of visit, search, detention or 
capture of any ship or aircraft or goods thereon may be exercised and the penalty for impeding the 
exercise of any such right;  
(o) the manner in which any such ship or aircraft or goods seized by or under the authority of any 
officer of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be kept in custody or disposed of;  
(p) the conditions for declaring any ship or aircraft or cargo thereon as hostile and for 
condemnation thereof;  
(q) the manner in which a ship or aircraft recaptured from the enemy may be disposed of;  
(r) the conditions subj ect to which a right of unhindered passage may be allowed to a ship or 
aircraft within the territory of India on the outbreak of hostilities or an armed conflict on the basis of 
reciprocity;  
(s) any other matter whi ch may be, or is required to be , prescrib ed by rules . 
(3) All rules made u nder this section shall be laid, as soon as may be , after they are made, before each 
house of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one 
or 1[in two or more successive  sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification in the rules or 
both Houses agree that the rules should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under those rules . 
18. Dissolution of Prize Courts .—The Central Government may at any time when there is no pri ze 
proceeding pending before a Prize Court dissolve that Prize Court, and make such further orders as to the 
custody of the records of that Court as may be considered necessary.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 5-3-1984). 6 
 19. Repeals .—The Naval Prize Act, 1864 , the Naval Agency and Distribution Act, 1864, the Prize 
Courts Act, 1894, the Prize Courts Procedure Act, 1914, the Prize Courts Act, 1915, the Naval Prize     
Act, 1918 , the Prize Act, 1939, in so far as they apply in India are  hereby repealed.  
20. Savings .—Nothing in this Act shall — 
(a) give to the officers and seamen of the Indian Naval ships or officers and airmen of the Indian 
Military aircraft or to any other person concerned in the capture of the prize any ri ght or claim in or to 
any ships , aircraft or goods taken as prize or the proceeds thereof; or  
(b) affect the operation of any existing treaty or convention with any foreign State; or  
(c) take away or abridge the powers of the Central Government to enter into any treaty  or 
convention with any foreign State containing any stipulation that the Central Government may deem 
appropriate concerning any matter to which this Act relates.  
--------------------------The North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
  THE NORTH -EASTERN AREAS (REORGANISATION) ACT, 1971  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
PART II  
ESTABLISHMENT  OF THE STATES OF MANIPUR AND TRIPURA AND FORMATION OF THE STATE OF 
MEGHALAYA AND OF THE UNION  TERRITORIES OF MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL  PRADESH  
3. Establishment of the State of Manipur . 
4. Establishment of the State of Tripura.  
5. Formation of the State of Meghalaya.  
6. Formation of the Union territory of Mizoram.  
7. Formation of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.  
8. Territories of  the State of the Assam.  
9. Amendment of first Schedule to the Constitution.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
10. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
11. Allocation of sitting members representing the existing Union territories of Manipur and Tripura.  
12. Election to fill the seats allotted to the State of Meghalaya and the Union territories of Mizoram 
and Arunachal Pradesh.  
13. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950 . 
The Ho use of the People  
14. Allocation of seats in the existing House of the People.  
15. Parliamentary constituencies of the States of Manipur and Tripura and provision as to sitting 
members.  
16. Provision as to sitting members representing Cachar and Dhubri parliamentary c onstituencies in 
the House of the People and the election of representative from Diphu parliamentary 
constituency.  
17. Parliamentary constituencies of the State of Meghalaya and provision as to sitting member 
representing the Autonomous Districts parliamentary  constituency in the House of the People and 
the election of representative from Tura parliamentary constituency . 
18. Parliamentary constituency of the Union territory of Mizoram.  
19. Provision as to the member to represent Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the People.  
The Legislative Assemblies  
20. Allocation of seats in the Legislative Assemblies.  
21. Amendment of Second Schedule to Act 43 of 1950.  2 
  SECTIONS  
22. Delimitation of constituencies.  
23. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date.  
24. Validation of acts done previous to the commencement of the Act.  
25. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders . 
26. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders.  
27. Provision as to Provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Meghalaya and as to Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct  of Business of the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Tripura.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
28. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.  
28A. Establishment of separate High Courts for the States of Meghalaya, Ma nipur and Tripura.  
28B. Judges of High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.  
28C. Jurisdiction of High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.  
28D. Custody of seal of High courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.  
28E. Practice and procedure in the H igh Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura . 
28F. Forms of writs and other processes.  
28G. Powers of Judges.  
28H. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.  
28-I. Transfer of proceedings from common High Court to the High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur 
and Tripura.  
28J. Interp retation. 
28K. Saving.  
29. Jurisdiction of the common High Court . 
30. Abolition of certain Courts.  
31.  Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court.  
32. Extension of jurisdiction of the common High Court to the Union territo ries of Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh.  
33. Allocation of expenditure of the common High Court.  
34. Special provisions relating to advocates and Bar Council.  
35. Practice and procedure in the common High Court . 
36. Custody of seal of the common High Court.  
37. Form of writs and other processes.  
38. Powers of Judges.  
39. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.  
40. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Assam and Nagaland and the Courts of the 
Judicial Commissioners to the common High Court.  
41. Interpretation . 
42. Right to appear or act  in proceedings transferred to the common High Court.  
43. Savings.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
44.  Authorisation of expenditure pending sanction by Legislatures.  
45. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.  
46. Reports relating to the accounts of the Union territories of Manipur and Tripura.  3 
  SECTIONS  
47. Reports relating to the accounts of the autonomous State of Meghalaya.  
48. Allowances and privileges of the Governors of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura.  
49. Distribution of revenues.  
 
PART VI  
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
50. Property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc. , of the States of Manipur and Tripura.  
51. Assets and liabilities of the State of Meghalaya.  
52. Assets and liabilities (including public debt) relating to the Mizo District.  
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
53. Provisions as to certain Corporations.  
54. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and supply of 
water.  
55. Provisions as to Assam State Financial Corporation.  
56. General provisions as to statutory corporations.  
57. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
58. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in cer tain cases.  
59. Special provisions as to income -tax. 
60. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions.  
PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
61. Provisions relating to All -India Services.  
62. Provision relating to Services in Manipur and Tripura.  
63. Special provisions relating to members of Central Health Service.  
64. Provisions relating to Services in the existing State of Assam.  
65. Provisions relating to Services in the autonomous State of Meghalaya . 
66. Other provisions relating to Services.  
67. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posts.  
68. Advisory Committees.  
69. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
70. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission.  
PART IX  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
71. Amendment of articles 210, 239A, 244, 244A, 275, 332, 3 71B and Fifth and Sixth Schedules to 
the Constitution.  
72. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.  
73. Amendment of Act 64 of 1950 . 
74. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 . 
75. Amendment of Act 20 of 1963.  
76. Amendment of Act 56 of 1955 and the Tripura (Courts) Order, 1950.  
77. Territorial extent of laws.  
78. Continuance of existing District Councils and Regional Council and members thereof.  4 
  SECTIONS  
79. Power to adapt laws . 
80. Power to construe laws . 
81. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions.  
82. Legal proceedings . 
83. Rights of pleaders to practise in certain cases.  
84. Transfer of pending proceedings . 
85. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc.  
86. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws.  
87. Power to remove difficulties.  
87A. Power to rem ove difficulties . 
88. Power to make rules.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE . 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE . 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE . 
  5 
  THE NORTH -EASTERN AREAS (REORGANISATION) ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 81 OF 1971  
[30th December , 1971.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of the States of Manipur and Tripura and to provide for 
the formation of the State of Meghalaya and of the Union territories of Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh by reorganisation of the existing State of Assam and f or matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator of a Union territory appointed by the President under 
article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “appointed day ” means the day1 which the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(c) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(d) “common High Court ” means the Gauhati High Court (the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura) referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 28:  
2[Provided that on and from the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) 
and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the provisions of this clause shall have effect as if 
for the brackets and words “(Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura) ”, the brackets and 
words “(Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland) ” had been substituted; ] 
(e) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by t he President under 
article 324;  
(f) “existing  State of Assam ” means the State of Assam as existing immedi ately before the 
appointed day;  
(g) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, notification 
or other instrument having, immediately before the appointed day , the force of law in the whole or any 
part of the existing State of Assam or the autonomous State of Meghalaya or the Union territory of 
Manipur or the Union territory of Tripura, as the case may be;  
(h) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or the Legislative Assembly of the 
existing State of Assam, means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of 
that House or that Assembly;  
(i) “successor State ”, in relation to the existing  State of Assam, means the State of Assam or 
Meghalaya, and includes also the Union in relation to the Union territory of Mizoram;  
(j) “treasury ” includes a sub -treasury.  
  
                                                           
1. 21st January, 1972, vide notification No. G.S.R. 18(E), dated 6th January, 1972, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
s. 3(i). 
2.  The proviso ins . by Act 26 of 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23 -3-2013).  6 
  PART II  
ESTABLISHMENT  OF THE STATES OF MANIPUR AND TRIPURA AND FORMATION OF THE STATE OF 
MEGHALAYA AND OF THE UNION  TERRITORIES OF MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL  PRADESH  
3. Establishment of the State of Manipur. —On and from the appointed day there shall be 
established a new State, to be known as the State of Manipur, comprising the territories which 
immediately before that day were comprised in the Union territory of Manipur.  
4. Establishment of the State of Tripura. —On and from the appointed day there shall be established 
a new State, to be known as the State of Tripura, comprising the territor ies which immediately before that 
day were comprised in the Union territory of Tripura.  
5. Formation of the State of Meghalaya. —On and from the appointed day there shall be formed a 
new State, to be known as the State of Meghalaya, comprising — 
(a) the territories which immediately before that day were comprised in the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya formed under section 3 of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969); 
and  
(b) so much of the territories comprised within the cantonme nt and municipality of Shillong as did 
not form part of that autono mous State,  
and thereupon the said territotries shall cease to form part of the existing State of Assam.  
6. Formation of the Union territory of Mizoram. —On and from the appointed day there shall be 
formed a new Union territory, to be known as the Union territory of Mizoram, comprising the territories 
which immediately before that day were comprised in the Mizo District in the existing State of Assam and 
thereupon the said territories shall c ease to form part of the existing State of Assam.  
7. Formation of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh. —On and from the appointed day there 
shall be formed a new Union territory, to be known as the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh, 
comprising the t erritories which immediately before that day were comprised in the tribal areas specified 
in Part B of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (but excluding 
the areas covered by notification No. TAD/R/35/50/109, dated the 23rd February, 1951 issued by the 
Governor of Assam under the proviso to sub -paragraph ( 3) of the said paragraph 20)  and known as the 
North -East Frontier Agency and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the existing State 
of Assam.  
8. Territories of State of the Assam.—On and from the appointed day the State of Assam shall 
comprise the territories of the existing State of Assam other than those specified in sections 5, 6 and 7.  
9. Amendment of first Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, —  
(a) under the heading “I. THE STATES ”,— 
(i) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Assam, the following shal l be 
added at the end, namely: —  
“and the territories  specified in sections 5, 6 and 7 of the  North -Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971 ”; 
(ii) after entry 18  the following entri es shall be inserted, namely: —  
 
“19. Manipur  The territory which immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution was being administ ered as if it were a Chief Com missioner ’s 
Prov ince under the name of Manipur.  
20. Tripura  The territory which immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution was being administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner ’s 
Province under  the name of Tripura.  7 
  21. Meghalaya  The territories specified in section 5 of the North -Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971. ”; 
(b) under the heading “II. THE UNION TERRITORIES ”.—  
(i) entries  2 and 3 shall be omitted and entries 4 to 9 shall be re -numbered as entries 2 to 7 
respectively;  
(ii) after entry 7 as so re -numbered, the following entr ies shall be inserted, namely: —  
 
“8. Mizoram  The territories specified in section 6 of the North -Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971.  
9. Arunachal  The territories specified in section 7 of the North -Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971. ”. 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
10. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. —On and from the appointed day, in the 
Fourth Schedule to th e Constitution, in the Table, — 
(a) for entries 19 to 22, the following  shall be substituted, namely: —  
 
“19. Manipur  .. 1 
20. Tripura  .. 1 
21. Meghalaya  .. 1 
22. Delhi  .. 3 
23. Pondicherry  .. 1 
24. Mizoram  .. 1 
25. Arunachal Pradesh  .. 1”; 
(b) for the figures “228”, the figures “231” shall be substituted.  
11. Allocation of sitting members representing the existing Union territories of Manipur and 
Tripura. —On and from the appointed day the sitting members of the Council of States representing the 
existing Union territories of Manipur and Tripura shall be deemed to have been duly elected under          
clause ( 4) of article 80 to fill the seat allotted to eac h of the States of Manipur and Tripura respectively in 
that Council and the term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
12. Election to fill the seats allotted to the State of Meghalaya and the Union territories of 
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. —As soon as may be after the appointed day steps shall be taken to 
fill the seats in the Council of States allotted to the State of Meghalaya and the Union territories of 
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh.  
13. Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950 . —On and from the appointed day, in section 27A 
of the Representation of  the People Act, 1950, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “For the purpose of filling any seat ”, the words, brackets and 
figure “Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), for the purpose of filling any seat ” shall be 
substituted;  8 
  (b) in sub -section ( 4), for the words “The electoral college for each of the Union territories of 
Manipur, Tripura and Pondicherry ”, the words “The electoral college for the Union territory of 
Pondich erry” shall be substituted;  
(c) after sub -section ( 4), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(5) The seat allotted in the Council of State to each of the Union territories of Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh shall be filled by a person nomina ted by the President in this behalf. ”  
The House of the People  
14. Allocation of seats in the existing House of the People .— (1) On and from the appointed day and 
until the dissolution of the existing House of the People, the allocation of seats to the States of Assam, 
Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya and the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh in the 
House of the Peo ple and the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the 
Scheduled Tribes of each State and Union territory shall be as specified in the Table below and the First 
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of  1950), shall be deemed to have been 
amended accordingly.  
THE TABLE  
 
Name of the State/Union  
territory  Number of seats in the existing House of the 
People  
 Total  Reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved for  
the Scheduled  
Tribes  
1 2 3 4 
 
I. STATES:  
1. Assam  . . . 14 1 2 
2. Manipur  . . . 2 .. 1 
3. Tripura  . . . 2 .. 2 
4. Meghalaya  . . . 2 .. 2 
II. UNION TERRITORIES:  
1. Mizoram  . . . 1 .. 1 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh  . . . 1 .. 1 
(2) On and from the appointed day and until the dissolution of the existing House of the People, Part A 
of Schedule II to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1966 shall stand 
amended as dire cted in the First Schedule.  
15. Pa rliamentary constituencies of the States of Manipur and Tripura and provision as to 
sitting members. —(1) On and from the appointed day and until the dissolution of the existing House of 
the People, — 
(a) the  two parliamentary constituencies of the existing Union territory of Manipur shall be 
deemed to be the two parliamentary constituenci es of the State of Manipur; and  
(b) the two parliamentary constituencies of the existing Union territory of Tripura shall be deemed 
to be the two parliamentary constitu encies of the State of Tripura,  
and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1966 shall be construe d 
accordingly.  
(2) Every sitting member of the House of the People representing a parliamentary constituency which 
on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), becomes a parliamentary constituency 9 
  of the State of Manipur or Tripura , as the case may be, shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been 
elected under sub -clause ( a) of clause (1) of article 81 to the House of the People from that constituency.  
16. Provision as to sitting members representing Cachar and Dhubri parliamenta ry 
constituencies in the House of the People and the election of representative from Diphu 
parliamentary constituency .—(1) The sitting member of the House of the People representing the Cachar 
parliamentary constituency which on the appointed day, by virtu e of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 14, stands altered shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been elected under sub -clause ( a) of 
clause (1) of article 81 to the House of the People from t hat constituency as so altered.  
(2) The sitting m ember of the House of the People representing the Dhubri parliamentary constituency 
which on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 14, stands altered 
shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been elected under sub -clause ( a) of clause (1) of article 81 to 
the House of the People from t hat constituency as so altered.  
(3) As soon as may be after the appointed day election shall be held to the House of the People to elect 
a representative from the Diphu  parliamentary constituency as if the seat of the member elected to the 
House of the People from that constituency has become vacant and the provisions of section 149 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) shall, so far as may be, apply  in relation to such 
election.  
17. Parliamentary constituencies of the State of Meghalaya and provision as to sitting member 
representing the Autonomous Districts parliamentary constituency in the House of the People and 
the election of representative fro m Tura parliamentary constituency. —(1) There shall be two 
parliamentary constituencies in the State of Meghalaya to be called the Shillong parliamentary 
constituency and the T ura parliamentary constituency.  
(2) The area falling within the Garo Hills distri ct as it exists immediately before the appointed day 
shall form the Tura parliamentary constituency and the remaining area in the State of Meghalaya shall 
form the Shillong parliamentary constituency and the said two parliamentary constituencies shall be 
deemed to have been delimited ac cordingly.  
(3) The sitting member of the House of the People representing immediately before the appointed day 
the Autonomous Districts parliamentary constituency shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been 
elected under sub-clause ( a) of clause (1) of article 81 to the House of the People from the Shill ong 
parliamentary constituency.  
(4) As soon as may be after the appointed day election shall be held to the House of the People to elect 
a representative from the Tura parl iamentary constituency as if the seat of the member elected to the 
House of the People from that constituency has become vacant and the provisions of section 149 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) shall, so far as may be, apply in r elation to such 
election.  
18. Parliamentary constituency of the Union territory of Mizoram. —The whole of the Union 
territory of Mizoram shall form one parliamentary constituency to be called the Mizoram parliamentary 
constituency and as soon as may be afte r the appointed day election shall be held to the House of the 
People to elect a representative from that constituency, as if the seat of the member elected to the House of 
the People from that constituency has become vacant and the provisions of section 1 49 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such 
election.  
19. Provision as to the member to represent Arunachal Prad esh in the House of the People. —The 
sitting member nominated to fill the se at allotted in the House of the People to the Tribal Areas of Assam 
specified in Part B of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, 
known as the North -East Frontier Agency, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deeme d to have been 
nominated to fill the seat allotted to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the People.  
  10 
  The Legislative Assemblies  
20. Allocation of seats in the Legislative Assemblies. —(1) On and from the appointed day, the total 
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam, to be filled by persons chosen by direct 
election from territorial constituencies, shall be reduced from one hundred and twenty -six to one hundred 
and fourteen; and every sitting member of that Legislative Assembly representing a constituency which 
ceases to be a constituency in the State of Assam by virtue of the provisions of sub -section ( 5) shall, as 
from the appointed day, cease to be a membe r of that Legislative Assembly.  
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Manipur, to be constituted at 
any time after the appointed day, to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial 
constituencies shall be sixty, out of which one seat shall be res erved for the Scheduled Castes and nineteen 
seats shall be res erved for the Scheduled Tribes.  
(3) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura, to be constituted at 
any time after the appointed day, to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial 
constituencies shall be sixty, out of which six seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and nineteen 
seats shall be res erved for the Scheduled Tribes.  
(4) The total number of seats in the Legislative Asse mbly of the State of Meghalaya, to be constituted 
at any time after the appointed day, to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial 
constituencies shall be sixty, out of which fifty seats shall be res erved for the Scheduled Tribes.  
(5) On and from the appointed day, Part B of Schedule II to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and 
Assembly Constituencies Order, 1966 shall stand amended as directed in the First Schedule.  
21. Amendment of Second Schedule to Act 43 of 1950. —(1) In the Second  Schedule to the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950, — 
(i) under the heading “I. STATES :”,— 
(a) in item 2 relating to Assam, for the figures “126”, the figures “114” shall be substituted;  
(b) after item 17 and the entries relating thereto, the follow ing shall be inserted, namely: — 
 
“18. Manipur  .. 60 1 19 
19. Tripura  .. 60 6 19 
20. Meghalaya  .. 60 .. 50”; 
(ii) under the heading “II. UNION TERRITORIES :” items 3 and 5 and the entries rel ating thereto 
shall be omitted.  
(2) The amendment made by clause ( i)(a) of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect on and after the 
appointed day in relation to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam and the amendments made by 
clause ( i)(b) and clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect in relation to  the Legisla tive Assemblies of 
the States of Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya to be constituted at any time after the appointed day.  
22. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein 
provided, distribute, whether before or after  the appointed day, the seats assigned to the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States of Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya under section 20 to single member territorial 
constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest census figures having regard to th e provisions of 
the Constitution an d to the following provisions: — 
(a) all constituencies shall, so far as practicable, be geographically compact areas and in 
delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communic ation and public convenience;  
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall only within one parliamentary 
constituency;  11 
  (c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes shall be distrib uted in 
different parts of the States and located, as far as practicable, in those areas where the proportion of 
their population to the total populat ion is comparatively large; and  
(d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes sh all, as far as practicable, 
be located in those areas where the proportion of their population to the total population is the largest.  
Explanation. —In this section “latest census figures ” mean s the census figures with respect to the State 
concerned ascert ainable from the latest census of which the finally p ublished figures are available.  
(2) For the purpose of assisting in the performance of its functions under sub -section ( 1), the Election 
Commission shall associate with  itself as associate members, — 
(a) in respect of the State of Manipur, all the sitting members of the House of the People 
representing the Union territory of Manipur or, as the case may be, the State of Manipur under            
sub-section ( 2) of section 15, and such six persons who were me mbers of the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union territory of Manipur immediately before its dissolution by order of the President published 
in the Gazette of India, dated 16th October, 1969 with notification No. S. O. 4223, dated 16th October, 
1969 of the G overnment of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, as the Pre sident may, by order, 
nominate;  
(b) in respect of the State of Tripura, all the sitting members of the House of the People 
representing the Union territory of Tripura or, as the case may be, the  State of Tripura under                 
sub-section ( 2) of   section 15, and such six persons, being members of the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union territory of Tripura as it functioned immediately before the 1st November, 1971, as the 
President may, by order, nominate;  
(c) in respect of the State of Meghalaya, the member of the House of the People representing the 
Autonomous Districts parliamentary constituency or, as the case may be, the Meghalaya parliamentary 
constituency under section 17, and such of  the six members of the Legislative Assembly of the 
autonomous State of Meghalaya constituted under section 62 of the Assam Reorganisation 
(Meghalaya) Act, 1969  ( 55 of 1969)  or, as the case may be, of the Provisional Legislative Assembly 
of the State of M eghalaya referred to in section 27, as the President may, by order,  nominate:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any decis ion of the 
Election Commission.  
(3) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled, if 
practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) A member of any Legislative Assembly nominated under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) 
shall continue to be an associate member notwithstanding that he ceases to be a member of such 
Legislative Assembly, otherwise than consequent on the inc urring of any disqualification.  
(5) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, toge ther with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof, in the Official Gazette and 
in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections 
and suggestions in relation  to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals wi ll 
be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or orders 
shall have the full force of law and shall not be call ed in question in any court.  
(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order shall be laid before the Legislative 
Assembly of the concerned State.  12 
  23. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date.—(1) The Election 
Commission may, from time to time, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under section 22 or any error arising therein 
from inadvertent slip  or omission;  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any such order or orders 
are or is altered, make such amendment as appear to it to be necessary or expedient  for bringing such 
order up -to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the 
Legislative Assembly of the concerned State.  
24. Validation of acts done previous to the commencement of the Act .—All things done, and all 
steps taken, before the commenceme nt of this Act with a view to delimiting the territorial constituencies of 
the States of Manipur, Tripura and Meghalaya for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assemblies 
of those States shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provision s of sections 22 and 23, be 
deemed to have been done or taken under those sections as if those sections were in force at the time such 
things were done or such steps were taken.   
25. Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 shall stand amended as directed in the Second Schedule.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 
1951 shall stand amended as directed in the Third Schedule.  
26. Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders .—(1) On and from the appointed day the Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 shall stand amended as d irected in the Fourth Schedule.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 
1951 shall stand amended as directed in the Fifth Schedule.  
27. Provision as to Provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Meghalaya and as to Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business of th e Legislative Assemblies of the States of Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Tripura. —(1) On and from the appointed day and until the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Meghalaya has been duly constituted and summoned to meet for the first session under the 
provisio ns of the Constitution, the Provisional Legislative Assembly of the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya, excluding the members nominated thereto, constituted under section 62 of the Assam 
Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969) and functioning immediat ely before the appointed 
day, shall be the Provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Meghalaya and that Assembly shall 
exercise all the powers and perform all the duties conferred by the provisions of the Constitution on the 
Legislative Assembly of that State:  
Provided that for the purposes of this sub -section, the member representing the autonomous District of 
United Khasi -Jaintia Hills in the said Provisional Legislative Assembly of the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya shall be deemed also to represen t the territories specified in clause ( b) of section 5.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Meghalaya shall, unless the said Legislative Assembly is sooner dissolved, expire immediately before the 
first meeting of the Legislative Asse mbly of the State of Meghalaya.  
(3) The persons who, immediately before the appointed day, are the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker 
of the Provisional Legislative Assembly of the autonomous State of Meghalaya shall be the Speaker and 
the Deputy Speaker respectively of the Provisional Legislative Asse mbly of the State of Meghalaya.  
(4) The Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the Provisional Legislative Assembly of the 
autonomous State of Meghalaya, as in force imme diately before the appointed day, shall, until rules are 
made under clause (1) of article 208, be the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the 
Provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Meghalaya and of the Legislative Assembly of the State 
of Meghalaya duly constituted under the provisions of the Constitution, subject to such adaptations as may 
be made therein by the Speaker of the L egislative Assembly, concerned.  13 
  (5) The Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the Legislative Assembly  of the Union 
territory of Manipur, as in force immediately before its dissolution by order of the President published in 
the Gazette of India, dated the 16th October, 1969 with notification No. S.O. 4223, dated the 16th October, 
1969 of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, shall, until rules are made under clause 
(1) of article 208, be the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Manipur, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein  by the Governor 
of that State.  
(6) The Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Tripura as in force immediately before the 1st November, 1971, shall, until rules are made 
under clause (1) of article 208, be the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Tripura, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by 
the Governor of that State.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
28. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura .—(1) On and 
from the appointed day, — 
(a) the High Court of Assam and Nagaland shall cease to fu nction and is hereby abolished;  
(b) there shall be a common High Court for the States of Assam, Na galand, Meghalaya, Manipur 
and Tripura to be called the Gauhati High Court (the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Megha laya, 
Manipur and Tripura);  
(c) the Judges of the High Court of Assam and Nagaland holding office immediately before that 
day shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on that day the Judges of the common                
High Court:   
1[Provided that on and from the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) 
and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the common High Court shall be the High 
Court for the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland and shall cease to have 
its jurisdiction, powers and authority for the States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.]  
(2) Nothing in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall prejudice or affect the continued operation of any 
notice served, injunction issued, direction given or proceedings taken before the appointed day by the 
High Court of Assam and Nagaland under the powers then conferred upon that Court.  
2[28A. Establish ment of separate High Courts for the States of Meghalaya, Manipur and 
Tripura .—(1) On and from the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other 
Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 20 12, there shall be a High Court — 
(a) for the State of Meghalaya to be called the High Court of Meghalaya;  
(b) for the State of Manipur to be called the High Court of Manipur;  
(c) for the State of Tripura to be called the High Court of Tripura.  
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court 
of Tripura shall respectively be at such place as the President may, by notified order, appoint.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division courts of the             
High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura may sit at such other 
place or places in the States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura respectively, other than their principal 
seat as the Chief Justice of the respectiv e High Court may, with the approval of the Governor o f the State 
concerned, appoint.  
                                                           
1. The p roviso ins . by Act 26 of 2012, s. 3 (w.e.f. 23 -3-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -3-2013).  14 
  28B. Judges of High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura .—(1) Such of the Judges of the 
common High Court holding office immediately before the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 as may be determined by the President 
after ascertaining their option shall, on such commencement, cease to be the Judges of the common High 
Court and become a Judge of the H igh Court of Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High 
Court of Tripura, as the case may be.  
(2) Every person who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) become a Judge of the High Court of Meghalaya or 
the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura shall, except in the case where any such person is 
appointed to be the Chief Justice of any of those High Courts, rank in the respective High Court according 
to the priority of their respective appointments as J udges of the common High Court.  
28C.  Jurisdic tion of High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura .—The High Court of 
Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura shall have, in respect of any part of 
the territories included in the State of Meghalaya, the State of Manipur and t he State of Tripura 
respectively, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the law in force immediately before the 
commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 
2012, are exercisable in respec t of that part of the said territ ories by the common High Court.  
28D. Custody of seal of High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura .—The law in force 
immediately before the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 with respect to the custody of the seal of the common High Court shall, 
with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of 
Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tr ipura, as the case may  be. 
28E. Practice and procedure in the High Courts of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura .—The law 
in force immediately before the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other 
Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 with respect to practice and procedure in the common High Court 
shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of 
Manipur and the High Court of Tripura, and accordingly, the High Court of Meghalaya, the Hig h Court of 
Manipur and the High Court of Tripura shall, respectively, have all such powers to make rules and orders 
with respect to practice and procedure as are immediately before the commencement of the North -Eastern 
Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Rela ted Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 exercisable by the common 
High Court:  
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the commencement of the 
North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 with resp ect to 
the practice and procedure in the common High Court shall, until varied or revoked by rules or orders 
made by the High Court of Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura, as the 
case may be, apply with the necessary modific ations in relation to the practice and procedure in the High 
Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura respectively, as if such 
rules or orders were mad e by the respective High Court.  
28F. Forms of writs and other processe s.—The law in force immediately before the commencement 
of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 with 
respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the common High Court shall, 
with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued 
or awarded by the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura.  
28G. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediatel y before the commencement of the           
North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 relating to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, Single Judges and division courts of the common High Court and with 
respect to all mat ters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, 
apply in relation to the High Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur  and the High Court of 
Tripura.  
28H. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in for ce immediately before the 
commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 
2012 relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the common High Court and the Judges and division 15 
  courts thereof shall, with the n ecessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Courts of Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Tripura.  
28-I. Transfer of proceedings from common High Court to the High Courts of Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Tripura .—(1) Except as hereinafter provided, the common High Court shall, as from the 
commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 
2012, have no jurisdiction in respect of the States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the common High  Court immediately before the commencement of 
the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 as are 
certified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the 
place of a ccrual of the cause of action and other circumstances to be proceedings which ought to be heard 
and decided by the High Court of Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura, 
as the case may be, shall, as soon as may be after such ce rtification, be transferred to the High Court of 
Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura, as the case may be.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) or in section 28A, but save as 
hereinafter provided , the common High Court shall have, and the High Court of Meghalaya, the High 
Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura shall not have, jurisdication to entertain, hear or dispose 
of appeals, applications for leave to the Supreme Court, applications f or review and other proceedings 
where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed by the common High Court 
before the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2012:  
Provided th at if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the common High Court, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Meghalaya or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura, he shall order that they shall be so 
transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any orde r made by the common High Court — 
(a) before the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related 
Laws ( Amendment) Act, 2012, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Meghalaya, or the 
High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura by virtue of sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) in any proceeding with respect to which the common High Court retains jurisdiction by virtue 
of sub -section ( 3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only as an order of the common High Court but also as an order 
made by the High Court of Meghalaya, or the High Court of Manipur or the High Court of Tripura, as the 
case may be.  
28J. Interpretation .—For the purposes of section 28H, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a Court until that Court has disposed of all 
issues between the parties, inc luding any issue with respect to the taxation of the costs of the 
proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs; and  
(b) references to a  High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
Court thereof, and references to an order made by a Court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.  
28K. Saving .—Nothing in sections 28 A to 28J (both inclusive) shall affect the application to the High 
Court of Meghalaya, the High Court of Manipur and the High Court of Tripura of any provisions of the 
Constitution, and the provisions of these sect ions shall have effect subject to any provision that may be 
made on or after the  commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 with respect to the respective High Court by any Legislature or other 
authority having power to make such provisions.]  16 
   29. Jurisdiction of the common High Court .—On and from the appointed day, the common            
High Court shall have, in respect of the territories comprised in the States of Assam, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as under the law in force 
immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of those territories by the High Court of 
Assam and Nagaland or the Court of the Judicial Commissio ner for Manipur, or the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner for Tripura, as the case may be.  
30. Abolition of certain Courts. —(1) On and from the appointed day, the Courts of the Judicial 
Commissioners for Manipur and Tripura shall cease to fun ction and are  hereby abolished.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall prejudice or affect the continued operation of any notice served, 
injunction issued, direction given or proceedings taken before the appointed day by any of the Courts 
abolished by that sub -section, u nder the powers then conferred upon that Court.  
31. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court .—(1) The principal seat of 
the common High Court shall be at the same place at which the principal seat of the High Court of Assam 
and N agaland is located immedi ately before the appointed day.  
(2) The President may by notified order provide for the establishment of a permanent bench or 
benches of the common High Court at one or more places within the territories to which the jurisdiction o f 
the High Court extends, other than the principal seat of the High Court, and for a ny matters connected 
therewith:  
Provided that before issuing any order under this sub -section, the President shall consult the Chief 
Justice of the common High Court and th e Governor of the State in which the bench or benches is or are 
proposed to be established.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division 
courts of the common High Court may also sit at such other place or places in the State of 1[Assam,  
Arun achal Pradesh, Mizoram or Nagaland ] as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the Governor of 
the State concerned, appoint.  
32. Extension of jurisdiction of the common High Court to the Union territories of Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh. —On and from the appointed day, the jurisdiction of the common High Court shall 
extend to the Union territories of Miz oram and Aruna chal Pradesh:  
2[Provided that on and from the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and 
Other Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the provisions of this s ection shall cease to have effect.]  
 33. Allocation of expend iture of the common High Court. —The expenditure in respect of salaries 
and allowances of the Judges of the common High Court shall be allocated amongst the States of 
3[Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland ] and the Union in such proportion as the President may, by 
order, determine.  
34. Special provisions relating to advocates and Bar Council .—(1) Subject to any rule made or 
direction given by the common High Court in this behalf, any person, who  immediately before the 
appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Assam and Nagaland or in the Court 
of the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur or in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Tripura, shall 
be entitled to pract ise as an adv ocate in the common High Court.  
(2) The right of audience in the common High Court shall be regulated in accordance with the like 
principles as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audience in 
the Hi gh Court of Assam and Nagaland:  
Provided that as among the Advocates -General of the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland and Tripura, the right of audience shall be determined with reference to their d ates of enrolment 
as advocates.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2012, s. 5, for “Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland or Tripura” (w.e.f. 23 -3-2013).  
2. The p roviso ins . by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -3-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura” (w.e.f. 23 -3-2013).  17 
  (3) On and fro m the appointed day, in the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961) (hereafter in this Part 
referred to as the Advocates Act), in section 3, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) for clause ( b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(b) for the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura and the Union 
territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh, to be known as the Bar Council of Assam, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura. ”; 
(ii) in clause ( e), for the words “Union territories of Tripura  and the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands ”, the words “Union territory of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands ” shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -section ( 2), in clause ( b), for the words “Bar Council of Assam ”, the words “Bar 
Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura ” shall be substituted.  
(4) The provisions of section 17 of the Advocates Act shall have effect in respect of the roll of the Bar 
Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura subje ct to the modifications that, — 
(a) for  clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of the said section 17, the following clause  shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“(a) all persons who were entered as advocates, — 
(i) on the roll of the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland immediately before the day 
appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the North -Eastern Ar eas (Reorganisation) Act, 
1971;  
(ii) on the roll of the Bar Council of West Bengal immediately before that day and who, 
within three months from that day, express in such manner as the Bar Council of India may , 
by rules, prescribe their intention in writing to practise within the jurisdiction of the Bar 
Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura; ”; 
(b) in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of the said section 17, for the words and figures “with his d ate 
of enrolment under the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, ” (38 of 1926) the words “with his seniority on 
the roll of the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland or, as the case may be, the Bar Council of West 
Bengal ” shall be substitute d. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Advocates Act, as amended or modifie d by                 
sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4),— 
(a) in the case of the first Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura 
under that Act, the fifteen members required to be elected under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 3 of that Act, shall be nominated by the Chief Justice of the common High Court from 
amongst the advocates who are entitled as of right of practise in that High Court and are ordinarily 
practising with in the territories comprised in the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and 
Tripura and the Union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh and the term of office of the 
members so nominated shall be one year from the date of the first meeting  of the Council or until 
their successors are duly elected in accordance with the provisions of the said Act, whichever is 
earlier;  
(b) the names of persons entered on the roll of the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Tripura from the roll of the Bar Council of West Bengal in accordance with the 
provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17 of the Advocates Act, as modified by              
sub-section ( 4), shall, as from the date or dates on which the names are so entered, s tand removed 
from the roll of the Bar Council of West Bengal;  
(c) any proceedings which were pending or which may be instituted against any person before or 
by the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland or by the Bar Council of West Bengal immediately before 
his name is entered in the roll of the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and 18 
  Tripura in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17 of the 
Advocates Act, as modified by sub -section ( 4), may, after such entry , be continued or instituted 
before or by the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura;  
(d) every person who, immediately before his name stands removed from the roll of the            
Bar Council of West Bengal in accordance with the  provisions of clause ( b), is a member of the              
Bar Council of West Bengal, shall cease to be a member of that Council as from the date on which his 
name stands so removed from the roll of that Bar Council;  
(e) the rules made or deemed to have b een made by the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland and 
in force immediately before the date on which the first Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Tripura is duly constituted in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a), shall, subject  
to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman of the Bar Council of 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura, be deemed to be rules made by that Bar Council 
and shall have effect accordingly.  
(6)(a) As from the appoin ted day, the assets and liabilities of the Bar Council of Assam and Nagaland 
shall pass to the Bar Council of Assam Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.  
(b) The assets and liabilities of the Bar Council of West Bengal shall be apportioned between that  Bar 
Council and the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura in such manner and 
proportion as may be agreed upon by the Bar Councils and in default of agreement with reference to any 
matter, the matter shall be referred to the Chairm an of the Bar Council of India and his decision thereon 
shall be final.  
Explanation .—Expressions used in this section but not defined in this Act shall have the meanings 
assigned to them respectively in the Advocates Act . 
35. Practice and procedure in the common High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the 
law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High 
Court of Assam and Nagaland shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common 
High Court.  
36. Custody of seal of the common High Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Assam and Nagaland shall, with 
the necessary modifications, apply with r espect to the custody of the seal of the common High Court.  
37. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Assa m 
and Nagaland shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other 
processes used, issued or awarded by the common High Court.  
38. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect t o the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court of Assam and Nagaland 
and with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply in relation to the common High Court.  
39. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immediately before the appointed 
day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Assam and Nagaland and the Judges 
and division courts thereof shall, with the ne cessary modifications, apply in relation to the common High 
Court.  
40. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Assam and Nagaland and the Courts of the 
Judicial Commissioners to the common High Court. —(1) All proceedings pending in the High Court of  
Assam and Nagaland and in the Courts of the Judicial Commissioners for Manipur and Tripura 
immediately before the appointed day shall, from such day, stand transferred to the common High Court.  
(2) Every proceeding transferred under sub -section ( 1) shall  be disposed of by the common High 
Court as if such proceeding was entertained by that High Court.  19 
  (3) Any order made before the appointed day by the High Court of Assam and Nagaland or by the 
Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur or by the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Tripura 
shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of that High Court or, as the case may be, of that 
Court but also as an order of the common High Court.  
41. Interpretation. —For the purposes of section 40 ,— 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues 
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings 
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to  appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revisi on and petitions for writs; and  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
court thereof; and references to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that court or Judge.  
42. Right to appear or act in proceedings transferred to the common High Court. —Any person 
who, immediately before the appo inted day, is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Assam 
and Nagaland or in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur or in the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner for Tripura and was authorised to appear or to act in any proceedin gs transferred from the 
said High Court or Courts of the Judicial Commissioners to the common High Court under section 40, 
shall have the right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the common High Cou rt in relation to those 
proceedings.  
43. Savings. —Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the common High Court of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made on 
or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by an y Legislature or other authority having 
power to make such provisions.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
44. Authorisation of expenditure pending sanction by Legislatures .—(1) The President may, at any 
time before the appointed day, authorise by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the 
State of Manipur or of the State of Tripura as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months 
beginning with the a ppointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of 
the State of Manipur or of the State of Tripura, as the case may be:  
Provided that the Governor of Manipur or of Tripura may, after the appointed day, authorise by order 
such further expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur or, as 
the case may be, of the State of Tripura for any period not extending beyond the  said period of six months.  
(2) The President or, as the case may be, th e Governor of the concerned State shall make separate 
orders under sub -section ( 1) in respect of periods fallin g in different financial years.  
(3) The Governor of Assam, exercising the functions as Governor in relation to the autonomous State 
of Meghalaya by virtue of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), may at any 
time, before the appointed day, authorise by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the 
State of Meghalaya as he deems necessary for a period of not more tha n six months beginning with the 
appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya:  
Provided that the Governor of Meghalaya may, after the appointed day, authorise such further 
expenditure as he deems necessary  from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Meghalaya for any period 
not extending beyond the said period of six months.  
(4) The Governors referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall make separate orders under that sub -section in 
respect of periods fallin g in dif ferent financial years.  
(5) The President may, at any time, before or after the appointed day authorise by order such 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six 20 
  months beginning with the appointe d day for the administration of the affairs of the Union territory of 
Mizoram pending the sanction of such expenditure by Parliament.  
(6) The President shall make separate orders under sub -section ( 5) in respect of periods falling in 
different financial ye ars. 
45. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh. —Any 
Act passed by Parliament for the appropriation of any money out of the Consolidated Fund of India to 
meet the expenditure in respect of any part of the financ ial year 1971 -72 in, or for the purposes of, the 
tribal areas of Assam specified in Part B of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to 
the Constitution shall, on and from the appointed day, have effect also in relation to the Union terri tory of 
Arunachal Pradesh and it shall be lawful for the President to spend any amount in, or for the purposes of, 
that Union territory out of the amounts authorised by such Act to be expended in, or for the purposes of, 
the said tribal areas.  
46. Reports relating to the accounts of the Union territories of Manipur and Tripura. —(1) The 
reports of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India referred to in section 49 of the Government of 
Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963) relating to the accounts of the Union territory of Manipur or of 
the Union territory of Tripura in respect of any period prior to the appointed day sha ll be submitted to the 
Governor of Manipur or of Tripura, as the case may be, who shall cause them to be laid before the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Manipur or of the State of Tripura, as the case may be.  
(2) The Governor of Manipur or of Tripura,  as the case may be, may, by order, — 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of 
Manipur or of Tripura on any service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the 
financial year 1971 -72 or in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted for 
that service and for that year as disclosed in the reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to have been duly 
authorised, and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter ar ising out of the said reports.  
47. Reports relating to the accounts of the autonomous State of Meghalaya. —(1) The reports of 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India relating to the accounts of the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya in respect of any period  prior to the appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of 
Meghalaya who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislative Asse mbly of the State of Meghalaya.  
(2) The Gover nor of Meghalya may, by order, — 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya on any service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial year 
1971 -72 or in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and  
for that year as disclosed in the reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to have been duly authorised, and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said reports.  
48. Allowances and privileges of the Governors of Assam, Mani pur, Meghalaya and             
Tripura .—The allowances and privileges of the Governors of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura 
shall, until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under clause (3) of article 158, be such as 
the President may , by order, determine.  
49. Distribution of revenues .—The President shall, by order, determine the grants -in-aid of the 
revenues of the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura and the share of each such State in the 
Union duties of excise, estate du ty and taxes on income and for that purpose amend thereby the relevant 
provisions of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1962 (3 of 1962), the Additional Duties of 
Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957), the Estate Duty (Dis tribution) Act, 1962   
(9 of 1962) and the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1969 in such manner as he thinks fit.  
  21 
  PART VI  
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
50. Property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc., of the States of Manipur and             
Tripura .—(1) All such property and assets within the Union territory of Manipur or of Tripura as are held 
immediately before the appointed day by the Union for purposes of governance of that Union territory 
shall, on and from that day, pass to the State of Manipur or of Tripura, as the case may be, unless the 
purposes for which such property and assets are so held are Union pu rposes:  
Provided that the cash balance in the treasuries in the Union territory of Manipur or of Tripura before 
the appoi nted day shall, as from that day, vest in the State of Manipur or of Tripura, as the case may be.  
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations (other than those relatable to, or in connection with, a Union 
purpose), whether arising out of any contract or o therwise, which are, immedia tely before the appointed 
day,— 
(a) the rights liabilities and obligations of the Central Government arising out of, or in connection 
with, the governance of the Union territo ry of Manipur or of Tripura; or  
(b) the rights, liabi lities and obligations of the Administrator of the Union territory of Manipur or 
of Tripura in his capacity as such or of the Government of the Union territory of Manipur or of 
Tripura,  
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the 
State of Manipur or of Tripura, as the case may be.  
(3) The right to recover arrears of — 
(a) any tax or duty being a tax or duty enumerated in the state List in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution, or  
(b) any  duty referred to in article 268, or  
(c) any tax under the Central S ales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , 
which having fallen due in the Union territory of Manipur or of Tripura immediately before the appointed 
day shall, on and from that day, pass to the Stat e of Manipur or of Tripura, as the case may be.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall n ot apply to or in relation to, — 
 (a) any institution, undertaking or project the expenditure in relation to which is, immediately 
before the appointed day, met from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India;  
(b) any property which has been placed by the Union at the disposal of the administration of the 
Union territory of Manipur or of Tripura subject to the condition that the ownership thereof will 
continue to vest in the Union.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “liability ” includes liability in respect of any civil deposit, local fund deposit, charitable or 
other endowment, provident fund accoun t, pension or actionable wrong;  
(b) “Union purposes ” mean the purposes of Government relatable to any of the matters 
mentioned in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  
51. Assets and liabilities of the State of Meghalaya .—(1) All rights, liabilities and obligations 
whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, which are, immediately before the appointed day, the 
rights, liabilities and obligations of the autonomous State of Meghalya, including the rights, liabilities and 
obligations apportioned or to be apportioned to the share of the autonomous State of Meghalaya by virtue 
of section 58 of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), shall, on and from the 
appointed day, be the rights, liabilities and obli gations of the State of Meghalya.  
(2) All property and assets held by the autonomous State of Meghalya immediately before the 
appointed day, including the property and assets apportioned or to be apportioned to the share of the 22 
  autonomous State of Mehgalya  by virtue of section 58 of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 
1969 (55 of 1969) shall, on and from that day,  pass to the State of Meghalya.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section and section 52, all rights, 
liabil ities and obligations whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, which are, immediately before 
the appointed day, the rights, liabilities and obligations of the existing State of Assam and all property and 
assets held by the existing State of Assam immediately before the appointed day shall be apportioned 
between the State of Assam and the State of Meghalaya in accordance with the provisions contained in the 
Sixth Schedule.  
52. Assets and liabilities (including public debt) relating to the Mizo  District .—(1) All property 
and assets within the Mizo District which are, immediately before the appointed day, vested in the existing 
State of Assam shall, as fr om that day, vest in the Union.  
(2) Unless the Central Government otherwise directs, any stor es, articles and other goods belonging to 
the existing State of Assam and situated outside the Mizo District immediately before the appointed day 
shall, as from that day, pass to the Union if such stores, articles or other goods are held for, or are relata ble 
to, the a dministration of that District.  
(3) All rights, liabilities and obligations of the existing State of Assam in relation to the Mizo District 
shall, as from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilitie s and obligations of the Union.  
(4) The liab ility of the existing State of Assam to the Union in respect of the loans taken by that State 
from the Central Government shall be reduced by an amount which bears such proportion to the total 
public debt of that State immediately before the appointed day as the total expenditure on all capital works 
and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred up to that day by the existing State of 
Assam in the Mizo District bears to the total expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlay s 
incurred or deemed to have been incurred by the existing State of Assam up to the appointed day:  
Provided that for the purposes of this sub -section the total public debt of the existing State of Assam 
shall exclude the public debt apportioned or apporti onable to the autonomous State of Meghalaya under 
section 58 of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), and the total expenditure on 
all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred by the existing S tate 
of Assam shall exclude such outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred for the purposes of the 
autonomou s State under the said section.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall apply to any amount which may be payable by the Union to the 
existing State  of Assam in respect of the expenditure incurred by that State in connection with internal 
disturbances in the Mizo District.  
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
53. Provisions as to certain Corporations .—(1) The  following bodies corporate constituted for the 
existing State of Assam, namely: — 
(a) the State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 1948); 
and  
(b) the State Warehousing Corporation established under the Warehousin g Corporations Act, 1962 
(58 of 1962),  
shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which they were 
functioning immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as 
may, from time to time, be is sued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by th e Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the Board or 
the Corporation may include a direction that the Act under which the Board or the Corporation was  
constituted shall, in its application to that Board or Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions and 
modifications as the  Central Government thinks fit.  23 
  (3) The Board or the Corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall cease to function as f rom, and 
shall be deemed to be dissolved on, the expiry of a period of 1[thirty -eight months] from the appointed day 
or such earlier date as the Central Government may, by order, appoint; and upon such dissolution, its 
assets, rights and liabilities shall be apportioned between the successor States in such manner as may be 
agreed upon among them within one year of the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation, as the case 
may be, or if no agreement is reached, in such manner as the Central Gover nment may,  by order, 
determine.  
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of any of the successor States from constituting at any time on or after the appointed day, a 
State Electricity Board or a State W arehousing Corporation for that State under the provisions of the Act 
relating to such Board or Corporation; and if such a Board or a Corporation is so constituted in any of the 
successor States before the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation referr ed to in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the new Board or the 
new Corporation to take over from the existing Board or Corporation all or any of its undertakings, 
assets, rights and liabilities in that  State, and  
(b) upon the dissolution of the e xisting Board or Corporation, — 
(i) any assets, rights and liabilities which would otherwise have passed to that State by or 
under the provisions of sub -section ( 3) shall pass to the new Board or the new Corpor ation instead 
of to that State;  
(ii) any employees who would otherwise have been transferred to or re -employed by that State 
under sub -section ( 3), read with clause ( i) of sub -section ( 5), shall be transferred to or                  
re-employed by the new Bo ard or the new Corporation instead of to or by that State.  
(5) An agreement entered into between the successor States under sub -section ( 3) and an order made 
by the Central Government under that sub -section or under clause ( a) of sub -section (4) may provid e for 
the transfer or re -employment of any employees of the Board or the Corporation referred to in                 
sub-section ( 1),— 
(i) to or by the successor States, in the case of an agreement under  sub-section ( 3) or an ord er 
made under that sub-section;  
(ii) to or by the new Board or the new Corporation constituted under sub -section ( 4), in the case of 
an order made under clause ( a) of that sub -section,  
and, subject to the provisions of section 58, also for the terms and conditions of servic e applicable to such 
employees after such transfer or  re-employment.  
54. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and 
supply of water. —If it appears to the Central Government that the arrangement in regard to the gen eration 
or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any area or in regard to the execution of any project 
for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvantage of that area by 
reason of the fact that it is, by vi rtue of the provisions of Part II, outside the State in which the power 
stations and other installations for the generation and supply of such power, or the catchment area, 
reservoirs and other works for the supply of water, as the case may be , are located , the Central 
Government may give such directions as it deems fit, to the State Government or other authority 
concerned for the maintenance, so far as practicable, of the previous arrangement.  
55. Provisions as to Assam State Financial Corporation. —(1) The  Assam State Financial 
Corporation established under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951) shall, on and from 
the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which it was functioning immediately 
before that day, subje ct to the provisions of this section and to such directions as may, from time to time, 
be issued by the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1975, s. 2, for “three years” (w.e.f. 20 -1-1975).  24 
  (2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under s ub-section ( 1) in respect of the 
Corporation may include a direction that  the said Act, in its application to the Corporation, shall have 
effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may  be specified in the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Board of Directors of 
the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and shall, if so required by 
the Central Government, convene at any time after the appointed day a meeting for the consideration of a 
scheme for the reco nstitution or reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation, 
including proposals regarding the formation of new Corporations, and the transfer thereto of the assets, 
rights and liabilities of the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at a general meeting by 
a resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be submitted to 
the Central Government for its sanction.  
(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either  without modifications or with 
modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify the scheme, 
and upon such certification the scheme shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
law for the time being in force, be binding on the Corporations affected by the scheme as well as the 
shareholders and creditors thereof.  
(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Central Government may refer the scheme to 
such Judge of the common High Court as may be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice thereof, 
and the decision of the Judge in regard to the scheme shall be final and shall be binding on the 
Corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shar eholders and creditors thereof.  
(6) Not hing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of the State of Meghalaya from constituting, at any time after the appointed day and with the 
approval of the Central Government, a State Financial Corporation  for that State under the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951).  
56. General provisions as to statutory corporations .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by 
the foregoing provisions of this Part, where any  body  corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act 
or Provincial Act for the existing State of Assam or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of  
Part II, become an inter -State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, on and from the appointed 
day continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of which it was functioning and operating 
immediately before that day, subject to such directions as may from time to time be issued by the Central 
Government, until other provision i s made by law in resp ect of the said body corporate.  
(2) Any directions issued by th e Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any such 
body corporate may include a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed shall, in  
its application to that body corporate, have effect, subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be 
specified in the direction.  
57. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain e xisting road transport                 
permits. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 63 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939              
(4 of 1939 ), a permit granted by the State or a Regional Transport Authority in the existing State of Assam 
shall, if such permit was, immediately before the ap pointed day, valid and effective in any area therein, be 
deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after that day subject to the provisions of that Act 
as for the time being in force in that area and it shall not be necessary for any such p ermit to be 
countersigned by any State or Regional Transport Authority for the purpose of validating it for use in such 
area:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government or 
Governments concerned, add to, amend or  vary the conditions attached to the permit by the authority by 
which the permit was granted . 
(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in 
respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in an y of the successor States under any such permit, if 
such vehicle was immediately before that day exempt from the payment of any such tolls, entrance fees or 
other charges for its operations with in the existing State of Assam:  25 
  Provided that the Central Gove rnment may, after consultation with the State Government or 
Governments concerned, authorise the levy of any such tolls, entrance fees or other charges, as the case 
may be.  
58. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases .—Where , on account 
of the reorganisation of the existing Sta te of Assam under this Act, any  body corporate constituted under a 
Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co -operative society registered under any law relating to          
co-operative societies  or any commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted or 
reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body corporate, co -operative 
society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitu tion, reorganisation, 
amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such body corporate or any such co -operative 
society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re -employed by, any other body corporate, or in any other           
co-operative society o r undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything contained in section 25F, 25FF or 
25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), such transfer or re -employment shall not entitle 
him to any compensatio n under that section:  
Provided that — 
(a) the ter ms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or                     
re-employment are not less favourable to the workman than those applicable to him immediately 
before the transfer or re -employmen t; and  
(b) the employer in re lation  to the body corporate, the co -operative society or the undertaking 
where the workman transferred or re -employed is, by agreement or otherwise, legally liable to pay to 
the workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation under section 25F, 25 FF or 25FFF of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), on the basis that his service has been continuous and has 
not been interrupted by the transfer or re -employment.  
59. Special provisions as to income -tax.—Where the assets , rights and liabilities of any body 
corporate carrying on business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies 
corporate which after the transfer carry on the same business, the losses or profits or gains sustained by the 
body corporate firs t mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried 
forward and set -off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income -tax Act, 1961             
(43 of 1961 ), shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies cor porate in accordance with the rules to 
be made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon such appoint nment, the share of loss allotted 
to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of 
the sai d Act as if the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a business carried on by it 
in the years in which these losses were sustained.  
60. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions .—(1) The Government of the State of 
Assam  or Meghalaya or, as the case may be, the Central Government in relation to the Union territory of 
Mizoram shall, in respect of the institutions specified in the Seventh Schedule located in that State or 
Union territory, continue to provide facilities to a ny other Government aforesaid and the people of the 
States and Union territory aforesaid which shall not, in any respect, be less favourable to such Government 
and people than what were being provided to them before the appointed day, for such period and u pon 
such terms and conditions (including those relating to any contributions to be made for the provision of 
such facilities) as may be agreed upon between the said Governments before the expiry of a period of one 
year from the appointed day or, if no agre ement is reached before such expiry, as may be fixed by o rder of 
the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may at any time before the expiry of a period of one year from the 
appointed day, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in the Se venth Schedule any other institution 
existing on the appointed day in the said States and Union territory and on the issue of such notification, 
the said Schedule shall be deemed to be amended by the inclusion of the said institution therein.  
  26 
  PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
61. Provisions relating to All -India Services .—(1) In this section, the expression “joint cadre ”,— 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian 
Administrative Ser vice (Cadre) Rules, 1954;  
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Police 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; and  
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Forest 
Service (Cadre ) Rules, 1966.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, there shall be constituted for the States of Assam and Meghalaya a 
joint cadre of the Indian Administrative Service, a joint cadre of the Indian Police Service and a joint cadre 
of the Ind ian Forest Service . 
1[(3) On and from the appointed day, there shall be constituted for the States of Manipur and Tripura 
and joint cadre of the Indian Administrative Service, a joint cadre of the Indian Police Service and a joint 
cadre of the Indian Forest Services. ] 
(4) The initial strength and composition of each of the joint cadres referred to in sub -sections ( 2) and 
(3) shall be such as the Central Government may, by order, dete rmine before the appointed day.  
(5) The members of each of the said Services borne on the As sam cadre thereof immediately before 
the appointed day shall be allocated to the joint cadre of the same Service constituted under sub -section ( 2) 
and to the Union territories cadre of that Service in such manner and with effect from such date or dates as 
the Central Gov ernment may, by order, specify.  
(6) Such members of each of the said Services borne on the Union territories cadre thereof 
immediately before the appointed day, as the Central Government may, by order, specify, shall be 
allocated to the join t cadre of the same Service constituted under sub -section ( 3) with effect from such 
date or dates as  may be specified in the order.  
(7) Every person who, being a member of a State Civil Service of the existing State of Assam, is borne 
on a Select List for promotion to the Assam cadre of an All -India Service immediately before the 
appointed day shall, unless he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union under section 64, be deemed 
to have been included in the same order as in that List, in the Select List  for promotion to the joint cadre of 
the same Service con stituted under sub -section ( 2). 
(8) Every person who, being a person deemed to have been allocated under section 62 for service in 
connection with the affairs of the State of Manipur or the State of Tripura, is borne on a Select List for 
promotion to the Union territories cadre of an All -India Service immediately before the appointed day, 
                                                           
1. Sub-section ( 3) shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by Act 39 of 2012, s. 2 to read as under:  
“(3) On and from the date of commencement of the North -Eastern Areas ( Reorganisation) Amendment Act, 2012, there 
shall be constituted each for the State of Manipur and for the State of Tripura a separate cadre of the Indian Administrative  
Service, a separate cadre of the Indian Police Service and a separate cadre of the Indi an Forest Service.  
(3A) The initial strength and composition of the State cadres referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be such as the Central 
Government may, by order, determine before the date of commencement of the  North -Eastern Areas  (Reorganisation) 
Ame ndment Act,  2012.  
(3B) The members of each of the said services borne on the joint cadre for the States of Manipur and Tripura in each 
category of the All -India Services immediately before the commencement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) 
Amendm ent Act, 2012 shall be allocated to the State cadres of the same service constituted under sub -section ( 1) in such manner 
and with effect from such date or dates as the Central Government may, by order, specify.  
(3C) Nothing in this section shall be deemed  to affect the operation, on or after the commencement of the North -Eastern 
Areas (Reorganisation) Amendment Act, 2012, of the All -India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951), or the rules and regulations 
made thereunder. ” 27 
  shall be deemed to have been included in the same order as in that List, in the Select List for promotion to 
the joint cadre of the same Service constituted under sub -section ( 3). 
(9) Every person who, bei ng a person deemed to have been allocated to the Union under section 64, is 
borne on a Select List for promotion to the Assam cadre of an All -India Service immediately before the 
appointed day, shall be deemed to have been included in the Select List for p romotion to the Union 
territories cadre of the same Service and his position in the said Select List shall be determined by the 
Central Government in consultation with the U nion Public Service Commission.  
(10) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to aff ect the operation after the appointed day of the          
All-India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951), or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
62. Provision relating to Services in Manipur and Tripura .—Every person who immediately before 
the appointed d ay is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administrative control of 
the Administrator of the Union territory of Manipur, or the Administrator of the Union territory of Tripura 
(including a person who has been placed on deputation by the Administrator concerned with any other 
authority), shall, unless otherwise directed by an order of the Central Government, be deemed to have 
been allocated for service as from that day in connection with the affairs of the State of Manipur or, as th e 
case m ay be, of the State of Tripura:  
Provided that no direction shall be issued under this section after the expiry of a period of one year 
from the appointed day.  
63. Special provisions relating to members of Central Health Service .—Notwithstanding the  
provisions of section 62, every member of the Central Health Service who immediately before the 
appointed day is holding any post in the Union territory of Manipur or the Union territory of Tripura, 
being a post included in the authorised strength of that  Service, shall, unless otherwise directed by the 
Central Government, be deemed to be on deputation on and from the appointed day, to the Government of 
the State of Manipur or, as the case may be, of the State of Tripura on the same terms and conditions of  
service as are applicable to him under the Central Health Service Rules, 1963, but wi thout any deputation 
allowance:  
Provided that the period of such deputation shall in no case extend beyond a period of thre e years from 
the appointed day.  
Explanation .—In this section, “Central Health Service ” means the Central Health Service constituted 
under the Central Health Service Rules, 1963.  
64. Provisions relating to Services in the existing State of Assam .—(1) Such persons serving in 
connection with the affairs o f the existing State of Assam (including persons borne on any cadre of that 
State and serving under the Government of the autonomous State of Meghalaya or on deputation to any 
other Government or authority) as may be determined at any time befo re or after the appointed day, — 
(a) by agreement between the Government of the existing State of Assam and the Government of 
the autonomous State of Meghalaya or between the Government of the State of Assam and the 
Government of the State of Meghalaya, as the case may  be, or  
(b) in default of any such agreem ent, by the Central Government,   
may, notwithstanding anything in their terms of appointment or  their conditions of service, — 
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), by one or more orders made by the Government of the 
existing State of Assam or the Government of the State o f Assam, as the case may be, or  
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), by one or more orders made by the Central Government,  
be required to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of  Meghalaya and every such person shall 
accordingly be deemed to have been allocated to that State with effect from such date as  may be specified 
in the order.  
(2) Such persons serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Assam (including 
persons borne on any cadre of the existing State of Assam and serving under the Government of the 28 
  autonomous State of Meghalaya or on deputation to any other Go vernment or authority), as the Central 
Government may, at any time before or after the appointed day, determine after consultation with the 
Government of the existing State of Assam  or the Government of the State of Assam , as the case may be, 
may, notwiths tanding anything in the terms of their appointment or their conditions of service, by one or 
more orders made by the Central Government, be required to serve in connection with the administration 
of the Union territory of Mizoram, and every such person sha ll, accordingly, be deemed to have been 
allocated to the Union with effect from such date as  may be specified in the order:  
Provided that every person borne on any cadre of the existing State of Assam and serving in the Mizo 
District immediately before the  appointed day shall, unless otherwise directed by the Administrator of the 
Union territory of Mizoram, continue to serve on and from the appointed day, in connection with the 
administration of that Union territory until any order is made under this sub -section in respect of such 
person or the expiry of a period of three years from the appointed day, whichever is earlier.  
65. Provisions relating to Services in the autonomous State of Meghalaya .—Every person who 
immediately before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya (including a person on deputation from the Government of that autonomous State to any other 
Government or authority) , not being a person to whom section 64 applies, shall be deemed  to have been 
allocated to serve as from that day in connection with the affairs of the State of Meghalaya.  
66. Other provisions relating to Services .—(1) Nothing in this section or sections 62 to 65 (both 
inclusive) shall be deemed to affect on or after t he appointed day the operation of the provisions of 
Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to determination of conditions of service of persons 
serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Manipur, Meghalaya or Tripura or the Union  territory 
of Mizoram:  
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day in the case of 
any person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Manipur or the State of Tripura under section 62 
or to the State of Megha laya under sub -section ( 1) of section 64 or section 65 or to the Union under             
sub-section ( 2) of section 64 shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous appr oval of 
the Central Government.  
(2) All services prior to the appo inted day rendered by a person — 
(a) if he is deemed to have been allocated to any State under section 62 or section 64 or              
section 65, shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of that State,  
(b) if he is deemed to h ave been allocated to the Union in connection with the administration of 
the Union territory of Mizoram, shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection  with the affairs 
of the Union,  
for the purposes of the rules regula ting his conditions of service.  
(3) The provisions of sections 62, 64 and 65 shall not apply in relation to members of any  All-India 
Service.  
67. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posts .—(1) Every person who, immediately 
before the appointed day is holding or discharging t he duties of any post or office in connection with the 
administration of the Union territory of Manipur or Union territory of Tripura, shall continue to hold the 
same post or office in the State of Manipur, or, as the case may be, in the State of Tripura a nd shall be 
deemed, on and from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or 
other appropriate au thority in the State concerned.  
(2) Where a person who immediately before the appointed day is holding or discharging t he duties of 
any post or office in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Assam and, as from the appointed 
day, such duties become duties in connection with the affairs of the State of Meghalaya or administration 
of the Union territory of Miz oram, then, he shall continue to hold the same post or office in that State or 
Union territory and shall be deemed, on and from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or 
office by the Government or Administrator of, or other appropriate authorit y in, that State or Union  
territory, as the case may be.  29 
  (3) Where a person who immediately before the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of 
any post or office in connection with the affairs of the autonomous State of Meghalaya and, as from the 
appointed day, such duties become duties in connection  with the affairs of the State of Meghalaya, then, he 
shall continue to hold the same post or office in the State of Meghalaya and shall be deemed, on and from 
that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or other appro priate 
authority in, the State of Meghalaya.  
(4) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to prevent a 
competent authority, on and from the appointed day, from passing in relation to any person referred to in 
that su b-section any order affecting his continuance in such post or office.  
68. Advisory Committees .—The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more Advisory 
Committees for the purpose  of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the discharge of any of its fun ctions under thi s Part; and  
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
Part and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons.  
69. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions to the State Governments of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura and to the Administrator 
of the Union territory of Mizoram as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to 
the foreg oing provisions of this Part and the State Governments and the Administrator shall comply with 
such directions.  
70. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission .—(1) The Public Service Commission for the 
existing State of Assam shall, on and from the a ppointed day, be deemed to be the Public Service 
Com mission for the State of Assam.  
(2) Every person holding office immediately before the appointed day as Chairman or other member 
of the Public Service Commission for the existing State of Assam shall, as from the appointed day, be the 
Chairman or, as the case may be, the other member of the Public Service Com mission for the State of 
Assam.  
(3) Every person who becomes Chairman or other member of the Public Service Commission for the 
State of Assam on the a ppointed day under sub -section ( 2) shall— 
(a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State of Assam conditions of service not less 
favourable than those to which he was entitled under the provisions applicable to him immediatel y 
before the appoi nted day; and  
(b) subject to the proviso to clause (2) of article 316, hold office or continue to hold office until 
the expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions applicable to him immediatel y 
before the appointed day.  
PART IX  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
71. Amendment of articles 210, 239A, 244, 244A, 275, 332, 371B and Fifth and Sixth Schedules 
to the Constitution. —On and from the appointed day — 
(a) in article 210, in the proviso to clause ( 2), for the words “Legislature of  the State of Himachal 
Pradesh ”, the words “Legislatures of the States of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and 
Tripura ” shall be substituted;  
(b) in article 239A, in clause ( 1), the words “Manipur, Tripura, ” shall be omitted;  
(c) in article 244, — 
(i) in clause ( 1), for the words “the State of Assam ”, the words “the States of Assam and 
Meghalaya ” shall be substituted;  30 
  (ii) in clause ( 2), for the words “the State of Assam ”, the words “the States of Assam and 
Meghalaya and the Union territory of Mizoram ” shall be substituted;  
(d) in article 244A, in clause ( 1), for the word and letter “Part A ”, the word and figure “Part I ” 
shall be substituted;  
(e) in article 275, in clause ( a) of the second proviso to clause ( 1), for the word and letter “Part A ”, 
the word and figure “Part I ” shall be substituted;  
(f) in article 332, — 
(i) in clause ( 5), the words “except in the case of the constituency comprising the cantonment 
and municipality of shillong ” shall be omitted;  
(ii) in clause ( 6), the words “except f rom the constituency comprising the cantonment and 
municipality of Shillong ” shall be omitted;  
(g) in article 371B, for the word and letter “Part A ”, the word and figure “Part I ” shall be 
substituted;  
(h) in the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution, in para graph 1, for the words “State of Assam ”, the 
words “States of Assam and Meghalaya ” shall be substituted;  
(i) the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall stand amended as direc ted in the Eighth Schedule.  
72. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934. —On and from the appointed day, in section 21A of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934, in sub -section ( 1), the bra ckets and words “(including the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya) ” shall be omitted.  
73. Amendment of Act 64 of 1950. —On and from the appointed day, in section 47A of the Road 
Transport Corporations Act, 1950, in the Explanation  to sub -section ( 1), after clause ( ii), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(iii) in relation to the Assam State Road Transport Corp oration, shall mean the Government 
of the State of Assam or of Meghalaya as formed under the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) 
Act, 1971. ”. 
74. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.  —On and from the appointed day, in the St ates Reorganisation 
Act, 1956, — 
(a) for clause ( c) of section 15, the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(c) the Eastern Zone, comprising the States of Bihar, West Bengal and Orissa; ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 1) of section 16, clause ( d) shall be omitted.  
75. Amendment of Act 20 of 19 63.—On and from the appointed day, in the Government o f Union 
Territories Act, 1963, — 
(a) in clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, the words “Manipur, Tripura, ” shall be omitted;  
(b) in section 44, sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted;  
(c) section  52 shall be omitted.  
76. Amendment of Act 56 of 1955 and the Tripura (Courts) Order, 1950 .—On and from the 
appointed day, — 
(a) the Manipur (Courts) Act, 1955 shall stand amended as directed in the Ninth Schedule;  
(b) the Tripura (Courts) Order, 1950 shall  stand amended as directed in the Tenth Schedule.  
77. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies , and the territorial references in any such law to the existing State of Assam or the autonomous 
State of Meghalaya or the Union territory of Manipur or the Union territory of Tripura or the North -East 31 
  Frontier Agency shall, until otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, 
be construed as meaning the territories within that State or autonomous State or Union territory or Agency 
immediatel y before the appointed day.  
78. Continuance of existing District Councils and Regional Council and members thereof. —For 
the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that all District Councils and the Regional Council constituted 
under the provisions of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and functioning immediately before the 
appointed day  in the respective autonomous districts and in the autonomous region shall, as from that day, 
be deemed to have been constituted under the said Schedule as amended by clause ( i) of section 71, read 
with the Eighth Schedule and accordingly, — 
(a) every such District Council and the Regional Council shall, unless sooner dissolved, continue 
to function in the respective autonomous districts and in the autonomous region, notwithstanding that 
any such district or region ceases to be comprised in the territories o f the State of Assam, by virtue of  
the provisions of Part II; and  
(b) every member of such District Council or Regional Council shall continue to be a member 
thereof for the unexpired term of his office as such.  
79. Power to adapt laws. —For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in relation to any 
of the States of Union territories formed or established by the provisions of Part II, the appropriate 
Government may, before the expiration of two years from the appointed day, by order, make such 
adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or 
expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so 
made until altered, repeal ed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “the appropriate Government ” means— 
(a) as respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule 
to the Constituti on, the Central Government; and  
(b) as respects any other law, — 
(i) in its application to a S tate, the State Government, and  
(ii) in its application to a Union territory, the Central Government.  
80. Power to construe laws .—(1) Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 
been made under section 79 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal 
or authority required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its applic ation 
in relation to the State of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya or Tripura or to the Union territory of Mizoram or 
Arunachal Pradesh construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary 
or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.  
(2) Any reference to the High Court of Assam or the High Court of Assam and Nagaland or to the 
Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur or the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Tripura in 
any law shall, unless t he context otherwise requires, be construed, on and from the appointed day, as a 
reference to the common High Court.  
81. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions. —The Central Government, 
as respects the Union territory of Mizoram  or Arunachal Pradesh and the State Government as respects 
any new State established or formed by the provisions of Part II may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who, as from the appointed day, shall be comp etent to 
exercise such functions exercisable under any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that 
notification and such law shall have effect acco rdingly.  
82. Legal proceedings. —(1) Where immediately before the appointed day the Union is a party to any 
legal proceedings with respect to any property, right or liability and such property, right or liability 
devolves on the State of Manipur or the State of tripura under this Act, then, the State of Manipur or, as 
the case may be, the State of Tripura  shall be deemed to be substituted for the Union as a party to those 
proceedings and the procee dings may continue accordingly.  32 
  (2) Where immediately before the appointed day the autonomous State of Meghalaya is a party to any 
legal proceedings with respect  to any property, right or liability of that State, and such property, right or 
liability devolves on the State of Meghalaya under this Act, then, the State of Meghalaya shall be deemed 
to be substituted for the autonomous State of Meghalaya as a party to those proceedings and the 
procee dings may continue accordingly.  
(3) Where immediately before the appointed day the existing State of Assam is a party to any legal 
proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities subject to apportionment unde r this Act, the 
successor State, which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights or liabilities by 
virtu e of any provision of this Act,  shall be deemed to be substituted for the existing State of Assam as a 
party to those proceedin gs or added as a party thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may 
continue accordingly.  
83. Rights of pleaders to practise in certain cases. —Any person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in an y subordinate courts in the existing State of 
Assam shall, for a period of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, 
notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those courts ha s been 
transferred to the State of Meghalaya or to a Union territory.  
84. T ransfer of pending proceedings. —(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any are a which on 
that day falls within a State or Union territory shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the 
territories which as from that day are the territories of another State or Union territory, stand transferred to 
the corresponding court, t ribunal, authority or officer in that other State or Union  territory, as the case may 
be. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the common High Court and the decision  of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section, — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes a ny suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in a St ate or a Union territory means — 
(i) the  court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State or Union territory in which or before 
whom the proceeding would have lain if it had been institu ted after the appointed day; or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in that S tate or Union territory as 
may be determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State or the Central 
Government, as the case may be, or before the appointed day by the Government of the existing 
State of Assam or the Government of the autono mous State of Meghalaya or the Central 
Government, as the case may be, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
85. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc. —All courts and tribunals and all authorities 
discharging lawful functions  throughout the existing State of Assam or the Union territory of Manipur or 
the Union territory of Tripura or any part of such State or Union territory immediately before the 
appointed day shall, unless their continuance is inconsistent with the provision s of this Act or until other 
provision is made by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, continue to exercise their 
respective functions.  
86. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therew ith contained in any other law.  
87. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President may, by order , do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him 
to be necessary or expedient for the purp ose of removing the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid b efore each House of Parliament.  
1[87A. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, as amended by the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws (Amendment) 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2012, s. 8 (w.e.f.  23-3-2013).  33 
  Act, 2012, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official G azette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the commen cement of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) and Other Related Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2012.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
88. Pow er to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total peri od of thirty days 1[which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to th e validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1974, s. 3, for “which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if, before the 
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following”  (w.e.f. 19 -1-1974).  34 
  THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 14 ( 2) and 20 ( 5)] 
AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY   
CONSTITUENCIES  ORDER , 1966  
In Schedule II to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assemb ly Constituencies Order, 1966, — 
(1) in P ART A.—PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES, — 
(a) for serial No. 1 and the entries relating thereto, the following  shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“1. Cachar .—(11) Silchar, (12) Sonai, (13) Dholai, (14) Lakhipur, (15) Udharbond,           
(16) Borkhola .”; 
(b) for serial No. 3 and the entries relating thereto, the following  shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“3. Diphu (S. T.).—(18) Haflong, (19) Bokajan, (20) Howraghat, (21) Baithalangso. ”; 
(c) for  serial No. 4 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“4. Dhubri .—(31) Mankachar, (32) South Salmara, (33) Dhubri, (34 ) Gauripur,             
(35) Golakganj, (36) Bilasipara .”; 
(2) in P ART B.—ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES, serial Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 22 to 30 (both inclusive) 
and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted.  
  35 
  THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 25 (1)] 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  CASTES ) ORDER , 1950  
In the Constitution ( Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,— 
(1) in paragraph 2, for the figures “XIV”, the figures “XVII ” shall be substituted;  
(2) in paragraph 4, — 
(a) for the words and figures “and any reference in Part XIV ”, the words and figures “any 
reference in Part XIV ” shall be substituted;  
(b) the following shal l be added at the end, namely: — 
“and any reference in Parts XV, XVI and XVII to a State shall be construed as a reference to 
the State constituted as from the day appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the              
North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 ”; 
(3) in the Schedule, after Part XIV, the following Pa rts shall be inserted, namely: — 
“PART XV—Manipur  
Throughout the State: — 
1. Dhupi or Dhobi  
2. Lois  
3. Muchi or Ravidas  
4. Namasudra  
5. Patni  
6. Sutradhar  
7. Yaithibi . 
PART XVI—Meghalaya  
Throughout the State: — 
 
1.  Bansphor  9.   Kaibartta or Jaliya  
2.  Bhuinmali or Mali  10.  Lalbegi  
3.  Brittial -Bania or Bania  11.  Mahara  
4.  Dhupi or Dhobi  12.  Mehtar or Bhangi  
5.  Dugla or Dholi  13.  Muchi or Rishi  
6.  Hira 14.  Namasudra  
7.  Jalkeot  15.  Patni  
8.  Jhalo, Malo  or Jhalo -Malo  
 16.  Sutradhar.  
 
 
  36 
  PART XVII—Tripura  
Throughout the State: — 
 
1.  Bagdi  20.  Kanda  
2.  Baiti  21.  Kanugh  
3.  Bhuimali  22.  Keot 
4.  Bhunar  23.  Khadit  
5.  Chamar or Muchi  24.  Kharia  
6.  Dandasi  25.  Khemcha  
7.  Dhenuar  26.  Koch  
8.  Dhoba  27.  Koir 
9.  Duai  28.  Kol 
10.  Dum  29.  Kora  
11.  Ghasi  30.  Kotal  
12.  Gour  31.  Mahisyadas  
13.  Gunar  32.  Mali  
14.  Gur 33.  Mehtor  
15.  Gorang  34. Musahar  
16.  Jalia Kaibartta  35.  Namasudra  
17.  Kahar  36.  Patni  
18.  Kalindi  37. Sabar. ”. 
19.  Kan   
 
 
  37 
  THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 25 ( 2)] 
AMENDMENT S TO THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED CASTES ) (U NION  TERRITORIES )  
ORDER , 1951  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (U nion Territories) Order, 1951, — 
(1) for paragraph 4, the following paragraph  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“4. Any reference in this Order to a Union territory in Part I of the Scheduled shall be 
const rued as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory as from the 1st 
day of November, 1956, any reference to a Union territory in Part II of the Schedule shall 
be construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory a s from the 1st 
day of November, 1966 and any reference to a Union territory in Parts III and IV of th e 
Schedule shall be construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory 
as from the day appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the North -Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971. ”; 
(2) in the Schedule ,— 
(a) Parts III and IV shall be omitted;  
(b) Part V shall be re -numbered as Part II and after that Part as so re -numbered, the following 
Parts s hall be inserted, namely: — 
“PART III—Mizoram  
Throughout the Union territory: — 
 
1.  Bansphor  10.  Lalbegi  
2.  Bhuinmali or Mali  11. Mahara  
3.  Brittial -Bania or Bania  12. Mehtar or Bhangi  
4.  Dhupi or Dhobi  13. Muchi or Rishi  
5.  Dugla or Dholi  14. Namasudra  
6.  Hira 15. Patni  
7.  Jalkeot  16. Sutradhar.  
8.  Jhalo , Malo or Jhalo -Malo    
9.  Kaibartta or Jaliya    
 
PART IV—Arunachal Pradesh  
Throughout the Union territory: — 
 
1.  Bansphor  10.  Lalbegi  
2.  Bhinmali or Mali  11.   Mahara  
3.  Brittial -Bania or Bania  12.  Mehtar or Bhangi  
4.  Dhupi or Dhobi  13.  Muchi or Rishi  
5.  Dugla or Dholi  14.  Namasudra  
6.  Hira 15.  Patni  38 
  7.  Jalkeot  16.  Sutradhar. ”. 
8.  Jhalo, Malo or Jhalo -Malo    
9.  Kaibartta or Jaliya    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  39 
  THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 26 ( 1)] 
AMENDMENTS TO THE COSTITUTION (SCHEDULED  TRIBES ) ORDER , 1950  
In the Constitution ( Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, — 
(1) in paragraph 2, for the figures “XIII”, the figures “XVI” shall be substituted;  
(2) in paragraph 3, — 
(a) for the words and figures “and any reference in Part XIII ”, the words and figures “any 
reference in Part XIII ” shall be substituted;  
(b) the following shal l be added at the end, namely: — 
“and any reference in Part s XIV to XVI to a State shall be construed as a reference to the 
State constituted as from the day appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the              
North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 ”; 
(3) in the Schedule, — 
(a) in P ART II—Assam , paragraph  2 shall be omitted and in paragraph 3, for the words 
“excluding the Tribal areas ”, the words  “excluding the autonomous districts ” shall be 
substituted;  
(b) after  Part XIII, the following Pa rts shall be inserted, namely: — 
“PART XIV —Manipur  
Throughout the State: — 
 
1.  Aimol  19 Moyon  
2.  Anal 20. Paite  
3.  Angami  21.  Purum  
4.   Chiru  22.  Ralte  
5.  Chothe  23.  Sema  
6.  Gangte  24. Simte  
7.  Hmar  25. Suhte  
8.  Kabui  26.  Tangkhul  
9.  Kacha  Naga  27.  Thadou  
10.  Khoirao  28.  Vaiphui  
11. Koireng  29.  Zou. 
12. Kom   
13. Lamgang    
14.  Any Mizo (Lushai) tribes    
15. Maram    
16. Maring    
17. Mao   
18. Monsang    
 40 
   
PART XV—Meghalaya  
Throughout the State: — 
1.  Chakma  (xvii)  Khelma  
2.  Dimasa (Kachari)  (xviii)  Kholhou  
3.  Garo  (xix)  Kipgen  
4.  Hajong  (xx)  Kuki 
5.  Hmar  (xxi)  Lengthang  
6.  Khasi and Jaintia (including Khasi , 
Synteng or Pnar, War, Bhoi or 
Lyngngam)  (xxii)  Lhangum  
7.  Any Kuki tribes, including:  (xxiii) Lhouje m 
(i) Biate or Biete  (xxiv) Lhouvum  
(ii) Changsan  (xxv)  Lupheng  
(ii) Chongloi  (xxvi)  Mangjel  
(iv) Doungel  (xxvii )  Misao  
(v) Gamalhou  (xxviii )  Riang  
(vi) Gangte  (xxix)  Siarhem  
(vii) Guite (xxx)  Selnam  
(viii) Hanneng  (xxxi)  Singson 
(ix) Haokip or Haupit  (xxxii )  Sitlhou  
(x) Haolai  (xxxiii )  Sukte  
(xi) Hengna  (xxxiv )  Thado  
(xii) Hongsungh  (xxxv)  Thangngeu  
(xiii) Hrangkhwal or Rangkhol  (xxxvi )  Uibuh  
(xiv) Jongbe  (xxxvii )  Vaiphei  
(xv) Khawchung    
(xvi) Khanwathlang or Khothalong  8. Lakher  
  9. Man (Tai -Speaking)  
  10. Any Mizo ( Lushai) tribes  
  11. Mikir  
  12. Any Naga tribes  
  13. Pawi  
  14. Synteng.  
 
  41 
  PART XVI—Tripura  
Throughout the State: — 
1.  Lushai  (vii) Khareng  
2.  Mag (xi)  Lentei  
3.  Kuki, including the following sub -tribes:— (xii)  Mizel  
(i)  Balte  (xiii)  Namte  
(ii)  Belalhu t (xiv)  Paitu, Paite  
(iii)  Chhalya  (xv) Rangchan  
(iv)  Fun (xvi) Rangkhole  
(v)  Hajango  (xvii) Thangluya  
(vi)  Jangtei  (xiv)  Paitu, Paite  
 (vii) Khareng    
(viii) Khephong    
 (ix) Kuntei    
  (x) Laifang    
4. Chakma    
5. Garoo    
6. Chaimal    
7. Halam    
8. Khasia    
9. Bhutia    
10. Munda including Kaur    
11. Orang    
12. Lepcha    
13. Santal    
14.  Bhil 
15.  Tripura or Tripuri, Tippera  
16.  Jamatia  
17.  Noatia  
18.  Riang  
19.  Uchai .”. 
 
   42 
  THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 26 (2)] 
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED TRIBES ) (U NION  TERRITORIES ) ORDER , 1951  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (U nion Territories) Order, 1951, — 
(1) in paragraph 2, for the words and figures “Parts I  to IV”, the words and figures “Parts I to  III” 
shall be substituted;  
(2) for paragraph 3, the following paragraph  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“3. Any reference in this Order to a Union territory in Part I of the Scheduled shall be 
construed as a reference to that territory constituted as a Union territory as from the 1st day of 
November, 1956 and any reference to a Union territory in Parts II  and III of the Schedule shall be 
construed as a reference to the territory constituted as a Union territory as from the day appointed 
under clause ( b) of section 2 of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 .”; 
(3) in the Schedule, — 
(a) Parts II and  III shall be omitted;  
(b) Part IV shall be re -numbered as Part I  and after that Part as so re -numbered, the 
following Pa rts shall be inserted, namely:  — 
“PART II—Mizoram  
Throughout the Union territory: — 
  (xi) Hengna  
1.  Chakma   (xii)  Hongsungh  
2.  Dimasa ( Kachari)  (xiii)  Hrangkhwal or Rangkhol  
3.  Garo  (xiv)  Jongbe  
4.  Hajong  (xv)  Khawchung  
5.  Hmar  (xvi)  Khawathlang or Khothalong  
6.  Khasi and Jaintia (including Khasi, 
Synten or Pnar, War, Bhoi or 
Lyngngam)  (xvii) Khelma  
7. Any Kuki tribes, including:  (xviii)  Kholhou  
(i)  Biate or Biete  (xix) Kipgen  
(ii) Changsan  (xx)  Kuki  
(iii) Chongloi  (xxi)  Lengthang  
(iv) Doungel  (xxii) Lhangum  
(v) Gamalhou  (xxiii) Lhoujem  
(vi)  Gangte  (xxiv) Lhouvun  
(vii)  Guite  (xxv) Lupheng  
 (viii)  Hanneng  (xxvi) Mangjel  
 (ix)  Haokip or Haupit  (xxvii )  Missao  43 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART III—Arunachal Pradesh  
Throughout the Union territory: — 
All tribes of the Union territory including:  
 
1.  Abor  7. Khowa  
2.  Aka 8.  Mishmi  
3.  Apatani  9. Momba  
4. Dafla  10.  Any Naga tribes  
5.  Galong  11.  Sherdukpen  
6. Khampti  12.  Singpho .”. 
 
 
 
   (xxviii )  Riang  8.  Lakher  
(xxix) Sirphem  9.  Man (Tai -Speaking)  
(xxx) Selnam  10.  Any Mizo (Lushai  tribes ) 
(xxxi) Singson  11.  Mikir  
(xxxii )  Sitlhou  12.  Any Naga tribes  
(xxxiii )  Sukte  13.  Pawi  
(xxxiv )  Thado  14. Synteng.  
(xxxv)  Thangngeu    
(xxxvi ) Uibuh    
  (xxxvii ) Vaiphei    
    44 
  THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 53 ( 3)] 
APPORTIONMENT OF A SSETS AND LIABILITIES  
1. Definitions. —In this Schedule, — 
(a) “population ratio ”, in relation to the States of Assam and Meghalaya means the ratio of 
93.58 to 6.42; and  
(b) “transferred territories ” means the territories which, as from the appointed day, become the 
territories of the State of Meghalaya under section 5.  
2. Provisions of the  Schedule to be applied to the apportionment of certain assets and 
liabilities .—Where any asset or liability is required to be apportioned to the autonomous State of 
Meghalaya by virtue of section 58 of the Assa m Reor ganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969  (55 of  1969) , but 
has not been so apportioned before the appointed day, the provisions of this Schedule shall be applied 
after apportionment under the said section has been effected.  
3. Apportionment of land, stores, etc .—(1) Subject to the other provisions cont ained in this 
Schedule, all land and all stores, articles and other goods belonging to the existing State of Assam shall, 
on and from the appointed day, — 
(a) in a case where such land, stores, articles and other goods are situated within the transferred 
territories, pass to the State of Meghalaya; and  
(b) in any other case, pass to the State of Assam;  
Provided that where the Central Government is of the opinion that any goods or class of goods should 
be distributed among the States of Assam and Meghalaya otherwise than according to the situation of the 
goods, the Central Government may issue such directions, as it thinks fit, for a just and equitable 
distribution  of the goods and the goods shall pass to the States of Assam and Meghalaya accordingly.  
(2) (a) Such of those lands and buildings as are held by the existing State of Assam, within the limits 
of the cantonment and municipality of Shillong immediately befo re the appointed day as may be agreed 
upon between the State s of Assam and Meghalaya shall be available for the use of the State of Assam on 
the appointed day and thereafter for such period as may be agreed upon between the said States.  
(b) Where no agreem ent is reached between the States of Assam and Meghalaya on any of the matters 
referred to in clause ( a), the Central Government shall decide such matter and the decision of the Central 
Government thereon shall be binding on the said States.  
(c) Different periods may be agreed upon under clause ( a) or decided under clause ( b) for different 
lands and buildings.  
(d) Where any land or building  is made available to the State of Assam under this sub -paragraph on 
or after the appointed day, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule , the debt or other 
liabilities in respect of such land or building shall pass to the State of Meghalaya only from the date from 
which possession of the land or building is given to the State of Meghalaya and the amount o f such debt 
or other liability shall be determined by agreement between the States of Assam and Meghalaya or, in 
default of any such agreement, by the Central Government.  
(e) For so long as any land or building referred to in clause ( a) is held by the Stat e of Assam for its 
use, it shall be the responsibility of that State to properly maintain such land or building from its own 
funds.  
(3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and the offices of Heads of departments having jurisdiction over 
the areas comprised partly in the transferred territories and partly in the State of Assam and unissued 
stores shall be divided between the States of Assam and Meghalaya in accordance with such directions as 
the Central Government may think fit to issue for a just and equitab le distribution thereof.  45 
  Explanation. —In this paragraph, the expression “land” includes immovable property of every 
description and any rights in or over such property, and the expression “goods ” does not include coins, 
bank notes and currency notes.  
4. Ar rears of Taxes. —The State of Meghalaya shall have the right to recover the arrears of any tax or 
duty, including the arrears of land revenue, on property situate in the transferred territories, and shall also 
have the right to recover the arrears of any other tax or duty if the place of assessment of that tax or duty 
is located in the transferred territories.  
5. Right to recover loans and advances. —(1) Save as provided in sub -paragraph ( 2) of paragraph 6, 
the right to recover any loans or advances made be fore the appointed day by the existing State of Assam 
to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in the transferred territories shall belong to the 
State of Meghalaya.  
(2) The right to recover loans and advances of pay and travelling allowan ces to a Government servant 
made before the appointed day by the existing State of Assam shall pass to the State of Meghalaya if, 
after the appointed day, that Government servant is required to serve in connection with the affairs of 
Meghalaya.  
6. Investme nts.—(1) The investments of the existing State of Assam immediately before the 
appointed day in any company or private commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as such 
investments have not been made or deemed not to have been made from the Cash Bala nce Investment 
Account, shall pass to the State of Meghalaya, if the principal seat of business of the company or 
undertaking is located in the transferred territories and where on that day the principal seat of business of 
the company or undertaking is lo cated outside the territories of the existing State of Assam, such 
investments shall be divided between the States of Assam and Meghalaya in the population ratio:  
Provided that such investments in any Government company shall be divided between the States of 
Assam and  Meghalaya in such proportion as may be agree d upon between those States or — 
(a) in default of such agreement; or  
(b) at the expiry of a period of one year from the appointed day,  
whichever is earlier, in such proportion as the Central Governm ent may, by order, determine:  
Provided further that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to any investment made by the existing 
State of Assam on or after the 2nd day of April, 1970 in any company or private commercial or industrial 
undertaking located ou tside the territories of the existing State of Assam.  
(2) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the 
existing State of Assam or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an              
inter-State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or advances to , any such body corporate by the 
existing State of Assam made before the appointed day shall , save as otherwise expressly provided by or 
under this Act, be divided between the State of Assam and Meghalaya in the same proportion in which 
the assets of the body corporate are divided under the provisions of Part VII.  
7. Assets and liab ilities of State undertakings. —(1) The assets and liabilities relating to any 
commercial or in dustrial undertaking of the existing State of Assam shall pass to the State of Meghalaya 
if the undertaking is located in the transferred territories.  
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the existing State of Assam for any 
commercial or industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund 
shall pass to the State of Meghalaya if the undertaking is located in the transferred territories.  
(3) Where any such undertaking is located partly in the State of As sam and partly in the State of 
Meghalaya, the assets and liabilities and the securities referred to in sub -paragraphs ( 1) and ( 2) 
respectively shall be divided in such manner as may be agreed upon between the Governments of the two 
States within one year f rom the appointed day, or in default of such agreement, as the Central 
Government may, by order, direct.  46 
  8. Public debt. —(1) The public debt of the existing State of Assam attributable to loans raised by the 
issue of Government securities and outstanding w ith the public immediately before the appointed day 
shall continue to be the public debt of the State of Assam, and the State of Meghalaya shall be liable to 
pay to the State of Assam a share of the sums due from time to time for the servicing and repaymen t of 
the debt and for the purpose of determining the said share, the debt shall be deemed to be divided between 
the States of Assam and Meghalaya as if it were a debt referred to in sub -paragraph ( 5). 
Explanation .—In this sub -paragraph, “the public debt of  the existing State of Assam ”, excludes the 
portion of such public debt the liability for servicing and repayment of which has been apportioned to the 
autonomous State of Meghalaya by virtue of section 58 of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 
1969  (55 of 1969) . 
(2) Where a sinking fund or depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State of Assam for 
repayment of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall 
be divided between the States of Assam a nd Meghalaya in the same proportion in which the total public 
debt is divided between the two States under this paragraph.  
(3) The public debt of the existing State of Assam attributable to loans taken from the Central 
Government, the National Co -operative  Development Corporation or the Central Warehousing 
Corporation or the Khadi and Village Industries Commission or from any other source for the express 
purpose of re -lending the same to a specific institution and outstanding immediately b efore the appointe d 
day shall, — 
(a) if re -lent to the Assam State Electricity Board, or any other institution which becomes an 
inter-State body corporate on the appointed day, be divided between the States of Assam and 
Meghalaya in the same proportion in which the assets of  such body corporate are divided under the 
provisions of Part VII;  
(b) if re -lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any local area, be the debt of 
the State in which the local area is included on the appointed day.  
(4) Out of so muc h of the public debt of the existing State of Assam, other than the public debt 
referred to in sub -paragraphs ( 1) and ( 3), as is equal to loans and advances made by that State and 
outstanding on the appointed day, the share of the liability of the State of  Meghalaya shall be for an 
amount equal to the loans and advances [not being re -lent amounts referred to in sub -paragraph ( 3) and 
outstanding immediately before the appointed day] recoverable by the State of Meghalaya under 
paragraph 5.  
(5) The remaining p ublic debt of the existing State of Assam attributable to loans taken from the 
Central Government, the Reserve Bank of India or any other body or bank outstanding immediately 
before the appointed day, shall be divided between the States of Assam and Meghal aya in proportion to 
the total expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have been 
incurred by the existing State of Assam up to the appointed day in the territories remaining in the State of 
Assam and the total expen diture on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to have 
been incurred by the existing State of Assam up to the appointed day in the transferred territories, other 
than such outlays incurred or deemed to have been incurred before th e 2nd day of April, 1970 in the 
autonomous State of Meghalaya for the purposes of the autonomous State as defined in paragraph 1 of the 
Third Schedule to the Assam Re -organisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969  (55 of 1969) . 
(6) For the purpose of this paragraph, “Government security ” means a security creat ed and issued by 
the existing St ate of Assam for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified 
in, or prescribed under, clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944  (18 of 1944) . 
(7) For the purpose of this paragraph, “the public debt of the existing State of Assam attributable to 
the loan taken from the Central Government ” means the public debt of the State as reduced in accordance 
with the provisions of sub -section  (4) of section 52.  
  47 
  9. Refund of taxes collected in excess. —After the appointed day it shall be the liability of the State 
of Meghalaya to refund any tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess on any 
property situate in the transferred territories or any other tax or duty collected in excess, if the place of 
assessment of that tax or duty is situate in the transferred territories.  
10. Deposits, etc. —(1) The liability of the existing State of Assam in respect of any civil depo sit or 
local fund deposit, made before the appointed day in any place situate in the transferred territories, shall 
become the liability of the State of Meghalaya.  
(2) The liability of the existing State of Assam in respect of any charitable or other endow ment shall, 
as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State or Meghalaya if the institution entitled to the 
benefit of the endowment is located in the transferred territories, or if the objects of the endowment, under 
the terms thereof, are confin ed to the transferred territories.  
11. Arrears of pay and allowances. —The liability of the existing State of Assam in respect of any 
arrears of pay or allowances due to any Government servant for the period prior to the appointed day 
shall, if the Governme nt servant is required to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of 
Meghalaya, be the liability of the State of Meghalaya.  
12. Provident Fund, etc. —The liability of the existing State of Assam in respect of the Provident 
Fund and Special Deposit  Fund accounts of a Government servant required to serve in connection with 
the affairs of the State of Meghalaya shall, on  and from the appointed day, be the liability of the State of 
Meghalaya.  
13. Pensions. —The liability of the State of Assam or the Sta te of Meghalaya in respect of pensions 
shall be apportioned between the two States in such manner as may be agreed upon between them or in 
default of such agreement, in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, specify.  
14. Contracts. —(1) Where,  before the appointed day, the existing State of Assam has made any 
contract in exercise of its executive power for any purposes of that State, that contract shall be deemed to 
have been made in the ex ercise of the executive power, — 
(a) if such purposes ar e, as from the appointed day, exclusively purposes of either the State of 
Assam or the State of Meghalaya, of the State of Assam or, as the case may be, of the State of 
Meghalaya; and  
(b) in any other case, of the State of Assam,  
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any such contract shall, to the extent 
to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the existing State of Assam, be rights or li abilities of 
the State of Assam  or, as the case may be, of the Stat e of Meghalaya:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( b), the initial allocation of rights and 
liabilities made under this sub -paragraph shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed 
upon between the States of Assam a nd Meghalaya or , in default of such agreement, as the Central 
Government may, by order, direct.  
(2) For the purposes of this paragraph, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which 
have accrued or may accrue under any contract, — 
(a) any li ability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or tribunal in proceedings relating 
to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in, or in connection with, any such proceedings.  
(3) This paragraph shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Schedule relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations; and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of contractual ri ghts, be dealt 
with under those provisions.  
  48 
  15. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
existing State of Assam is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong, other than breach of 
contract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories, which as from that day, are the 
territories of the State of Assam or the State of Meghalaya, be the liability of the State of Assam or, as 
the case may be, of t he State of Meghalaya; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially the liability of the State of Assam, but subject to such financial 
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Assam and Meghalaya or, in default of any 
such agreement, as the Centra l Government may, by order, direct.  
16. Liability as guarantor. —Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of 
Assam is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society or other  person, 
that liability  shall, — 
(a) if the area of operation of such society or person is limited to the territories which, as from 
that day, are the territories of the State of Assam or the State of Meghalaya, be the liability of the 
State of Assam or as the case may be, of the  State of Meghalaya; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially the liability of the State of Assam, subject to such financial 
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Assam and Meghalaya or, in default of such 
agreement, as the Central Governme nt may, by order, direct.  
17. Items in suspense. —If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Schedule, it shall be dealt with in 
accordance with that provi sion.  
18. Residuary provisions. —The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing State of 
Assam not dealt with in the foregoing paragraphs of this Schedule shall pass to the State of Assam in the 
first instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Assam 
and Meghalaya within one year from the appointed day or , in default of such agreement, as the Central 
Government may, by order, direct.  
19. Apportionment of asset s and liabilities by agreement. —Where the States of Assam and 
Meghalaya agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned 
between them in  a manner other than that as provided for in  the foregoing paragraphs of this Schedule , 
then, notwithstanding anything c ontained therein, the benefit or  burden of that asset or liability shall be 
apportioned in the manner so agreed upon.  
20. Power of Central Government to order allocation o r adjustment in certain cases. —Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of  this Schedule, the State of Assam or the State of Meghalaya is 
entitled to any property, or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central 
Government is of opinion, on a reference made to it within a period of three years from t he appointed day 
by the State of Assam or the S tate of Meghalaya, as the case may be, that it is just and equitable that that 
property or those benefits should be transferred to one of the two States or shared between them, or that a 
contribution towards t hat liability should be made by either of the States, the said property or benefits 
shall be allocated in such manner, or the State of Meghalaya or the State of Assam shall make to the other 
State primarily subject to the liability such contribution in res pect thereof, as the Central Government 
may, after consultation with the Government of Assam and the Government of Meghalaya, by order, 
determine.  
  49 
  THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 60 (1)] 
LIST OF INSTITUTIONS WHERE EXISTING FACILITIES SHALL BE CONTINUED  
 
1.  Assam Forest Training School, Jhalukbari.  
2.  Survey School for Mandals, Gauhati.  
3.  Assam Survey Train ing School, Gauhati . 
4.  Assam Co -operative Training Centre, Joysagar.  
5.  Grain Sevikas Training Centre, Jorhat.  
6.  Police Training College, Dergaon . 
7.  Forensic Science Laboratory, Gauhati . 
8.  Finger Print Bureau, Shillong.  
9.  Public Health Laboratory, Shillong.  
10.  Administrative Training School, Gauhati.  
11.  Reid Chest T. B. Hospital, Shillong.  
12.  Gauhati Medical College, Gauhati.  
13.  Assam Medical College, Dibrugarh.  
14.  Medical College, Silchar.  
15.  Pasteur Institute, Shillong.  
16.  State Malaria Institute, Shillong.  
17.  Ayurvedic College, Gauhati.  
18.  Mental Hospital, Tezpur.  
19.  Primary Health Centre, Chabua.  
20.  Assam Engineering College, Jhalukbari.  
21.  Jorhat Engineering College, Jorhat.  
22.  Assam Government Press, Shillong.  
23.  Assam Agricultural College.     
Assam Veterinary College.  Under the Agricultural  
University, Jorhat  
24.  
 
  50 
  THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 71 ( i)] 
AMENDMENTS TO THE SIXTH  SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION  
1. In the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (hereinafter in this Schedule referred to as the Sixth 
Schedule), in the heading, for the word “Assam ”, the words “the States of Assam and Meghalaya and in 
the Union territory of Mizoram ” shall be substituted.  
2. In para graph 1 of the Sixth Schedule, — 
(i) in sub -paragraph ( 1), for the word and letter “Part A ”, the words and figures “Parts I and II 
and in Part III ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in sub -paragraph ( 3),— 
(i) in clauses ( a) and ( b), for the word and letter “Part A ”, the words “any of the Parts ” 
shall be substituted;  
(ii) after the existing proviso, the following prov iso shall be inserted, namely: — 
“Provided further that any order made by the Governor under this sub -paragraph may 
contain such incidental and consequential provisions (including any amendment of 
paragraph 20 and of any item in any of the Parts of the said table) as appear to the 
Governor to be necessary for giving effect to the provisions of the order. ”. 
3. In paragra ph 3 of the Sixth Schedule, in the proviso to clause ( a) of sub -paragraph ( 1), for the 
words “by the Government of Assam or the Government of Meghalaya ”, the words “by the Government 
of the State concerned ” shall be substituted.  
4. In para graph 4 of the Si xth Schedule, — 
(i) in sub -paragraph ( 3), the words “of Assam ” shall be omitted;  
(ii) in sub -paragraph ( 5), for the words “after consulting the Government of Assam or, as the 
case may be, the Government of Meghalaya ”, the words “after consulting the Governm ent of 
the State concerned ” shall be substituted.  
5. In paragraph 6 of the Sixth Schedule , in sub -paragraph ( 2), the words “of Assam or Meghalaya, as 
the case may be, ” shall be omitted.  
6. In paragraph 8 of the Sixth Schedule, in sub -paragraph ( 1), for the words “by the Government of 
Assam in assessing lands for the purpose of land revenue in the State of Assam generally ”, the words “by 
the Government of the State in assessing lands for the purpose of land revenue in the State generally ” 
shall be substituted.  
7. In paragraph 9 of the Sixth Schedule, in sub -paragraph ( 1), for the words “the Government of 
Assam ”, in both the places where they occur, the words “the Government of the State ” shall be 
substituted.  
8. In parag raph 12 of the Sixth Schedule ,— 
(i) for the heading, the following heading  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of the State of Assam to 
autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State of Assam. ”; 
(ii) in sub -paragraph ( 1), — 
(a) in clause ( a), for the words “Legislature of the State ”, in both the places where they occur, 
the words “Legislature of the State of Assam ” shall be substituted and after the words “any 
autonomous district or autonomous region ”, the words “in that St ate” shall be inserted;  51 
  (b) in clause ( b), for the words “Legislature of the State ”, the words “Legislature of the State 
of Assam ” shall be substituted and after the words “an autonomous district or an autonomous 
region ”, the words “in that State ” shall be  inserted.  
9. For paragraph 12A of the Sixth Schedule, the following paragraphs shall be substituted, namely: — 
“12A. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya to 
autonomous districts and autonomous regi ons in the State of Meghalaya .—Notwithstanding 
anything in this Constitution, — 
(a) if any provision of a law made by a District or Regional Council in the State of 
Meghalaya with respect to any matter specified in sub -paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 3 of this 
Schedule or if any provision of any regulation made by a District Council or a Regional Council 
in that State under paragraph 8 or paragraph 10 of this Schedule , is repugnant to any provision of 
a law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya with respect to t hat matter, then, the law 
or regulation made by the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regional Council whether 
made before or after the law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya, shall, to the 
extent of repugnancy, be void and the la w made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya 
shall prevail;  
(b) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, by notification, direct that it 
shall not apply to an autonomous district or an atonomous  region in the State of Meghalaya, or 
shall apply to such district or region or any part thereof subject to such exceptions or 
modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such direction may be given so as to 
have retrospective effect.  
12B. Application of Acts of Parliament and other Acts to autonomous districts and 
autonomous regions in the Union  territory of Mizoram. -—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, the President may with respect to any Act of Parliament and the Administrator  may with 
respect to any other Act, by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district or an 
autonomous region in the Union territory of Mizoram or shall apply to such district or region or any 
part thereof subject to such exceptions  or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any 
such direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect ”. 
10. In paragraph 13 of the Sixth Schedule, the words “of Assam ” shall be omitted.  
11. In paragraph 14 of the Sixth Schedule, in  sub-paragraph ( 2), for the words “the Government of 
Assam ”, the words “the Government of the State ” shall be substituted.  
12. In paragraph 17 of the Sixth Schedule, for the words “the Legislative Assembly of Assam ”, the 
words “the Legislative Assembly of Assam or Meghalaya ” shall be substituted and after the words 
“autonomous district ”, the words “in the State of Assam or Meghalaya, as the case may be, ” shall be 
inserted.  
13. Paragraph 18 of the Sixth Schedule shall be omitted.  
14. For paragraphs 20 and 20 A of the Sixth Schedule, the following paragraphs  shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“20. Tribal areas .—(1) The  areas specified in Parts I, II and III of the table below shall 
respectively be the tribal areas within the State of Assam, the State of Meghalaya and the Union 
territory of Mizoram.  
(2) Any reference in the table below to any district shall be construed as a reference to the 
territories comprised within the autonomous district of that name existing immediately before the day 
appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971:  
Provided that for the purposes of cla uses ( e) and ( f) of sub -paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 3, 
paragraph 4, paragraph 5, paragraph 6, sub -paragraph ( 2), clauses ( a), (b) and ( d) of                            
sub-paragraph ( 3) and sub -paragraph ( 4) of paragraph 8 and clause ( d) of sub -paragraph ( 2) of 52 
  paragraph 10 of this Schedule, no part of the area comprised within the Municipality of Shillong shall 
be deemed to be within the United Khasi -Jaintia Hills District.  
TABLE  
PART I 
1. The North Cachar Hills District.  
2. The Mikir Hills District.  
PART II 
1. The United Khasi -Jaintia Hills District.  
2. The Jowai District.  
3. The Garo Hills District.  
PART III 
The Mizo District.  
20A. Interpretation. —Subject to any express provision made in this behalf, the provisions of 
this Schedule shall, in their application to the Union terri tory of Mizoram, have effect — 
(1) as if references to the Governor and Government of the State were references to the 
Administrator of the Union territory appointed under Article 239 and references to State (except 
in the expr ession “Government of the State ”) were references to the Union territory of Mizoram;  
(2) as if — 
(a) in sub -paragraph ( 3) of paragraph 1, — 
(i) after clause ( g), the following cla use had been inserted, namely: — 
“(h) divide  any autonomous region into two or more autonomous regions and 
define the boundaries thereof ”; 
(ii) the first proviso had been omitted;  
(b) in sub -paragraph ( 5) of paragraph 4 the provision s for consultation with the 
Government of the State concerned had been omitted;  
(c) in sub -paragraph ( 2) of paragraph 9, the words “in his discretion ” had been omitted;  
(d) paragraph 13 had been omitted;  
(e) sub -paragraphs ( 2) and ( 3) of paragraph 14 had be en omitted;  
(f) sub -paragraph ( 2) (including the proviso thereto) of paragraph 15 had been omitted;  
(g) in paragraph 16, — 
(i) in sub -paragraph ( 1), in clause ( b), the words “subject to the previous approval of 
the Legislature of the State ” and the second p roviso to that sub -paragraph had been 
omitted;  
(ii) sub -paragraph ( 3) had been omitted. ’ 
 
  53 
  THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 76 (a)] 
AMENDMENTS TO THE MANIPUR  (COURTS ) ACT, 1955  
In the Manipur (Courts) Act, 1955  (56 of 1955) ,— 
(i) throughout the Act, save as  otherwise expressly provided, — 
(a) for the words “Chief Commissioner ”, the words “State Government ” shall be substituted , 
and for the words, “Judicial Commissioner ” or “Court of the Judicial Commissioner ”, the words 
“High Court ” shall be substituted, and such consequential amendments, as the rules of grammar 
may require, shall be made;  
(b) for the words “Union territory of Manipur ”, the words “State of Manipur ” shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) in the long title, the words “a Judicial C ommissioner's Court and other ” shall be omitted;  
(iii) in section 2, — 
(a) clause ( i) shall be omitted;  
(b) after clause ( iii), the following cla use shall be inserted, namely: — 
(iiia) “High Court ” means the Gauhati  High Court (the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, 
Maghalaya, Manipur and Tripura);';  
(iv) Chapter II shall be omitted;  
(v) in section 16, the words “the Court of the Judicial Comm issioner and ” shall be omitted;  
(vi) in se ction 17, — 
(a) the brackets and figur e “(1)” shall be omitted;  
(b) sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted;  
(vii) in section18, for sub -section ( 1), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(1) When the business pending before the court of a district judge requires the aid of an 
additional district judge for i ts speedy disposal, one or more  additional district judges may be 
appointed. ”; 
(viii) section 19 shall be omitted;  
(ix) for section 23, t he following sectio n shall be substituted, namely: — 
“23. Local limits of the jurisdiction of courts of subordinate judges and                  
munsiffs .—(1) The local limits of the jurisdiction of the court of a subordinate judge or a 
munsiff  shall be such as the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, define.  
(2) When a subordinate judge is posted to a district, the local limits of the district shall, in 
the absence of any directi on to the contrary, be the local limits of his jurisdiction. ”; 
(x) in section 25, sub -section ( 4) shall be omitted;  
(xi) sections 33, 34, 35 and 40 shall be omitted;  
(xii) in sub -section ( 1) of section 43, the words “the Court of the Judicial Commissioner and” 
shall be omitted;  
(xiii) section 46 shall be omitted.  54 
  THE TENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 76 (b)] 
 AMENDMENTS TO THE TRIPURA (COURTS ) ORDER , 1950  
In the  Tripura (Courts) Order, 1950, — 
(i) throughout the Order, save as otherwise expressly provided, for the words “Chief 
Commissioner ”, the words “State Government ” shall be substituted, and for the words “Judicial 
Commissioner ” or “Court of the Judicial Commissioner ”, the words “High Court ” shall be 
substituted, and such consequential amendments, as the rules of grammar may require, shall be made;  
(ii) in paragraph 2, — 
(a) clause ( i) shall be omitted;  
(b) for clause ( iii), the following clause shall b e substituted, namely: — 
(iii) “High Court ” means the Gauhati High Court (the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura);  
(iiia) “Tripura ” means the State of Tripura;  
(iii) Chapter II shall be omitted;  
(iv) in paragraph 15, the words “the Court of the Judicial Commissioner and ” shall be omitted;   
(v) in paragraph 16, — 
(a) the brackets and figure “(1)” shall be omitted;  
(b) sub -paragraph ( 2) shall be omitted;  
(vi) in paragraph 17, for sub -paragraph ( 1), the following sub -paragraph  shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“(1) When the business pending before the Court of a District Judge requires the aid of an 
Additional Judge or Judges for its speedy disposal, one or more Additional District Judges 
may be appointed. ”; 
(vii) paragraph 18 shall be omitted;  
(viii) for paragraph 22, the following paragraph  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“22. Local limits of jurisdiction of Courts of Su bordinate Judges and Munsiffs .—(1) The 
local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court of a Subordinate Judge or Munsiff shall be such as t he 
State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, define.  
(2) When a Subordinate Judge is posted to a district, the local limits of the district shall, in the 
absence of any directions to the contrary, be the local limits of his jurisdiction. ” ; 
(ix) paragraph 31 shall be omitted;  
(x) for paragraph 32, the following paragraph  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“32. Finality of appellate decrees of Dist rict Court. —Subject to the provisions of section 
100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , an appellate decree of a District Court shall 
be final. ”; 
(xi) paragraphs 33, 34, 35 and 41 shall be omitted;  
(xii) in sub -paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 42, the words “the Court of Judicial Commiss ioner and ” 
shall be omitted.  
 
--------------------------The North-Eastern Council Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE NORTH -EASTERN COUNCIL ACT, 1971  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Setting up and composition of the North -Eastern Council . 
4. Functions of the Council . 
5. Meetings of the Council . 
6. Nomination of certain officers to attend the meetings of the Council . 
7. Officers and staff of the Council . 
8. Repeal . 
  2 
 THE NORTH -EASTERN COUNCIL ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 84 OF 1971  
[30th December , 1971.]  
An Act to provide for the setting  up of a Council for the north -eastern areas of India to be called 
the North -Eastern Council and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the North-Eastern Council  
Act, 1971.  
(2) It shal l come into force on such date1, being a date not earlier than the day appointed under  
clause ( b) of section 2 of the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971  (81 of 1971) , as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise require s,— 
(a) “Council ” means the North -Eastern Council set up under section 3;  
2[(b) “north-eastern area ” means the area comprising the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,3[Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura]] ; 
3. Setting up and composition of th e North -Eastern Council .—4[(1) There shall be a Council to be 
called the North -Eastern Council which shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the person or persons for the time being holding the office of the Governor of the States;  
(ii) the Chief Ministers of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura:  
Provided that, if there is no Council of Ministers in any State referred to in clause ( b), the 
President may nominate not more than one person to represent such State in t he Council for so long 
as there is no Council of Ministers in such State;  
(iii) three members to be nominated by the President.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the President may, if he deems it 
necessary so to do, nominate a Union Minister  to be a member of the Council.  
5[(3) The President shall nominate the Chairman of the Council.]  
(4) The President may, if he deems it necessary so to do, nominate another member of the Council to 
act as Vice -Chairman of the Council.  
4. Functions of the Council .—6[(1) The Council shall function as a regional planning body for the 
north -eastern area.  
(2) While formulating the regional plans for the north -eastern area, the Council shall give priority to 
schemes and projects which will benefit two or more States:  
Provided that in case or Sikkim, the Council shall formulate specific projects and schemes for that 
State including the review of implementation of such projects and schemes .] 
  
                                                           
1. 1 stAugust, 1972 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 359(E), dated 25th July, 19 72, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part II, sec. 3( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 69 of 1986, s. 45, for clauses ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 2002, s. 2, for “ Nagaland and T ripura” (w.e.f. 26 -6-2003 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -6-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 26 -6-2003 ). 
6. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section s (1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 26 -6-2003 ). 3 
 (3) The Council shall — 
(a) review, from time to ti me, the implementation of the projects and schemes included in the 
regional plan and recommend measures for effecting co -ordination among the Governments of the 
States concerned in the matter of implementatio n of such projects and schemes;  
(b) where a proj ect or scheme is intended to benefit two or more States, recommend the ma nner 
in which, — 
(i) such project or scheme may be executed or implemented and managed or maintained; or  
(ii) the benef its therefrom may be shared; or  
(iii) the expen diture thereon may  be incurred;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(d) recommend to the Government of the State concerned or to the Central Government the 
undertaking of necessary surveys and investigation of projects in any State represented in the Council 
to facilitate consideration of the feasibility of including new  projects in the regional plan.  
(4) The Council shall review from time to time the measures taken by the States represented in the 
Council for the maintenance of security and public order therein and re commend to the Governm ents of 
the States concerned further measures necessary in this regard.  
2[(5) The Council shall have such power as may be delegated to it by the Central Government.]  
5. Meetings of the Council .—(1) 3[The Council shall meet at  least twice in a year at  such times ] as 
the Chairman of the Council may appoint in this behalf and shall, subject to the other provisions of this 
section, observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as it may lay 
down from time to time.  
(2) The Chairman or in his absence the Vice -Chairman, if any, or in the absence of both the Chairman 
and the Vice -Chairman, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves, 
shall presi de at a meeting of the Council.  
(3) The proceedings  of every meeting of the Council shall be forwarded to the Central Government 
and also to the Government of each State represented on the Council.  
6. Nomination of certain officers to atte nd the meetings of the Council .—In order to assist the 
Council in the discharge of its functions, each of the Ministries of the Central Government dealing with 
matters relating to Defence, Finance, Home Affairs 4[Planning  and the Department of Development of 
North -Eastern Region]  shall n ominate an officer to attend the meetings of the Council.  
7. Off icers and staff of the Council .—(1) The Council shall have a secretarial staff consisting of a 
Secretary, a Planning Adviser, a Financial Adviser and a Security Adviser and such other officers  and 
employees as the Central Gover nment may, by order, determine.  
(2) The secretarial staff of the Council shall function under the direction, supervision and control of 
the Chairman of the Council.  
(3) The office of the Council shall be located at such place as ma y be determined by the Council.  
(4) The administrative expenses of the said office, including the salaries and allowances payable to, or 
in respect of, members of the secretarial staff of the Council, shall be borne by the Central Government 
out of the moneys provided by Parliament for the purpose.  
8. Repeal .—The North -Eastern Council Act, 1970 (26 of 1970) is hereby repealed.  
                                                           
1. Clause ( c) omitted by  Act 68 of 2002, s. 4  (w.e.f. 26 -6-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -6-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “The Council sh all meet at such times” (w.e.f. 26 -6-2003 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “and Planning” (w.e.f. 26 -6-2003 ). 
--------------------------The Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE PREVENTION OF INSULTS TO NATIONAL HONOUR ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 69 OF 1971  
[23rd December, 1971 .] 
An Act to prevent insults to national honour . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Insults to National Honour 
Act, 1971.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Insults to Indian National Flag and Constitution of India .—Whoever in any public place or in 
any other plac e within public view burns, mutilates, defaces, difiles, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon or  
1[otherwise shows disrespect to or brings] into contempt (whether by words, either spoken or written, or 
by acts) the Indian National Flag or the Constitution o f India or any part thereof, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term  which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
Explanation  1.—Comments expressing disapprobation or criticism of the Constitution or of the 
Indian National Flag or of  any measures of the Government with a view to obtain an amendment of the 
Constitution of India or an alteration of the Indian National Flag by lawful means do not constitute an 
offence under this section.  
Explanation  2.—The expression “Indian National Fla g” includes any picture, painting, drawing or 
photograph, or other visible representation of the Indian National Flag, or of any part or parts thereof, 
made of any substance or represented on any substance.  
Explanation  3.—The expression “public place ” mean s any place intended for use by, or accessible to, 
the public and Includes any public conveyance.  
2[Explanation 4.—The disrespect to the Indian National Flag means and includes — 
(a) a gross affront or indignity offered to the Indian National Flag; or  
(b) dipping the Indian National Flag in salute to any person or thing; or  
(c) flying the Indian National Flag at half -mast except on occasions on which the Indian National 
Flag is flown at half -mast on public buildings in accordance with the instructions issued by the 
Government; or  
(d) using the Indian National Flag as a drapery in any form whatsoever except in State funerals or 
armed forces or other para -military forces funerals; or  
3[(e) using the Indian National Flag, — 
(i) as a portion of costume, unif orm or accessory of any description which is worn below the 
waist of any person; or  
(ii) by embroidering or printing it on cushions, handkerchiefs, napkins, undergarments or any 
dress material; or]  
(f) putting any kind of inscription upon the Indian Nation al Flag; or  
(g) using the Indian National Flag as a receptacle for receiving, delivering or carrying anything 
except flower petals before the Indian National Flag is unfurled as part of celebrations on special 
occasions including the Republic Day or the In dependence day; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2003, s. 2, for “otherwise brings” (w.e.f. 8 -5-2003).  
2. The Explanation  inserted  by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -5-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 51 of 2005, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 20 -12-2005).  2 
 (h) using the Indian National Flag as covering for a statute or a monument or a speaker ’s desk or 
a speaker ’s platform; or  
(i) allowing the Indian National Flag to touch the ground or the floor or trail in water 
intentionally; or  
(j) dra ping the Indian National Flag over the hood, top and sides or back or on a vehicle, train, 
boat or an aircraft or any other similar object; or  
(k) using the Indian National Flag as a covering for a building; or  
(l) intentionally  displaying the Indian National Flag with the “saffron ” down.]  
3. Prevention of singing of Indian National Anthem, etc .—Who ever Intentionally prevents the 
singing of the Indian National Anthem or causes disturbance to any assembly engaged in such singing 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both.  
1[3A. Enhanced penalty on second  and subsequent convictions. —Whoever, having already been 
convicted of an offence under section 2 or section 3, is again convicted of any such offence shall be 
punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which s hall not 
be less than one year.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31  of 200 3, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8 -5-2003).  
--------------------------The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UN AUTHORISED  
OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1971  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1971  
[23rd August , 1971.]  
An Act to provide for the eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises and for 
certain incidental matters.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Public Premises 
(Eviction of Una uthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of September, 1958 except sections 11, 
19 and 20 which shall come into force at once.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(b) “estate officer ” means an officer appointed as such by the Cent ral Government under  
section 3;  
(c) “premises ” means any land or any building or part of a building and incl udes, — 
(i) the  garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such buil ding or part of a 
building, and  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for the mor e beneficial 
enjoyment thereof;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by  rules made under this Act;  
2[(e) “public premises” means — 
(1) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease or requisitioned by, or on behalf of , the 
Central Government, and includes any such premises which have been placed by that 
Government, whether before or after the commencement of the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unau thorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 1980  (61 of 1980) under the control of t he Secretariat 
of either House  of Parliament for providing residential accommodation to any member of the staff 
of that Secretariat;  
(2) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf of, — 
(i) any company as defined in section 3  of the  3[the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)], 
in which not less than fifty -one per cent . of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central 
Government or any company which is a subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act)  of the 
first-mentioned company;  
(ii) any cor poration (not being a company as defined in section 3 of the  3[the Companies 
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)], or a local authority) established by or under a Central Act and 
owned or contr olled by the Central Government;  
4[(iii) any company as defined in clause ( 20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013  
(18 of 2013) in which not less than fifty -one per cent . of the paid -up capital is held partly by 
the Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments and includes a 
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-12-1980).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2, for “the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for item ( iii) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 2 
 company which is a subsidiary (w ithin the meaning of that Act) of the first -mentioned 
company and which carries on the business of public transport including metro railway.  
Expla nation .—For the purposes of this item, “metro railway” shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause  (i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Metro 
Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002 (60 of 2002);  
(iiia) any University established or i ncorporated by any Central Act ,]; 
(iv) any Institute incorporated by the Institutes of Technology Act, 1961                  
(59 of 1961) ; 
1[(v) any Board of Trustees or any successor company constituted under or referred to 
in the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) ;] 
(vi) the Bhakra Management Board constituted under section 79 of the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966  (31 of 1966) , and that Board as and when re -named as the 
Bhakra -Beas Management Board under sub -section  (6) of section 80 of that Act , 2***. 
3[(vii) any State Government or the Government of any Union territory situated in the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi or in any other Union territory,  
(viii) any Cantonment Board constituted under the Cantonments Act, 1924                
(2 of 1924) ; and]  
(3) in relation to the4[Nationa l Capital Territory of Delhi], — 
(i) any  premises belonging to the5[Council as defined in clause ( 9) of section 2 of the 
New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 (44 of 1994) or Corporation or Corporations 
notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957     
(66 of 1957),] of Delhi, or any Municipal Committee or notified area committee,  2*** 
(ii) any premises belonging to the Delhi Development Authority, whether such premises 
are in the possession of, or leased out by, the said Authority;]6[and],  
7[(iii) any  premises belonging to, or taken on lease or requisitioned by, or on behalf of 
any State Go vernment or  the Government of any Union Territory, ] 
8[(iv) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf of any Government 
company as defined in clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “State Government” 
occurring in clause ( 45) of the said section shall mean the Government of the National 
Capital Territory of De lhi;] 
9[(4) any premises of the enemy property as defined in clause ( c) of section 2 of the Enemy 
Property Act, 1968  (34 of 1968) ;] 
(f) “rent”, in relation to any public premises, means the consideration payable periodically for the 
authorised occupation  of the premises, and includes — 
(i) any charge for electricity, water or any other services in connection with the occupation of 
the premises,  
(ii) any tax (by whatever name called) paya ble in respect of the premises,  
where  such charge or tax is payable by the Central Government or the 10[statutory  authority ]; 
11[(fa) “statutory authority”, in relation to the public premises referred to in clau se (e) of this 
section, means, — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2, for item ( v) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
2. The word “and” omitted by Act 7 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2, for “Municipal Corporation” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
6. The word  “and”  added by  Act 7 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
7. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
8. Ins. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
9. Ins. by Act 3 of 2017 , s. 2 0 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016 ). 
10. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2, for “corporate authority ” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
11. Ins. by  s. 2, ibid.  (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  3 
 (i) in respect of the public premises placed under the control of the Secretariat of either House 
of Parliament, the Secretariat of the concerned House of Parliament,  
(ii) in respect of the public premises referred to in item ( i) of sub -clause ( 2) 1[and in item (iv) 
of sub -clause ( 3)] of that clause, the company or the subsidiary company, as the case may be, 
referred to therein,  
(iii) in respect of the public premises referred to in item ( ii) of sub -clause ( 2) of that clause, 
the corporation referred to therein,  
(iv) in respect of the public premises referred to, respectively, in items ( iii), (iv), (v) and ( vi) 
of sub -clause ( 2) of th at clause, the University, Institute or Board, as the case may be , referred to 
therein, and  
(v) in respect of the public premises referred to in sub -clause ( 3) of that clause , the 2[Council, 
Corporation or Corporations], Committee or Authority, as the case may be, referred to in that  
sub-clause;]  
3[(fb) “temporary occupation”  in relation to any public  premises, means occupation by any  person  
on the basis of an order of allotment made under the authority of the Central Government, a State 
Government, the Government of a Union territory or a statutory authority for a total period (including 
the extended period, if any) which is less than thirty days ;] 
(g) “unauthorised occupation”, in relation to any public premises, means the occupation by any  
person of the public premises without authority for such occupation, and includes the continuance in 
occupation by any person of the public premises after the authority (whether by way of grant or any 
other mode of transfer) under which he was allowed to occupy the premises has expired or has been 
determined for any reason whatsoever.  
3. Appointment of estate office rs.—The Central Government may, by notifica tion in the Offi cial 
Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons, being gazetted officers of Government4[or of the Government of any 
Union Territory] or officers of equivalent rank of the5[statutory authority], as it thinks fit, to be estate 
officers for the purposes of this Act :6*** 
7[Provided that no officer of the Secretariat of the Rajya  Sabha shall be so appointed except after 
consultation with the Chairman of the Rajya  Sabha  and no officer of the Secretariat of the Lok  Sabha 
shall be so appointed except after consultation wi th the Speaker of the Lok  Sabha:  
Provided further that an officer of a statutory authority shall only be appointed as an estate officer 
in respect of the public premis es controlled by that authority:  8***] 
9[Provided also that the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant Custodian of the enemy 
property appointed under section 3 of the Enemy Property Act, 1968  (34 of 1968)  shall be deemed to 
have been appoi nted as the Estate Officer in respect of those enemy property, being the public 
premises, referred to in sub -clause ( 4) of clause ( e) of section 2 of this Act for which they had been 
appointed as the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant Custodian under section 3 of the Enemy 
Property Act, 1968 ;] 
(b) define the local limits within which, or the categories of public premises in resp ect of which, 
the estate officers shall exercise the powers conferred, and perform the duties imposed, on estate 
officers by or under this Act.  
10[3A. Eviction from temporary occupation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4 or 
section 5, if the estate officer, after making such inquiry as he deems expedient in the circumstances of 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-6-2015 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 7 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (1-6-1994).  
5. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2, for “corporate authority” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
6. The word “and” omitted by  s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
7. Provisos a dded by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
8. The word “and” omitted by Act 3 of 2017, s. 2 0 (w.e.f. 7-1-2016). 
9. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -1-2016 ). 
10. Ins. by Act 7 of 1994, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  4 
 the case, is satisfied that any persons who were allowed temporary occupation of any public premise s are 
in unauthorised occupation of the said premises, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, make an 
order for the eviction of such persons forthwith and, thereupon, if such persons refuse or fail to comply 
with the said order of eviction, he may evict them from the premises and take possession there of and may, 
for that purpose, use such force as may be necessary.]  
4. Issue of notice to sho w cause against order  of eviction .—1[(1) If the estate officer has 
information that any person is in unauthor ised occupation of any public premises and that he should be 
evicted, the estate officer shall issue in the manner hereinafter provided a notice in writing within seven 
working days from the date of receipt of the information regarding the unauthorised occ upation calling 
upon the person concerned to show cause why an order of eviction should not be made.  
(1A) If the estate officer knows or has reasons to believe that any person is in unauthorised  occupation 
of the public premises, then, without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall forthwith 
issue a notice in writing calling upon the person concerned to show cause why an order of eviction should 
not be made.  
(1B) Any delay in is suing a notice referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 1A) shall not vitiate the 
proceedings under this Act. ] 
(2) The notice shall — 
(a) specify the grounds on which the order of evict ion is proposed to be made; and  
2[(b) require all persons concerned, that is  to say, all persons who are, or may be, in occupation 
of, or claim inte rest in, the public premises, — 
(i) to show cause, if any, against the proposed order on or before such date as is specified in 
the notice, being a date not 3[later than] seven days fro m the date of issue thereof, and  
(ii) to appear before the estate officer on the date specified in the notice along with the 
evidence which they intend to produce in support of the cause shown, and also for personal 
hearin g, if such hearing is desired.]  
(3) The estate officer shall cause the notice to be served by having it affixed on the outer door or 
some other conspicuous part of the public premises, and in such other manner as may be prescribed, 
whereupon the notice shall be deemed to have been duly giv en to all persons concerned.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
5. Evic tion of unauthorised occupants .—5[(1) If, after considering the cause, if any, shown by any 
person in pursuance of a notice under section 4 and any evidence produced by him in support of the same 
and after personal hearing, if any, given under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4, 
the estate officer is satisfied that the public premises are in unauthorised occupation, the estate officer 
shall make an order of eviction, for reas ons to be recorded therein, directing that the public premises shall 
be vacated, on such date as may be specified in the order but not later than fifteen days from the date of 
the order, by all persons who may be in occupation thereof or any part thereof, and cause a copy of the 
order to be affixed on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the public premises:  
Provided that every order under this sub -section shall be made by the estate officer as expeditiously 
as possible and all endeavour shall b e made by him to issue the order within fifteen days of the date 
specified in the notice under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A), as the case may be, of section 4.]  
(2) If any person refuse s or fails to comply with the order of eviction  6[on or before the date specified 
in the said order or within fifteen days of  the date of its publication under sub -section  (1), whichever is 
later,] the estate officer or any other officer duly authorised by the estate officer in this behalf 7[may after 
the date so specified or after  the expiry of the period afore said, whichever is later, evict that person]   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015). 
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 4, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 3, for “earlier than” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
4. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by Act 7 of 1994, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
6. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 1 , for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “may evict that person” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  5 
 from, and take possession of, the public premises and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be 
necessary.  
1[Provided that if the estate officer is satisfi ed, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that there exists 
any compelling reason which prevents the person from vacating the premises within fifteen days, the 
estate officer may grant another fifteen days from the date of expiry of the order under sub -section ( 1) to 
the person to vacate the premises.]  
2[5A. power to remove unauthorised constructions, etc .—(1) No person shall — 
      (a) erect or place or raise any building or3[any movable or  immovable structure or fixture ], 
(b) display or spread any goods,  
(c) bring or keep any cattle or other animal,  
on, or against, or in front of, any public premises except in accordance with the authority (whether by 
way of grant or any other mode of transfer) under which he was allowed to occupy such premises.  
4[(2) Where any building or other immovable structure or fixture has been erected, placed or raised on 
any public premises in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the estate officer may serve 
upon the person erecting such building or other structu re or fixture, a notice requiring him either to 
remove, or to show cause why he shall not remove such building or other structure or fixture from the 
public premises within such period, not being less than seven days, as he may specify in the notice; and 
on the omission or refusal of such person either to show cause, or to remove such building or other 
structure or fixture from the public premises, or where the cause shown is not, in the opinion of the estate 
officer, sufficient, the estate officer may, by order, remove or cause to be removed the building or other 
structure or fixture from the public premises and recover the cost of such removal from the person 
aforesaid as an arrear of land revenue.  
(3) Where any movable structure or fixture has been erecte d, placed or raised, or any goods have been 
displayed or spread, or any cattle or other animal has been brought or kept, on any public premises, in 
contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) by any person, the estate officer  may, by order, remove 
or cause to be removed without notice, such structure, fixture, goods, cattle or other animal, as the case 
may be, from the public premises and recover the cost of such removal from such person as an arrear of 
land revenue.]  
5B. Order of demoliti on of unaut horised construction .—(1) Where the erection of any build ing or 
execution of any work has been commenced, or is being carried on, or has been completed, on any public 
premises by any person in occupation of such  public premises under an authority (whether  by way of 
grant or any other mode of transfer), and such erection of building or ex ecution of work is in 
contraven tion of, or not authorised by , such authority, then, the estate officer may, in addition to any other 
action that may be taken under this Act  or in accordance with the terms of the authority aforesaid, make 
an order, for reasons to be recorded therein, directing that such erection or work shall be demolished by 
the person at whose instance the erection or work has been commenced, or is being ca rried on, or has 
been completed, within such period, a s may be specified in the order 5*** 
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made unless the person concerned has been 
given, by means of a notice  6[of not less than seven days] served in  the prescribed manner, a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause why such order should not be made.  
(2) Where the erection or work has not been completed, the estate officer may, by the same order or 
by a separate order, whether made at the time of the is sue of the notice under the proviso to  
sub-section ( 1) or at any other time , direct the person at whose instance the erection or work has been 
                                                           
1. Ins . by Act 2 of 2015, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 6 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 2, for “other struc ture or fixture” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
5.Certain words, brackets and figure omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
6. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  6 
 commenced, or is being carried on, to stop the erection or work until the expiry of the period within 
which an  appeal against the order of demolition, if made, may be preferred under section 9.  
(3) The estate officer shall cause every order made under sub -section ( 1), or, as the case may be, 
under sub -section ( 2), to be affixed on the outer door, or some other con spicuous part, of the public 
premises.  
(4) Where no appeal has been preferred against the order of demolition made by the estate officer 
under sub -section ( 1) or where an order of demolition made by the estate officer under that sub -section 
has been confir med on appeal, whether with or without variation, the person against whom the order has 
been made shall comply with the order within the period specified therein, or, as the case may be, within 
the period, if any, fixed by the appellate officer on appeal, and, on the failure of the person to comply with 
the order within such period, the estate officer or any other officer duly authorised by the estate officer in 
this behalf, may cause the erection or work to which the order relates to be demolished.  
(5) Whe re an erection or work has been demolished, the estate officer may, by order, require the 
person concerned to pay the expenses of such demolition within such time, and in such number of 
instalments, as may be specified in the order.]  
1[5C. Power to s eal unauthorised constructions .—(1) It shall be lawful for the estate officer, at any 
time, before or after making an order of demolition under section 5B, to make an order directing the 
sealing of such erection or work or of the public premises in which such erection or work has been 
commenced or is being carried on or has been completed in such manner as may be prescribed, for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, or for preventing any dispute as to the nature and e xtent 
of such erection or work.  
(2) Where any erection or work or any premises in which any erection or work is being carried on 
has, or have been sealed, the estate officer may, for the purpose of demolishing such erection or work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act,  order such seal to be removed.  
(3) No person shall  remove such seal except — 
(a) under an order made by the estate off icer under sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) under an order of the appellate officer made in an appeal under this Act.]  
6. Disposal of property left on public prem ises by unauthorised occupants .—(1) Where any 
persons have been evicted from any pu blic premises under section 5 2[or where any building or other 
work has been demolished under section 5B], the estate officer m ay, after giving fourteen days’ notice to 
the persons from whom possession of the public premises has been taken and after publishing the notice 
in at least one newspaper having circulation in the locality, remove or cause to be removed or dispose of 
by public auction any prope rty remain ing on such premises.  
 2[(1A) Where any goods, materials, cattle or other animal have been removed from any public 
premises under section 5A, the estate officer may, after giving fourteen days' notice to the persons owning 
such goods, materials, cattle or other animal and after publishing the notice in at least one newspaper 
having circulation in the locality, dispose of, by public auction, such goods, mat erials, cattle or other 
animal.  
(1B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section s (1) and ( 1A), the giving or publication of any 
notice referred to therein shall not be necessary in respect of any property which is subject to speedy and 
natural decay, and the estate officer may, after recording such evidence as he may think fit, cause such 
property to  be sold or otherwise disposed of in such manner as he may think fit.]  
(2) Where any property is sold under sub -section ( 1), the sale proceeds thereof shall, after deducting 
the expenses of the sale and the amount, if any, due to the Central Government or  the 3[statutory 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 7 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “ corporate authority” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  7 
 authority] on account of arrears of rent or damages or costs, be paid to such person or persons as may 
appear to the estate officer to be entitled to the same:  
Provided that where the estate officer is unable to decide as to the person or persons to whom the 
balance of the amount is payable or as to the apportionment of the same, he may refer such dispute to the 
civil court of competent jurisdiction and the decision of th e court thereon shall be final.  
1[(2A) The expression “costs ”, referred to in sub -section ( 2), shall include the cost of removal 
recoverable under section 5A and the cost of demolition recoverable under section 5B.]  
7. Power to require payment of rent or damages  in respect of public premises .—(1) Where any 
person is i n arrears of rent payable in respect of any public premises, the estate officer may, by order, 
require that person to pay the same within such time and in such instalments as  may be specified in the 
order.  
(2) Where any person is, or has at any time been, in unauthorised occupation of any public premises, 
the estate officer may, having regard to such principles of assessment of damages as may be prescribed, 
assess the damages on account of the use and occupation of such premises and may, by order, require t hat 
person to pay the damages within such time and in such instalments as may be specified in the order.  
2[(2A) While making an orde r under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the estate officer may direct 
that the arrears of rent or, as the case may be, damages shall be payable together with 3[compound 
interest ] at such rate as may be prescribed, not being a rate exceeding the current rate of interest within 
the meaning of t he In terest Act, 1978 (14 of 1978).]  
(3) No order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be made against any person until after the 
issue of a notice in writing to the person calling upon him to show cause 4[within seven days from the 
date of issue  thereof] , why such order should not be made, and until his objections, if any, and any 
evidence he may produce in support of the same, have been considered by the estate officer.  
5[(4) Every order under this section shall be made by the estate officer as expeditiously as possible 
and all endeavour shall be made by him to issue the order within fifteen days of the date specified in the 
notice.]  
8. Powers of estate officers .—An estate officer shall, for the purpose of holding any inquiry under 
this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  
(5 of 1908) when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
9. Appeals .—(1) An appeal shall lie from every order of the estate office r made in respect  of any 
public premises under 6[section 5 or section 5B] 7[or section 5C] or section 7 to an appellate officer who 
shall be the district judge of the district in which the public premises are situate or such other judicial 
officer in that district of not less than ten years standing as the district judge may designate in this behalf.  
(2) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be preferred, — 
(a) in the case of an appeal f rom an order under section 5, 8[within twelve days] from the date of 
publication of the order under sub -section ( 1) of that section; 9*** 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 7 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 5, for “simple interest” (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
6. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s.  9, for “section 5 ” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
7. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
8. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 9, for “within fifteen days” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
9. The word “and” omitted by Act 35 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  8 
 (b) in the ca se of an appeal from an order 1[under section 5B or section 7, within twelve days] 
from the date on which the order is communicated to the appellant; 2[and]  
2[(c) in the case of  an appeal from an order under section 5C, within twelve day s from the date of 
such order:]  
3[Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal  in exceptional cases after the expiry 
of the  said period , if he is satisfied  for reasons to be recorded in writing that there was compelling 
reasons which prevented the  person from filing the  appeal in time .] 
(3) Where an appeal is preferred from an order of the estate officer, the appellate officer may stay 
the enforcement of that order for such period and on such conditions a s he deems fit:  
4[Provided that where the construction or erection of any building or other structure or fixture or 
execution of any other work was not completed on the day on which an order was made under  section 5B 
for the demolition or removal of such building or other structure or fixture, the appellate officer shall not 
make any order for the stay of enforcement of such order, unless such security, as may be sufficient in the 
opinion of the appellate o fficer, has been given by the appellant for not proceeding with such 
construction, erection or work pendi ng the disposal of the appeal.]  
5[(4) Every appeal under this section shall be disposed of by the appellate officer as expeditiously as 
possible and every endeavour shall be made to dispose of the appeal finally within one month from the 
date of filing the appeal, after providing the parties  an opportunity of being heard.]  
(5) The costs of any appeal under this section shall be in the discr etion of the appellate officer.  
(6) For the purposes of this section, a presidency -town shall be deemed to be a district and the chief 
judge or the princip al judge of the city civil court therein shall be deemed to be the district judge of the 
district.  
10. Finality of orders .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made by an 
estate officer or appellate officer under this Act shall be final and shall not be called in question in any 
original suit, application or execution proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or u nder 
this Act.  
11. Offences and penalty .—6[(1) If any person unlawfully occupies any public premises, he shall be 
be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to fiv e thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that a person who, having been lawfully in occupation of any public premises by virtue of 
any authority (whether by way of grant, allotment or by any other mode whatsoever) continues to be in 
occupation of such premises after such authority has ceased to be valid, shall not be guilty of such 
offence.]  
7[(2)] If any person who has been evicted from any public premises under this Act again occupies the 
premises without authority for such occupation, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to8[five thousand rupees ], or with both.  
7[(3)] Any magistrate convicting a person under  9[sub-section ( 2)] may make an order for evicting 
that person summarily and he shall be liable to su ch eviction without prejudice to any other action that 
may be taken against him under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 9, for “under section 7, within fifteen days” (w.e.f.  20-12-1980).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
4. The proviso added by  Act 61 of 1980, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 2015, s. 6, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 22 -6-2015 ). 
6. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 6 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
7. Sub -section s (1) and ( 2) renumbered as sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) thereof by s.  6, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
8. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  
9. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1984).  9 
 1[11A. Offences und er section 11 to be cognizable .—The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974), shall apply to an offence under section 11 as if it were a  cognizable  offence — 
(i) for the purposes of inv estigation of such offence, and  
(ii) for the pu rposes of matters, other than — 
(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and  
(2) arrest  of a person except on the complaint of, or upon information received  
from,— 
(a) a Group A officer as may be appointed by the Central Government, in the case of an 
offence in relation to the public premises specified in sub -clause (1) of clause ( e) of sec tion 2;  
(b) an officer equivalent to the rank of a Group A officer of the Central Government or 
where it is not possible to specify an officer of such equivalent rank, such executive officer as 
may be appointed by the statutory authority in the case of an offence in relation to the public 
premises specified in sub -clause ( 2) of clause ( e) of section 2;  
(c) such Deputy Commissioner, in the case of an offence in relation to the public 
premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, as may be appoint ed by the 
Administrator o f the Union territory of Delhi;  
(d) the Secretary, New Delhi Municipal Committee, in the case of an offence in relation 
to the public premises belonging to the  New Delhi Municipal Committee;  
(e) the Secretary of a notified area com mittee, in the case of an offence in relation to the 
public premises belo nging to that committee;  
(f) such Director, in the case of an offence in relation to the public premises belonging to 
the Delhi Development Authority, as may be appointed by the Admin istrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi.]  
12. Power to obtain informatio n.—If the estate officer has reason to believe that any persons are in 
unauthorised occupation of any public premises, the estate officer or any other officer authorised  by him 
in this behalf may require those persons or any other person to furnish information relating to the names 
and other particulars of the persons in occupation of the public premises and every person so required 
shall be bound to furnish the informati on in his possession.  
13. Liability of h eirs and legal representatives .—(1) Where any person against whom any 
proceeding for the determination of arrears of rent or for the assessment of damages 2[or for the 
determination of the amount payable by way of in terest on such arrears of rent or damages] is to be or has 
been taken dies before the proceeding is taken or during the pendency thereof, the proceeding may be 
taken or, as the case may be, continued against the heirs or legal representatives of that perso n. 
2[(1A) Where any person from whom any cost of removal of any building or other structure or f ixture, 
or, as the case may be,  any goods, cattle or other animal is to be re covered under sub -section ( 2) 3[or    
sub-section ( 3)] of section 5A, or any expenses of demolition are to be recovered under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 5B, dies before any proceeding is taken for the recovery of such cost or during the pendency 
thereof, the proceeding may be taken or, as the case may be, continued against the heir s or legal 
representatives of that person.]  
(2) Any amount due to the Central Government or t he 4[statutory authority] from any person  whether 
by way of arrears of 5[rent or damages or costs of removal referred to in section 5A or expenses of  
demolition referred to in section 5B or interest referred to in sub -section ( 2A) of section 7 or any other 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 3-11-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 10 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 3-11-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 2, for “corporate authority” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “rent or damages or costs”  (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  10 
 cost] shall, after the death of the person, be payable by his heirs or legal representatives but their liability 
shall be limited to the extent of th e assets of the deceased in their hands.  
14. Recovery of rent, etc. , as an arrear of land revenue .—If any p erson refuses or fails to pay 1[the 
expenses of demolition payable under sub -section ( 5) of section 5B or] the arrears of rent payable under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 or  the damages payable under sub -section ( 2) 1[or the interest determined 
under sub -section ( 2A)] of that section or the costs awarded to the Central Government or the  
2[statutory authority] under sub -section ( 5) of section 9 or any 3[portion of such rent, damages, expenses, 
interest] or costs, within the time, if any, specified therefor in the order relating thereto, the estate officer 
may issue a certificate for the amount due to the Collector who shall proceed to recover the  same as an 
arrear of land revenue.  
4[15. Bar of jurisdiction. —No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any sui t or proceeding in 
respect of — 
(a) the eviction of any person who is in unauthorised occupa tion of any public premises, or  
(b) the  removal of any building, structure or fixture or goods, cattle or other animal from any 
public premises under secti on 5A, or  
(c) the demolition of any building or other structure made, or ordered to be made, under section 
5B, or  
5[(cc) the sealing of any  erection or work or of any public  premises under section 5C, or]  
(d) the arrears of rent payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 or damages payable under  
sub-section ( 2), or interest payable under sub -section ( 2A), of that section, or  
(e) the recovery of — 
(i) costs of removal of any building, structure or fixture or goods, cattle or other animal under 
section 5A, o r 
(ii) expenses of demolition under section 5B, or  
(iii) costs awarded to the Central Government or statutory authority under s ub-section ( 5) of 
section 9, or  
(iv) any portion of such rent, damages, costs of removal, expenses of demolition or costs 
awarded to the Central Government or the statutory authority.]  
16. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the 2[statutory authority] or the appellate officer or the estate officer 
in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of t his Act or of 
any rules or orders made thereunder.  
17. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, subject to such conditions if any, as may be 
specified in the notification be exercisable also by a State Government or an officer of the State 
Government or an officer of the State Government.  
18. Pow er to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980 , s. 11 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “corporate authority” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “portion of such rent, damages” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
4. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
5. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 3-11-1984).  11 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of any notice required or authorised  to be given under this Act and the ma nner in 
which it may be served;  
(b) the holdi ng of inquiries under this Act;  
(c) the distribution and allocation of work to estate officers and the transfer of any proceeding 
pending before an estate off icer to another  estate officer;  
(d) the procedure to be followed in taking  possession of public premises;  
(e) the manner in which damages for unauthorised occupation may be assessed and the principles 
which may be taken into acc ount in assessing such damages;  
1[(ee) the manner in which the sealing of any erection or work or of any public premises shall be 
made under s ub-section ( 1) of section 5 C;] 
2[(ea) the rate at which interest shall be payable on arrear s of rent specifi ed in any order made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, or damages assessed under su b-section ( 2) of that section;]  
(f) the manner in which appeals may be preferred and the procedure to be followed in appeals;  
(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this s ection shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may b e comprised in one 
session or 3[in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
19. Repeal .—The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1958 (32 of 1958), is 
hereby repealed.  
20. Validation .—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, anything done or any 
action taken (including rules or orders made, notices issued, evictions ordered or effected, damages 
assessed, rent s or damages or costs recovered and proceedings initiated) or purported to have been done 
or taken under the public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1958 (32 of 1958) 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the 1958 -Act) shall be deemed  to be as valid and effective as if 
such thing or action was done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act which, under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 1 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of Sep tember, 1958, 
and accordingly — 
(a) no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund 
of any rent or damages or costs recovered under the 1958 -Act where such refund has been claimed 
merely on the ground that the said Act has been declared to  be unconstitutional and void; and  
(b) no court shall enforce a decree or order directing the refund of any rent or damages or costs 
recovered under the 1958 -Act merely on the ground that the said Act has been declared to be 
unconstitutional and void.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1984, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 3-11-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 61 of 1980, s. 13 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -12-1980).  
--------------------------The Uttar Pradesh Cantonments (Control of Rent and Eviction) (Repeal) Act, 1971--------------------------
1 
 THE UTTAR PRADESH CANTONMENTS (CONTROL OF RENT AND EVICTION)  
 (REPEAL) ACT , 1971  
ACT NO. 68 OF 1971  
[23rd December,  1971 .] 
An Act to provide for the repeal of the Uttar Pradesh Cantonments (Control of Rent and 
Eviction) Act,  1952.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Twenty -second Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Cantonments (Control of Rent and 
Eviction) (Repeal) Act,  1971.  
2. Repeal of Act 1 0 of 1952 .—On and from the da te1 on which the United Provinces (Temporary) 
Control of Rent and Eviction Act,  1947  (United Provinces Act III of 1947) is ex tended by notification 
under section  3 of the Cantonments (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act,  1957  (46 of 1957) , to the 
cantonments in the State of Uttar Pradesh, the Uttar Pradesh Cantonments (Control of Rent and Eviction) 
Act, 1952 (10 of 1952) shall stand repealed.  
3. Savings .—(1) The repeal of Uttar Pradesh Cantonments (Control of Rent and Eviction)   
Act, 1952  (10 of 1952) by section  2 shall not affect :— 
(a) the previous operation of the said Act or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said Act; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or p unishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the 
said Act; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the said Act had not been repealed.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in  sub-section ( 1), anything done or any action taken under the 
Act repealed by section  2 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions 
of the United Provinces (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act,  1947  (United Provinces            
Act III of 1947) extended by notification as provided in that section to the cantonments in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh and  shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done 
or any action taken under the Act so extended.  
 
                                                           
1. 3rd April, 197 2, vide notification No. S.R. O. 8(E), dated 3rd April , 197 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 4. 
