--------------------------The Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1972  
[15th June,  1972.]  
An Act further to amend the Aligarh Muslim University Act, 1920.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Aligarh Muslim University 
(Amendment) Act, 1972.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
33. Transitional provisions. —(1) Every authority of the University shall, as soon as may be , after 
the commencement of this Act, be constituted in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act as 
amended by this Act and of the Statutes set out in the Schedule and until any such authority is constituted, 
the authority functioning immediately before such commencement, shall continue to exercise all the 
powers and perform all the duties under the principal Act, so amended.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, the Treasurer and the Registrar, holding office 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, on and from such commencement, hold their 
respective offices by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions as they held it immediately 
before such commencement.  
(3) The Chancellor, and the Deans of Faculties shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement of 
this Act, be appointed in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act and 
of the Statute s set out in the Schedule and the person holding any such office immediately before such 
commencement shall continue to hold that office until his successor enters upon his office.  
34. Power of Visitor to make appointments in certain cases. —If any difficul ty arises with respect 
to the establishment of any authority of the University or in connection with the first meeting of any 
authority of the University, the Visitor may, in consultation with the Vice -Chancellor, by order, make any 
appointment or do anyth ing which appears to him necessary or expedient for the proper establishment of 
any authority of the University or for the first meeting of any authority of the University.  
35. Saving. —Anything done, any action taken or any degree or other academic distinction conferred 
by the University before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding any change made by this 
Act in the constitution of the Court, Executive Council, Academic Counci l, or any other authority of the 
University, be valid as if such thing were done, action were taken or degree or other academic distinction 
were conferred under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act.  
                                                           
1.  17th June, 1972, vide notification No. S.O. 1683, dated 17th June, 1972, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3  (ii). 
2.  Sections 2 to 32 rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 19 78 (38 of 19 78), s. 2 and the First                                              
Schedule (w.e.f. 26-11-1978). 
--------------------------The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
  THE ANTIQUITIES AND ART TREASURES  ACT, 197 2                                                                                                                                       
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Regulation of export trade in antiquities and art treasures.  
4. Application o f Act 52 of 19 62. 
5. Antiquities to be  sold only under a licence.  
6. Appointment of licensing officers.  
7. Application for licence.  
8. Grant of licence.  
9. Renewal of licence.  
10. Maintenance of records, photographs and registers by licensees.  
11. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.  
12. Persons whose licences have been revoked may sell antiquitie s to other  licensees.  
13. Power of Central Government to carry on the business of selling antiquities to the exclusion 
of others.  
14. Registration of antiquities . 
15. Appointment of registering officers.  
16. Application for registration and grant of certificate of registration.  
17. Transfer of ownership, etc., of antiquities to be intimated to the registerin g officer.  
18. Provisions of sections 14, 16 and 17 not to apply in certain ca ses. 
19. Power of Central Government to compulsorily acquire antiquities and art treasures.  
20. Payment of compensation for antiquities and art treasures compulsorily acquired under            
section 19.  
21. Appeals against decisions of licensing officers  and registering officers.  
22. Appeals against awards of arbitrators.  
23. Powers of entry, search, seizure, etc.  
24. Power to determine whether or not an article, etc., is antiquity or art treasure.  
25. Penalty.  
26. Cognizance of offences.  
27. Magistrate’s  power to impose enhanced penalties.  
28. Offences by companies.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Application of other laws not barred.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Repeal.  
33. Amendment of Act 24 of 1958.  2 
 THE ANTIQUITIES AND ART TREASURES  ACT, 197 2 
ACT NO. 52 OF 1972  
[9th September, 1972 .] 
An Act to regulate the export trade in antiquities and art treasures , to provide for the prevention 
of smuggling of, and fraudulent dealings in, antiquities, to provide for the compulsory 
acquisition of antiquities and art treasures for preservation in public places and to provide for 
certain other matters connected  therewith or incidental or ancillary thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Antiquities and Art 
Treasures Act, 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Ga zette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for 
different States and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be 
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that pro vision.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “antiquity ” includes — 
(1) (i) any coin, sculpture, painting, epigraph or other work of art or craftsmanship;  
(ii) any article, object or thing detached from a building or cave;  
(iii) any article, object or thing illustrative of science, art, crafts, literature, religion, customs, 
morals or politics in bygone ages;  
(iv) any article, object or thing of historical interest;  
(v) any article, object or thing declared by the Cent ral Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, to be an antiquity for the purposes of this Act,  which has been in existence for 
not less than one hundred years; and  
(II) any manuscript, record or other document which is of scientific, historical,  literary or 
aesthetic value and which has been in existence for not less than seventy -five years;  
(b) “art treasure ” means any human work of art, not being an antiquity, declared by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette, to be an art treasure for the purposes of this Act 
having regard to its artistic or aesthetic value:  
Provided that no declarat ion under this clause shall be made in respect of any such work of art so 
long as the author thereof is alive;  
(c) “export ” means taking out of India to a place outside India;  
(d) “licensing officer ” means an officer appointed as such under section 6;  
(e) “registering officer ” means an officer appointed as such under section 15;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
(2) Any reference in th is Act to any law which is not In force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be constr ued as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
                                                           
1. 5th April, 1976, vide notification No. G.S.R. 279 (E), dated 5th April, 1976 , (except the State of Sikkim) , see Gazette of 
India, P art II, sec. 3( i). 
1st June, 1979, vide notification No. G.S.R. 312(E), dated 15th May, 197 9 [in respect of the State of Sikkim, the 
provisions of ss. 2, 3, 4, 19, 20, 22, 24, sub -section ( 1) of s. 25, sub -section ( 1) of s. 26 and ss. 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31], see 
Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
 3 
 3. Regulation of export tr ade in antiquities and art trea sures. —(1) On and from the 
commencement of this Act, it shall not be lawful for any person, other than the Central Government or 
any authority or agency authorized by the Central Government in this behalf, to export any antiquity or 
art treasure.  
(2) Whenever the Central Government or any authority or agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
intends to export any antiquit y or art treasure such export shall be made only under and in accordance 
with the terms and conditions of a permit issued for the purpose by such authority as may be prescribed.  
4. Application o f Act 52 of 19 62.—The Customs Act, 1962, shall have effect in relation to a ll 
antiquities and art treasures, the export of which by any person (other than the Central Government or any 
authority or agency authorized by the Central Government) is prohibited under section 3 save in so far as 
that Act is inconsistent wi th the provisions of this Act and except that (notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 125 of that Act) any confiscation authorized under that Act shall be made unless the 
Central Government on an application made to it in this behalf, otherwise dire cts. 
5. Antiquities to be sold only under a licence. —1[As from the date of expiry of a period of six 
months from the commencement of this Act] no person shall, himself or by any other person on his 
behalf, carry on the business of selling or offering to se ll any antiquity except under and in accordance 
with the terms and conditions of a licence granted under section 8.  
Explanation. —In this section and in sections 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 17 and 18 “antiquity ” does not include 
ancient and historical records other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament, to be of 
national importance.  
6. Appointment of licensing officers. —The Central Government may, by notified order, — 
(a) appoint such persons, bei ng gazetted officers of Government, as it thinks fit, to be licensing 
officers for the purposes of this Act;  
(b) define the limits of the area within which a licensing officer shall exercise the powers 
conferred on licensing officers by or under this Act.  
7. Application for licence. —(1) Any person desiring to carry on, himself or by any other person on 
his behalf, the business of selling or offering to sell antiquities may make an application for the grant of a 
licence to the licensing officer having jurisd iction.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and shall contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
8. Grant of licence. —(1) On receipt of an application for the grant of a licence under section 7, the 
licensing officer may, after holding such inquiry as he deems fit, grant a licence to the applicant having 
regard to the following factors, namely: — 
(a) the experience of the applicant with respect to trade in antiquities;  
(b) the village, town or city where the applicant i ntends to carry on business;  
(c) the number of persons already engaged in the business of selling, or offering for sale of, 
antiquities in the said village, town or city; and  
(d) such other factors as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no licence shall be gr anted to the applicant if he is convicted of an offence 
punishable under the Antiquities (Export Control) Act, 1947 (31 of 1947) unless a period of ten years 
has elapsed since the date of the conviction.  
(2) Every licence granted under this section shall b e on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every licence granted under this section shall be for such period, subject to such conditions and in 
such form and shall contain such particulars, as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 82 of 1976, s. 2 , for “On and from the expiry of a period o f two months of the commencement of this Act” 
(w.e.f. 4 -6-1976).  4 
 (4) No application for the grant of  a licence made under section 7 shall be rejected unless the 
applicant has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
9. Renewal of licence. —(1) A licence  granted under section 8 may, on an application made by the 
licensee, be renewed by the licensing officer for such period and on payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) No application made under this section shall be rejected unless the applicant ha s been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
10. Maintenance of records, photographs and registers by licensees. —(1) Every holder of a 
licence granted under section 8 or renewed under section 9 shall maintain such records, photographs and 
registers, in such manner and containing such particulars, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every record, photograph and register maint ained under sub -section ( 1) shall, at all reasonable 
times, be open to inspection by the licensing officer or by  any other gazetted officer of Government 
authorised in writing by the licensing officer in this behalf.  
11. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences. —(1) If the licensing officer is satisfied 
either on a reference made to him in this behalf or oth erwise that — 
(a) a licence granted under section 8 has been obtained by misrepresentation of an essential     
fact, or  
 (b) the holder of a licence has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply with the conditions 
subject to which the licence has been gr anted or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the licence may be liable under this 
Act, the licensing officer may, after giving the holder of the  licence an opportunity of showing cause, 
revoke or suspend the licence.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may also vary or amend 
a licence granted under section 8.  
12. Persons whose licences have been revoked may sell antiquities to other                  
licensees. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5, any person whose licence has been revoked 
under section 11 may, after making a declaration before the licensing officer, within such period, in such 
form and in such manner, as may be prescribed, of all the antiquities in his ownership, control or 
possession immediately before such revocation, sell such antiquities to any other person holding a valid 
licence under this Act:  
Provided that no such antiquity shall be sold after the expiry of a period of six mont hs from the date 
of revocation of the licence.  
13. Power of Central Government to carry on the business of selling antiquities to the exclusion 
of others. —(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that with a view to conserving antiquities or in 
the publ ic interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare that with effect on and from such date as may be specified in the notification, the Central 
Government or any authority or agency authorised by the Central Government in this behalf shall alone 
be entitled to carry on the business of selling or offering for sale of antiquities.  
(2) On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) it shall not be lawful for any person, authority or agency, ot her than the Central Government 
or any authority or agency authorized by the Central Government, to carry on the business of selling 
or offering for sale any antiquity on and f rom the date specified therein;  
(b) the provisions of this Act, in so far as they relate to the licensing of persons carrying on the 
business of selling or offering for sale of antiquities shall cease to have effect except as respects 
things done or omitted to be done before such cesser of operation and section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) shall apply upon such cesser of operation as if those provisions had 
been repealed by a Central Act:  5 
 Provided that every licence granted under section 8 and in force on the date aforesaid shall, 
notwithstanding that the period s pecified therein has not expired, cease to be in force.  
(3) Every person whose licence has ceased to be in force under the proviso to clause ( b) of            
sub-section ( 2) shall, within such period, in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, make a 
declaration before the licensing officer of all the antiquities in his ownership, control or possession 
immediately before the date specified in the notification issued under sub -section ( 1). 
14. Registration of antiquities .—(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify those antiquities which shall be registered under this Act.  
(2) In specifying the antiquities under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have regard to 
the following factors, namely: — 
(i) the necessity for conserving the objects of art;  
(ii) the need to preserve such objects within India for the better appreciation of the cultural 
heritage of India;  
(iii) such other factors as will, or are likely to, c ontribute to the safeguarding of the cultural 
heritage of India.  
(3) Every person who owns, controls or is in possession of any antiquity specified in the notification 
issued under sub -section ( 1) shall register such antiquity before the registering office r— 
(a) in the case of a person who owns, controls or possesses such antiquity on the date of issue of 
such notification, within three mo nths of such date; and  
(b) in the case of any other person, within fifteen days of the date on which he comes into 
owner ship, control or possession of such antiquity,  
and obtain a certificate in token of such registration.  
15. Appointment of registering officers. —The Central Government may, by notified order, — 
(a) appoint  such persons, as it thinks fit, to be registering officers for the purposes of this Act; and  
(b) define the limits of the area within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers 
conferred on registering officers by or under this Act.  
16. Applica tion for registration and grant of certificate of registration. —(1) Every person 
required to register any antiquity before the registering officer under section 14 shall make an application 
to the registering officer for the grant of a certificate of regis tration.  
(2) Every application under sub -section  (1) 1[shall , in the case of such antiquities or class of 
antiquities as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, be 
accompanied] by such photographs of the antiquity which is to be registered and by such number of 
copies, not exceeding six, as may be prescribed and shall be made in such form and shall contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the registering officer may, after holding such 
inquiry as he deems fit, grant a certificate of registration containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(4) No application made under this section shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a 
reasonable opp ortunity of being heard in the matter.  
17. Transfer of ownership, etc ., of antiquities to be intimated to the registering                
officer. —Whenever any person transfers the ownership, control or possession of any antiquity specified 
in any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 14 such person shall intimate, within such 
period and in such form as may be prescribed, the fact of such transfer to the registering officer.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 82 of 1976, s. 3, for “shall be accompanied” (w.e.f. 4 -6-1976).  
 6 
 18. Provisions of sections 14, 16 and 17 not to apply in c ertain cases. —Nothing in section 14 or 
section 16 or section 17 shall apply to any antiquity kept — 
(i) in a museum; or  
(ii) in an office; or  
(iii) in an archive; or  
(iv) in an educational or cultural institution,  
owned, controlled or managed by the Government 1[or by an y local authority or by any such body as the 
Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing , approve for the purpose of this section by 
general or special order] . 
19. Power of Central Government to compulsorily acquire antiquities and art treasures. —(1) If 
the Central Government is of opinion that it is desirable to preserve any antiquity or art treasure in a 
public place, that Government may make an order for the compulsory acquisition  of such antiquity or art 
treasure.  
(2) On the making of an order under sub -section ( 1) the Collector of the district in which such 
antiquity or art treasure is kept shall give notice to the owner thereof intimating him of the decision of the 
Central Gover nment to acquire the same and it shall be lawful for the Collector to take possession of such 
antiquity or art treasure, for which purpose the Collector may use such force as may be necessary.  
(3) Where the owner of any antiquity or art treasure the possession of which has been taken over by 
the Collector under sub -section ( 2) objects to the taking over of such possession, he may, within a period 
of thirty days from the date on which such possession was taken over, make a representation to the 
Central  Government putting forth his objections:  
Provided that the Central Government may entertain the representation after the expiry of the said 
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the owner of such antiquity or art treasure was prevented by 
suffici ent cause from making  the representation in time.  
(4) On receipt of any representation under sub -section ( 3), the Central Government, after making such 
inquiry as it deems fit and after giving to the objector an opportunity of being heard in the matter, sh all, 
within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of the representation, either rescind or confirm the 
order made by it under sub -section ( 1). 
(5) Where any order made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) is rescinded under     
sub-section ( 4) the antiquity or art treasure shall be returned to the owner thereof without delay and at the 
expense of the Central Government.  
(6) Where the order made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) is confirmed under     
sub-section ( 4) the a ntiquity or art treasure shall vest in the Central Government with effect from the date 
on which the possession thereof has been taken over by the Collector under sub -section ( 2). 
(7) The power of compulsory acquisition conferred by this section shall not extend to any object, 
being an antiquity or art treasure, used for bona fide  religious observances.  
Explanation. —In this section, “public place ” means any place which is open to the use of the public, 
whether on payment of fees or not, or whether it is actually used by the public or not.  
20. Payment of compensation for antiquities and art treasures compulsorily acquired under         
section 19 .—(1) Where any antiquity or art treasure is compulsorily acquired under section 19, there shall 
be paid compensation, the amount of which shall be determined in the manner and in accordance with the 
principles hereinafter set out, that is to say, — 
(a) where the amount of compensation can be fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance 
with such agreement;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 82 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 4 -6-1976).  
 7 
 (b) where no such agreement can be reached , the Central Government shall appoint as arbitrator a 
person who is, or has been, or is qualified for appoi ntment as, a Judge of a High Court;  
(c) the Central Government may , in any particular case, nominate a person having expert 
knowledge as to the nature of the antiquity or art treasure compulsorily acquired to assist the 
arbitrator and where such nomination is made, the person to be compensated may also nominate an 
assesso r for the same purpose;  
(d) at the commencement of the proceedings before the arbitrator, the Central Government and 
the person to be compensated shall state what, in their respective opinion , is a fair amount of 
compensation;  
(e) the arbitrator shall, aft er hearing the dispute, make an award determining the amount of 
compensation which appears to him to be just and specifying the person or persons to whom such 
compensation shall be paid and in making the award he shall have regard to the circumstances of e ach 
case and the provisions of sub -section ( 2); 
(f) where there is any dispute as to the person or persons who are entitled to the compensation, the 
arbitrator shall decide such dispute and if the arbitrator finds that more persons than one are entitled 
to compensation, he shall apportion the amount thereof amongst such persons;  
(g) nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940) shall apply to arbitration under this section.  
(2) While determining the compensation under sub -section ( 1), the arbitrator sha ll have regard to the 
following factors, namely: — 
(i) the date or the period to which the antiquity or art treasure belongs;  
(ii) the artistic, aesthetic, historical, architectural, archaeological or  anthropological  importance of 
the antiquity or art treas ure; 
(iii) the rarity of the antiquity or art treasure;  
(iv) such other matters as are relevant to the dispute.  
(3) The arbitrator appointed under sub -section ( 1), while holding arbitration proceedings under this 
section, shall have all the powers of a Civ il Court, while trying a suit, under the Code of Civil    
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring  the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses.  
21. Appeals against decisions of licensing offi cers and registering officers. —(1) Any person 
aggrieved by a decision of a licensing officer under section 8 or section 9 or section 11 or by a decision of 
a registering officer under section 16 may, within thirty days from the date on which the decision i s 
communicated to him, prefer an appeal to such authority as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by suffic ient cause from  filing the appeal in 
time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders as it deems fit.  
22. Appeals against awards of arbitrators. —Any person aggrieved by an award of the arbitrator 
made under section 20 may, within thirty days from the date on which the award is communicated to him, 
prefer an appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction he resides:  8 
 Provided that th e High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days 
if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by a sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
23. Powers of entry, search, seizure, etc. —(1) Any person, being an officer of Government, 
authorized in this behalf by the Central Government, may, with a view to securing compliance with the 
provisions of this Act or to satisfying himself that the provisions of this Act have been complied with — 
(i) enter and sea rch any place;  
(ii) seize any antiquity or art treasure in respect of which he suspects that any provision of this 
Act has been, is being, or is about to be, contravened and thereafter take all measures necessary for 
securing the production of the antiquit y or a rt treasure so seized in a court and for its safe custody, 
pending such production.  
(2) The provisions of sections 102 and 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) 
relating to search and seizure shall, so far as may be, apply to search es and seizures under this section.  
24. Power to determine whether or not an article, etc ., is antiquity or art treasure. —If any 
question arises whether any article, object or thing or manuscript, record or other document is or is not an 
antiquity or is or is not an art treasure for the purposes of this Act, it shall be referred to the Director 
General, Archaeological Survey of In dia, or to an officer not below  the rank of a Director in the 
Archaeological Survey of India authorized by the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India and 
the decision of the Director General, Archaeological Survey of India or such officer, as the case may be, 
on such question shall be final.  
25. Penalty. —(1) If any person, himself or by any other person on his behalf, exports or attempts to 
export any antiquity or art treasure in contravention of section 3, he shall, without prejudice to any 
confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable under the provisi ons of the Customs                           
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) as applied by section 4, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than six months but which may  extend to three years and with  fine. 
(2) If any person contravenes  the provisions of section 5 or section 12 or sub -section ( 2) or              
sub-section ( 3) of section 13 or section 14 or section 17, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both and the an tiquity in respect of which the 
offence has been committed shall be liable to confiscation.  
(3) if any person prevents any licensing officer from inspecting any record, photograph or register 
maintained under section 10 or prevents any officer authorized b y the Central Government under         
sub-section ( 1) of section 23 from entering into or searching any place under that sub -section, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.  
26. Cogni zance of offences. —(1) No prosecution for an offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 25 
shall be instituted except by or with the sanction of such officer of Government as may be prescribed in 
this behalf.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) 
of section 25 except upon complaint in writing made by an officer generally or specially authori zed in this 
behalf by the Central Government.  
(3) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Cla ss shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
27. Magistrate ’s power to impose enhanced penalties. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898),  it shall be lawful for  any Presidency 
Magistrate or any Magistrate of the First Class to pa ss any sentence under this A ct in excess of his power 
under section 32 of the said Code.  
28. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, ev ery person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceede d against and punished accordingly:  9 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due dili gence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the pu rpose of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosec ution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Government for anything which is in good faith done or 
is intended to be done under this Act.  
30. Application of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 (7 of 1904) or the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958) , or any other law for 
the time being in force . 
31. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the authority for issue of permit under sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(b) the form in which an application for the grant of a licence may be made under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 7 and the particulars which such application shall  contain;  
(c) the factors to which regard may be had while granting a licence under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 8;  
(d) the fees on payment of which, the period for which, the conditions subject to which and the 
form in which a licence may be granted under s ub-section ( 1) of section 8 and the particulars w hich 
such licence shall contain ; 
(e) the fees on payment of which and the period for which a licence may be renewed under      
sub-section ( 1) of section 9;  
(f) the records, photographs and registers which are to be maintained under section 10 and the 
manner in which such records, photographs and registers shall be maintained and the particulars 
which such records, photographs and registers shall contain;  
(g) the nature of the photographs of the antiquity an d the number of copies thereof which shall 
accompany an application for the grant of a certificate of registration to be made under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 16 and the form in which such application may be made and the particulars 
which  such application shall contain;  
(h) the particulars which a certificat e of registration granted under sub-section ( 3) of section 16 
shall contain;  
(i) the authority to which an appeal may be preferred under sub -section ( 1) of section 21; and  
(j) any other  matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
  10 
 (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rul e. 
32. Repeal. —(1) The Antiquities (Export Control) Act, 1947 (3 of 1947 ) is hereby repealed.  
(2) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that every licence issued under section 3 of the Act 
repealed under sub -section ( 1) and in force at the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that 
the period specified therein has not expired, cease to be in force.  
33. Amendment of Act 24 of 1958. —In the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act, 1958 ,— 
(i) in section 1, for sub -section ( 2), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India. ”; 
(ii) after section 2, the following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“2A. Construction of references to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. —Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to th e corresponding law, if 
any, in  force in that State. ”; 
(iii) in section 23, — 
(a) in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 4), for the words “compulsory purchase ”, the words “compulsory 
acquisition ” shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -section ( 3), for the words “compulsory purchase of any such antiquities at their 
market value ”, the words “compulsory acquisition of any such antiquities ” shall be substituted;  
(iv) in section 26, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “compulsory purchase of such antiquity at its market 
value ”, the words “compulsory acquisition of such antiquity ” and for the words “to be  
purchased ”, the words “to be acquired ” shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), for the words “compulsory purchase ”, the words “compulsory 
acquisition ” shall be substituted;  
(v) in section 28, for sub -section ( 2), the following sub -section s hall be substituted, namely: — 
“(2) For every antiquity in respect of which an order for compulsory acquisition has been 
made under sub -section ( 3) of section 23 or under sub -section ( 1) of section 26, there shall be 
paid compensation and the provisions of sections 20 and 22 of the Antiquities and Art Treasures       
Act, 1972 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the determination and payment of such 
compensation as they apply i n relation to the determination and payment of compensation for any 
antiquity or art treasure compulsorily acquired under section 19 of that Act. ”. 
--------------------------The Architects Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE ARCHITECTS ACT, 197 2                                                                                                                                       
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
COUNCIL OF ARCHITECTURE  
3. Constitution of Council of Architecture.  
4. President and Vice -President of Council.  
5. Mode of elections.  
6. Terms of office and casual vacancies.  
7. Validity of act or proceeding of Council, Executive Committee or other committees not to be 
invalidated by reason of vacancy, etc.  
8. Disabilities.  
9. Meetings of Council.  
10. Executive Committee and other committees.  
11. Fees and allowances to President, Vice -President and members.  
12. Officers and other employees.  
13. Finances of Council.  
14. Recognition of qualifications granted by authorities in India.  
15. Recognition of arc hitectural qualifications granted by authorities in foreign countries.  
16. Power of Central Government to amend Schedule.  
17. Effect of recognition.  
18. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations.  
19. Inspection of examinations.  
20. Withdrawal of recognition.  
21. Minimum standard of architectural education.  
22. Professional conduct.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ARCHITECTS  
23. Preparation and maintenance of register.  
24. First preparation of register.  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Qualification for entry in register.  
26. Procedure for subsequent registration.  
27. Renewal fees.  
28. Entry of additional qualification.  
29. Removal from register.  
30. Procedure in inquiries relating to misconduct.  
31. Surrender of certificates.  
32. Restoration to register.  
33. Issue of duplicate certificates.  
34. Printing of register.  
35. Effect of registration.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCEL LANEOUS  
36. Penalty for falsely claiming to be registered.  
37. Prohibition against use of title.  
38. Failure to surrender certificate of registrati on. 
39. Cognizance of offences.  
40. Information to be furnished by Council and publication thereof.  
41. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
42. Members of Council and officers and employees to be public servants.  
43. Power to remove difficulties.  
44. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
45. Power of Council to make regulations.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE ARCHITECTS A CT, 1972  
ACT NO.  20 OF 1972  
[31st May, 1972 .] 
An Act to provide for the registration of architects and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Architects Act , 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may , by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “architect” means a person whose name is for the time being entered in the register;  
(b) “Council” means the Council of Architecture constituted under section 3;  
(c) “Indian Institute of Architects ” means the Indian Institute of Architects registered under the 
Societ ies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(d) “recognised qualification ” means any qualification in architecture for the time being included 
in the Schedule or notified under section 15;  
(e) “register” means the register of architects maintained under section 23;  
(f) “regulation ” means a regulation made under this Act by the Council;  
(g) “rule” means a rule made under this Act by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER II  
COUNCIL OF ARCHITECTURE  
3. Constitution  of Council of Architecture .—(1) The Central Government shall , by notification in 
the Official Gazette , constitute , with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, a 
Council to be known as the Council of Architecture, which shall be a b ody corporate , having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property , both movable and 
immovable, and to contract, and may by that name sue or be sued.  
(2) The Head Office of the Council shall be at Delhi or at such other place as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(3) The Council shall consist of  the following members , namely:— 
(a) five architects possessing recogni sed qualifications elected by the Indian Institute of 
Architects from among its members;  
(b) two persons nominated by the All India Council for Technical Education established by the 
Resolution of the Government of India in the late Minist ry of Education No. F.16 -10/44 -E. III, dated 
the 30th November, 1945;  
(c) five persons elected from among themselves by heads of architectural institutions in India 
imparting full -time instruction for recognised qualifications;  
                                                           
1. 2nd April , 197 3, vide notification No. G.S.R. 400(E), dated 16th March , 197 3, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,    
sec. 3(i). 4 
 (d) the Chief Architects in the Ministries of the Central Government to which the Government 
busines s relating to defence and railways has been allotted and the head of the Architectural 
Organisation in the Central Public Works Department, ex officio;  
(e) one person nominated by the Central Government;  
(f) an architect from each State nominated by the Go vernment of that State;  
(g) two persons nominated by the Institution of Engineers (India) from among its members; and  
(h) one person nominated by the Institution of Surveyors of India from among its members.  
Explanation. —For the  purposes of this sub -section,— 
(a) “Institution of Engineers (India) ” means the Institution of Engineers (India) first registered     
in 1920 under the Indian Companies Act, 1913  (7 of 1913)  and subsequently incorporated by a Royal 
Charter in 1935 ; 
(b) “Institution of Surveyors of India ” means the Institution of Surveyors registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) . 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3), the Central Government may, 
pending the prepar ation of the register, nominate to the first Council, in consultation with the Indian 
Institute of Architects, persons referred to in the said clause ( a) who are qualified for registration under 
section 25, and the persons so nominated shall hold office for such period as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3), the Central Government may, 
pending the preparation of the register, nominate to the f irst Council, in consultation with the State 
Governments concerned, persons referred to in the said clause ( f), who are qualified for registration under 
section 25, and the persons so nominated shall hold office for such period as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
4. President and Vice -President of Council .—(1) The President and the Vice -President of the 
Council shall be elected by the members of th e Council from among themselves : 
Provided that on the first consti tution of the Council and until the President is elected, a member of 
the Council nominated by the Central Government in this behalf shall discharge the functions of the 
President.  
(2) An elected President or Vice -President of the Council shall hold office  for a term of three years or 
till he ceases to be a member of the Council, whichever is earlier, but subject to his being a member of the 
Council, he shall be eligible for re -election:  
Provided that — 
(a) the President or the Vice -President may, by writing  under his hand addressed to the           
Vice -President or the President, as the case may be , resign his office;  
(b) the President or the Vice -President shall, notwithstanding the expiry of his term of three years, 
continue to hold office until his succe ssor enters upon office.  
(3) The President and the Vice -President of the Council shall exercise such powers and discharge 
such duties as may be prescribed by regulations.  
5. Mode of elections .—(1) Elections under this Chap ter shall be conducted in such  manner as may be 
prescribed by rules.  
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any such election, t he matter shall be referred by the Council 
to a Tribunal appointed by the  Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, 
and the de cision of the Tribunal shall be final:  
Provided that no such reference shall be made except on an application made to the Council by an 
aggrieved party within thirty days from the date of the declaration of the result of the election.  5 
 (3) The expenses of t he Tribunal shall be borne by the Council.  
6. Terms of office and casual vacancies .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, an elected or 
nominated member shall hold office for a term of three years from the date of his election or nomination 
or unt il his successor has been duly elected or nominated, whichever is later.  
(2) An elected or nominated member may, at any time, resign his membership by writing under his 
hand addressed to the President, or in his absence, to the Vice -President, and the seat  of such member 
shall thereupon become vacant.  
(3) A member shall be d eemed to have vacated his seat — 
(i) if he is absent without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Council, from three consecutive 
ordinary meetings of the Council; or  
(ii) if he cease s to be a member of the body referred to in clause ( a), clause ( g) or clause ( h) of       
sub-section ( 3) of section 3 by which he was elected or nominated, as the case may be; or  
(iii) in the case where he has been elected under clause ( c) of sub -section (3) of section  3, if he 
ceases to hold his appointment as the head of an institution referred to in the said clause.  
(4) A casual vacancy in the Council shall be filled by fresh election or nomination, as the case may 
be, and the person so elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of 
the term for which the member whose place he takes was elected or nominated.  
(5) Members of the Council shall be eligible for re -election or re -nomination, but not exceeding three 
consecutive terms.  
7. Validity of act or proceeding of Council, Executive Committee or other committees not to be 
invalidated by reason of vacancy, etc. —No act or proceeding of the Council or the Executive 
Committee or any other committee shall be invalid me rely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Council, the Executive Committee or any 
other committee, or  
(b) any defect in the election or nomination of a person acting as a member thereof, or  
(c) any irregularity in procedu re not affecting the merits of the case.  
8. Disabilities .—A person shall not be eligible for election or nomination as  a member of the 
Council , if he— 
(a) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted by a court in India for any offence and sentenced to imprisonment for not 
less than two years, and shall continue to be ineligible for a further period of five years since his 
release.  
9. Meetings of Council .—(1) The Council shall meet at least once in every six months at such time 
and place and  shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings 
as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(2) Unless otherwise prescribed by regulations , nine members of the Council shall form a quorum, 
and all the acts of the Co uncil shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting.  
(3) In the case of an equal division of votes, the President, or in his absence, the Vice -President or, in 
the absence of both, the member presiding over the meeting, shall have and ex ercise a second or casting 
vote.  
10. Executive Committee and other committees .—(1) The Council shall constitute from among its 
members an Executive Committee, and may also constitute other committees for such general or special 
purposes as the Council deems necessary to carry out its functions under this Act.  6 
 (2) The Executive Committee shall consist of the President and the Vice -President of the Council who 
shall be members ex officio  and five other members who shall be elected by the Council from amon g its 
members.  
(3) The President and the Vice -President of the Council shall be the Chairman and Vice -Chairman 
respectively of the Executive Committee.  
(4) A member of the Executive Committee shall hold office as such until the expiry of his term as a 
member of the Council but subject to his being a member of the Council, he shall be eligible for              
re-election.  
(5) In addition to the powers and d uties conferred and imposed on it by this Act, the Executive 
Committee shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties as may be prescribed by regulations.  
11. Fees and allowances to President, Vice -President and members .—The President, the         
Vice-President and other members of the Council shall be entitled to such fees and allowances as the 
Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix in this behalf.  
12. Officers and other employees .—(1) The Council shall — 
(a) appoint  a Registrar who shall act as its Secretary and who may also act, if so decided by the 
Council, as its treasurer;  
(b) appoint such other officers and employees as the Council deems necessary to enable it to carry 
out its functions under this Act;  
(c) with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix the pay and allowances and other 
conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Council.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), for the first three years f rom 
the first constitution of the Council, the Registrar of the Council shall be a person appointed by the 
Central Government , who shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
(3) All the persons appointed under this section shall be th e employees of the Council.  
13. Finances of Council .—(1) There shall be established a Fund under the management and control 
of the Council into which shall be paid all moneys received by the Counci l and out of which shall be met  
all expenses and liabilitie s properly incurred by the Council.  
(2) The Council may invest any money for the time being standing to the credit of the Fund in any 
Government security or in any other security approved by the Central Government.  
(3) The Council shall keep proper account s of the Fund distinguishing capital from revenue.  
(4) The annual accounts of the Council shall be subject to audit by an auditor to be appointed 
annually by the Council.  
(5) As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, but not later than the thi rtieth day of 
September of the year next following, the Council shall cause to be published in the Official Gazette a 
copy of the audited accounts and the report of the Council for that year and copies of the said accounts 
and report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.  
(6) The Fund shall consist of — 
(a) all moneys received from the Central Government by way of grant, gift or deposit;  
(b) any sums received under this Act whether by way of fee or otherwise.  
(7) All moneys standing at the credit of Council which cannot immediately be applied shall be 
deposited in the State Bank of India or in any other bank specified in column 2 of the First Schedule to 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970) . 
14. Recogn ition of qualifications granted by authorities in India .—(1) The qualifications included 
in the Schedule or notified under section 15 shall be recognised qualifications for the purposes of this Act.  7 
 (2) Any authority in India which grants an architectural qualification not included in the Schedule 
may apply to the Central Government to have such qualification recognised, and the Central Government, 
after consultation with the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule so as 
to include such qualification therein, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made 
in the Schedule against such architectural qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised qualification 
only when granted after a specified da te: 
Provided that until the first Council is constituted, the Central Government shall, before issuing any 
notification as aforesaid, consult an expert committee consisting of three members to be appointed by the 
Central Government by notification in the O fficial Gazette.  
15. Recognition of architectural qualifications granted by authorities in foreign         
countries .—(1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Council, direct , by notification 
in the Official Gazette, that an architectura l qualification granted by any university or other institution in 
any country outside India in respect of which a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of architectural 
qualification is not in force, shall be a recognised   qualification for the purpose s of this Act or, shall be so 
only when granted after a specified date or before a specified date:  
Provided that until the first Council is constituted the Central Government shall, before issuing any 
notification as aforesaid, consult the expert committee  set up under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of 
section 14.  
(2) The Council may enter into negotiations with the authority in any State or country outside India, 
which by the law of such State or country is entrusted with the maintenance of a register of architects, for 
settling of a scheme of reciprocity for the rec ognition of architectural qualifications, and in pursuance of 
any such scheme, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such 
architectural qualification as the Council has decided should be recognised, shall be deeme d to be a 
recognised qualification for the purposes of this Act, and any such notification may also direct that such 
architectural qualification shall be so recognised only when granted after a specified date or before a 
specified date.  
16. Power of Centra l Government to amend Schedule .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 14, the Central Government, after consultation with the Council, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule by directing that an entry be  made therein in 
respect of any architectural qualification.  
17. Effect of recognition .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law , but subject to the 
provisions of this Act, any recognised qualification shall be a sufficient qualification for enr olment in the 
register.  
18. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations .—Every authority in 
India which grants a recognised qualification shall furnish such information as the Council may, from 
time to time, require as to the cours es of study and examinations to be undergone in order to obtain such 
qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of study and examinations are required to be undergone 
and such qualification is conferred and generally as to the requisites for obtai ning such qualification.  
19. Inspection of examinations .—(1) The Executive Committee shall, subject to regulations, if any, 
made by the Council, appoint such number of inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any college 
or institution where architec tural education is given or to attend any examination held by any college or 
institution for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of architectural 
qualifications granted by that college or institution.  
(2) The inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report 
to the Executive Committee on the adequacy of the standards of architectural education including staff , 
equipment , accommodation, training and such other facilities as may be p rescribed by regulations for 
giving such education or on the sufficiency of every  examination which they attend.  
(3) The Executive Committee shall forward a copy of such report to the college or institution and 
shall also forward copies with remarks, if an y, of the college or institution thereon, to the Central 
Government.  8 
 20. Withdrawal of recognition .—(1) When upon report by the Executive Commi ttee it appears to 
the Council — 
(a) that  the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency required from 
the candidates at any examination held by, any college or institution, or  
(b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for staff and t raining 
provided in such college or institution,  
do not conform to the standards prescribed by regulations, the Council shall make a representation to that 
effect to appropriate Government.  
(2) After considering such representation the appropriate Government shall forward it along with such 
remarks as it may choose to make to the college or institution concerned, with an intimation of the period 
within which the college or institution, as the c ase may be, may submit its explanation to the appropriate 
Government.  
(3) On receipt of the explanation or where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, then 
on the expiry of that period, the State Government, in respect of the college or inst itution referred to in 
clause ( b) of sub -section  (5), shall make its recommendations to the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government — 
(a) after making such further enquiry, if any, as it may think fit, in respect of the college or 
institution referre d to in sub -section ( 3), or 
(b) on receipt of the explanation from a college or institution referred to in clause ( a) of                 
sub-section ( 5), or where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, then on the expiry of 
that period , 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the Schedule against the 
architectural qualification awarded by such college or institution, as the case may be, declaring that it 
shall be a recognised qualification only when granted before a specified date and the Schedule shall be 
deemed to be amended accordingly.  
(5) For the purposes of this section, “appropriate government ” means— 
(a) in relation to any college or institution established by an Act of Parliament or managed, 
controlled or financed by the Central Government, the Central Govern ment, and  
(b) in any other case, the State Government.  
21. Minimum standard of architectural education .—The Council may prescribe the minimum 
standards of architectural education required  for granting recognised qualifications by colleges or 
institutions in India.  
22. Professional conduct .—(1) The Council may by regulations prescribe standards of professional 
conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for architects.  
(2) Regulations made b y the Council under sub -section ( 1) may specify which violations thereof shall 
constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional misconduct, and such 
provision shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ARCHITECTS  
23. Preparation and maintenance of register .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may 
be, cause to be prepared in the manner hereinafter provided a register of architects for India.  
(2) The Council shall upon its constitution assume the duty of maintaining the register in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The register shall include the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the full name with date of birth, nationality and residential address of the architect;  9 
 (b) his qualification for registration, and the date on which he obtained that qualification and the 
authority which conferred it;  
(c) the date of his first admission to t he register;  
(d) his professional address; and  
(e) such further particulars as may be prescribed by rules.  
24. First preparation of register .—(1) For the purposes of preparing the register of architects for the 
first time, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Registration 
Tribunal consisting of three persons who have, in the opinion of the Central Government, the knowledge 
of, or experience in, architecture; and the Registrar appointed under section 12 shall ac t as Secretary of 
the Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government shall, by the same or a like notification, appoint a date on or before 
which application for registration, which shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by rule s, 
shall be made to the  Registration Tribunal.  
(3) The Registration Tribunal shall examine every application received on or before the appointed day 
and if it is satisfied that the applicant is qualified for registration under section 25, shall direct the entry of 
the name of th e applicant in the register.  
(4) The first register so prepared shall thereafter be published in such manner as the Central 
Government may direct and any person aggrieved by a decision of the Registration Tribunal expressed or 
implied in the register so pu blished may, within thirty days from the date of such publication, appeal 
against such decision to an authority appointed by the Central Government in this behalf by notification 
in the Official Gazette.  
(5) The authority appointed under sub -section ( 4) shall, after giving the person affected an 
opportunity of being heard and after calling for relevant records, make such order as it may deem fit.  
(6) The Registrar shall amend, where necessary, the register in accordance with the decisions of the 
authority a ppointed under sub -section ( 4). 
(7) Every person whose name is entered in the register shall be issued a certificate of registration in 
such form as may be prescribed by rules.  
(8) Upon the constitution of the Council, the register shall be given into its custody, and the Central 
Government may direct that the whole or any specified part of the application fees for registration in the 
first register shall be paid to the credit of the Council.  
25. Qualification for entry in register .—A person shall be entitl ed on payment of such fee as may 
be prescribed by rules to have his name entered in the register, if he resides or carries on the profes sion of 
architect in India and — 
(a) holds a recognised qualification, or  
(b) does not hold such a qualification but , being a citizen of India, has been engaged in practice as 
an architect for a period of not less than five years prior to the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 24, or  
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed by rules:  
Prov ided that no person other than a citizen of India shall be entitled to registratio n by virtue of a 
qualification — 
(a) recognised under sub -section ( 1) of section 15 unless by the law and practice of a country 
outside India to which such person belongs, cit izens of India holding architectural qualification 
registrable in that country are permitted to enter and practise the profession of architect in such 
country, or  
(b) unless the Central Government has, in pursuance of a scheme of reciprocity or otherwise, 
declared that qualification to be a recognised qualification under sub -section ( 2) of section 15.  10 
 26. Procedure for subsequent registration .—(1) After the date appointed for the receipt of 
applications for registration in the first register of architects, all applications for registration shall be 
addressed to the Registrar of the Council and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by 
rules.  
(2) If upon such application the Registrar is of opinion that the applicant is entitled to have his name 
entered in the register he shall enter thereon the name of the applicant:  
Provided that no person, whose name has under the provisions of thi s Act been removed from the 
register, shall be entitled to have his name re -entered in the register except with the approval of the 
Council.  
(3) Any person whose application for registration is rejected by the Registrar may, within three 
months of the date  of such rejection, appeal to the Council.  
(4) Upon entry in the register of a name under this section, the Registrar shall issue a certificate of 
registration in such form as may be prescribed by rules.  
27. Renewal fees .—(1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that for the retention of a name in the register after the 31st day of December of the year following the 
year in which the name is first entered in the register, there shall be paid annually to the Council suc h 
renewal fee as may be prescribed by rules and where such direction has been made, such renewal fee shall 
be due to be paid before the first day of April of the year to which it relates.  
(2) Where the renewal fee is not paid before the due date, the Registrar shall remove the name of the 
defaulter from the register:  
Provided that a name so removed may be restored to the register on , such conditions as may be 
prescribed by rules.  
(3) On payment of the renewal fee , the Registrar shall, in such manner as may be prescribed by rules, 
endorse the certificate of registration accordingly.  
28. Entry of additional qualification .—An architect shall, on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed by rules, be entitled to have entered in the register any further recognised  qualification which 
he may obtain.  
29. Removal from register .—(1) The Council may, by order, remove from the regi ster the name of 
any architect — 
(a) from whom a request has been received to that effect, or  
(b) who has died since the last publication of the register.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Council may order that the name of any architect shall 
be removed from the register where it is satisfied, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of  being 
heard and after such further inquiry, if any , as it may think fit to make, — 
(a) that his name has been entered in the register by error or on account of misrepresentation or 
suppression of a material fact; or  
(b) that he has been convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Council, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) that he is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(d) that he has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind.  
(3) An order under sub -section ( 2) may direct that any architect whose name is ordered to be removed 
from the register shall be ineligible for registration under this Act for such period as may be specified.  
(4) An order under sub -section ( 2) shall not take effect until the expiry of three months from the date 
thereof.  11 
 30. Procedure in inquiries relating to misconduct .—(1) When on receipt of a complaint made to it, 
the Council is of opinion that any architect has been guilty of professional misconduct which, if proved, 
will render him unfit to practi ce as an architect, the Council may hold an inquiry in such manner as may 
be prescribed by rules.  
(2) After holding the inquiry under sub -section ( 1) and after hearing the architect, the Council may, 
by order, reprimand the said architect or suspe nd him from practice as an architect or remove his name 
from the register or pass such other order as it thinks fit.  
31. Surrender of certificates .—A person whose name has been removed from the register under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 27, sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 29 or sub -section ( 2) of    
section 30, or where such person is dead, his legal representative, as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , shall forthwith surrender his certificate  of registration to 
the Registrar, and the name so removed shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
32. Restoration to register .—The Council may, at any time , for reasons appearing to it to be 
sufficient and subject to the approval of the Central Govern ment, order that upon payment of such fee as 
may be prescribed by rules, the name of the person removed from the register shall be restored thereto.  
33. Issue of duplicate certificates .—Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Registrar that a 
certific ate of registration has been lost or destroyed, the Registrar may, on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed by rules, issue a duplicate certificate in the form prescribed by rules.  
34. Printing of register .—As soon as may be after the 1st day of April i n each year, the Registrar 
shall cause to be printed copies of the register as it stood on the said date and such copies shall be made 
available to persons applying therefor on payment of such fee as may be prescribed by rules and shall be 
evidence that on  that said date the persons whose names are entered therein were architects.  
35. Effect of registration .—(1) Any reference in any law for the time being in force to an architect 
shall be deemed to be a reference to an architect registered under this Act.  
(2) After the expiry of two years from the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 24, a person 
who is registered in the register shall get preference for appointment as an architect under the Central or 
State Government or in any other local body o r institution which is supported or aided from the public or 
local funds or in any institution recognised by the Central or State Government.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCEL LANEOUS  
36. Penalty for falsely claiming to be registered .—If any person whose name is not for the time 
being entered in the register falsely represents that it is so entered, or use s in connection with his name or 
title any words or letters reasonably calculated to suggest that his name is so entered, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may exte nd to one thousand rupees.  
37. Prohibition against use of title .—(1) After the expiry of one year from the date appointed under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 24, no person other than a registered architect , or a firm of architects shall use 
the title and styl e of architect:  
Provided that the provisions of t his section shall not apply to — 
(a) practice of the profession of an architect by a person designated as a “landscape architect ” or 
“naval architect ”; 
(b) a person who, carrying on the profession of an architect in any country outside India, 
undertakes the function as a consultant or designer in India for a specific project with the prior 
permission of the Central Government.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( a),— 
(i) “landscape architect ” means a person who deals with the design of open spaces relating to 
plants, trees and landscape;  
(ii) “naval architect ” means an architect who deals with design and construction of ships.  12 
 (2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable on first 
conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and on any subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding one tho usand rupees or with 
both.  
38. Failure to surrender certificate of registration .—If any person whose name has been removed 
from the register fails without sufficient cause forthwith to surrender his certificate of registration, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, and , in the case of a continuing 
failure, with an additional fine which may extend to ten rupees for each day after the first during which he 
has persisted in the failure.  
39. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act, except upon complaint made by order of the Council or a person authorised in this behalf by the 
Council.  
(2) No Magistrate other than a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
40. Information to be furnished by Council and publication thereof .—(1) The Council shall 
furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, and other information to the Central Government as that 
Government  may require.  
(2) The Central Government may publish, in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy or other 
information furnished to it under this section.  
41. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding  shall 
lie against the Central Government, the Council or any member of the Council, the Executive Committee 
or any other committee or officers and other employees of the Council for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Ac t or an y rule or regulation made there under.  
42. Members of Council and officers and employees to be public servants .—The members of the 
Council and officers and other employees of the Council shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of sec tion 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
43. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament and the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 44 shall apply in respect of such 
order as it applies in respect of a rule made under this Act.  
44. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which elections under Chapter II shall be conducted, the terms and conditions 
of service of the member of the Tribunal appointed under sub -section ( 2) of sect ion 5  and the 
procedure to be followed by the Tribunal;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the expert committee constituted under the proviso to        
sub-section ( 2) of section 14 in the transaction o f its business and the powers and duties of the expert 
committee and the travelling and daily allowances payable to the members thereof;  
(c) the particulars to be included in the register of architects under sub -section ( 3) of section 23;  
(d) the form in which a certificate of registration is to be issu ed under sub -section ( 7) of        
section 24,  sub-section ( 4) of section 26 and section 33;  13 
 (e) the fee to be paid under sections 24,  25, 26, 27,  28, 32 and 33;  
(f) the conditions on which name may be restored to the register under the proviso to                
sub-section ( 2) of section 27;  
(g) the manner of endorsement under sub -section ( 3) of section 27;  
(h) the manner in which the Council shall hold an enquiry under section 30;  
(i) the fee for supplying printed copies of the register under sec tion 34; 
(j) any other matter which is to be or may be provided by rules under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may , be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period o f thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
to the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the vali dity of anything previously done under that rule.  
45. Power of Council to make regulations .—(1) The Council may , with the appr oval of the Central 
Government, 1[by notification in the Official Gazette ,] make regulations not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, or the rules made there under, to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, su ch regulations may 
provide for — 
(a) the management of the property of the Council;  
(b) the powers and duties of the President and the Vice -President of the Council;  
(c) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Council and the Executive Committee or any 
other committee constituted under section 10, the times and places at which such meetings  shall be 
held, the conduct of business thereat and the number of persons necessary to constitute a quorum;  
(d) the functions of the Executive Committee or of any other committee constituted under    
section 10;  
(e) the courses and periods of study and of practical training, if any, to be undertaken, the subjects 
of examinations and standards of proficiency therein to be obtained in any college or institution for 
grant of recognised qualifications;  
(f) the appointment, powers and duties of inspector;  
(g) the standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for 
architectural education;  
(h) the conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of examiners and the conditions of 
admission to such examinations;  
(i) the standards o f professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by 
architects;  
(j) any other matter which is to be or may be provided by regulations under this Act and in 
respect of which no rules have been made.  
1[(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expir y of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect  only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1982).  14 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 14 ) 
QUALIFICAT IONS  
1. Bachelor Degree in Architecture awarded by Indian Universities established by an Act of the 
Central or State Legislature.  
2. National Diploma (formerly All India Diploma) in Architecture awarded by the All India Council 
for Technical Education.  
3. Degree of Bachelor of Architecture ( B. Arch.) awarded by the Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur.  
4. Five -Year f ull-time diploma in Architecture of the Sir J. J. School of Art, Bombay, awarded       
after 1941.  
5. Diploma in Architecture awarded by t he State Board of Technical Education and Training of the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh with effect from 1960 (for the students trained at the Government 
College of Arts and Architecture, Hyderabad).  
6. Diploma in Architecture awarded by the Government Coll ege of Arts and Architecture , Hyderabad 
till 1959, subject to the condition that the candidates concerned have subsequently passed a special final 
examination in architecture held by the State Board of Technical Education, Andhra Pradesh and obtained 
a spe cial certificate.  
7. Diploma in Architecture awarded by the University of Nagpur with effect from 1965 to the 
students trained at the Government Polytechnic, Nagpur.  
8. Government Diploma in Architecture awarded by the Government of Maharashtra (or the for mer 
Government of Bombay).  
9. Diploma in Architecture of Kalabhavan Technical Institute, Baroda.  
10. Diploma in Architecture awarded by the School of Architecture, Ahmedabad.  
11. Membership of the Indian Institute of Architects.  
1[12. Diploma in Architecture awarded by the University of Nagpur during the period 1962 -1964.]  
2[13. Bachelor Degree in Architecture awarded by the School of Planning and Architecture, New 
Delhi (an Institution deemed to be a University) with effect from 3-12-1979.]  
3[14. Diploma in Architecture awarded by the Centr e for Environmen tal Planning and Technology 
(CEPT), Ahmedabad, with effect from 16 -10-1980.]  
4[15. Diploma in Architecture awarded by the Institute of Environment Design with effect from 1985 
to the students trained at the D.C. Patel School of Architecture,  Vallabh Vidya Nagar (Gujarat).]  
5[16. 5 years Diploma in Architecture awarded by the Sushant School of Art and Architecture, 
Gurgaon (Haryana) with effect from 1 -6-1994 to the students trained  at the Sushant School of Art and 
Architecture, Gurgaon (Haryana) .] 
6[17. 5 years Diploma in Architecture awarded by the TVB School of Habitat Studies, Sector -D, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi with effect from 1 -8-1995 to the students trained at the TVB  School of Habitat 
Studies, Sector -D, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi.]  
 
                                                           
1. Added  by G.S.R . 780(E), dated 4th July, 1973.  
2. Added  by G.S.R. 790, dated 28th August , 1982.  
3. Added  by G.S.R. 866, dated 30th September,  1982.  
4. Added  by G.S.R. 361, dated 6th July, 1995. 
5. Added  by G.S.R. 482, dated 1 2th September, 19 94. 
6. Added  by G.S.R. 7 2, dated 25th January , 1996. 
--------------------------The Carriage by Air Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE CARRIAGE BY AIR ACT, 1972  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
SECTIONS   
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Application of Convention to India . 
4. Application of amended Convention to India . 
 4A. Application of Montreal Convention to India.  
5. Liability in case of death.  
6. Conversion of frances . 
6A. Conversion of Special Drawing Rights.  
7. Provisions regarding suits against High Contracting Parties who undertake carriage by air.  
8. Application of Act to carriage by air which is not international . 
8A. Power to make rules . 
9. [Repealed .] 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND  SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDUEL E. 
            ANNEXURE  
  2 
 THE CARRIAGE BY AIR ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 69 OF 1972  
[19th December , 1972.]  
An Act to give effect to the Convention for the unification of certain rules relating to international 
carriage by air signed at Warsaw on the 12th day of October, 1929 and to the said Convention as 
amended by the Hague Protocol on the 28th day of Septembe r, 1955 1[and also to the Montreal 
Convention signed on the 28th day of May, 1999 and to make provision for]  applying the rules 
contained in the said Convention in its original form and in the amended form (subject to exceptions, 
adaptations and modificati ons) to non -international carriage by air and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India a s follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called  the Carriage by Air Act, 
1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requ ires,— 
(i) “amended Convention ” means the Convention as amended by the Hague Protocol on t he 28th 
day of September, 1955;  
(ii) “Convention ” means the Convention for the unification of certain rules relating to 
international carriage by air signed at Warsaw on the 12th day of October, 1929.  
3[(iii) “Montreal Convention ” means the Convention for the unification of certain rules for 
internationa l carriage by air signed at Montreal on the 28th day of May, 1999;  
(iv) “Annexure ” means the Annexure to this Act. ] 
3. Application of Convention to India .—(1) The rules contained in the First Schedule, being the 
provisions of the Convention relating to the  rights and liabilities of carriers, passengers, consignors, 
consignees and other persons, shall , subject to the provisions of this Act, have the force of law in India in 
relation to any carriage by air to which those rules apply, irrespective of the natio nality of the airc raft 
performing the carriage.  
4[(2) For the purpose of this Act, the High Contracting Parties to the Convention and the date of 
enforcement of the said Convention shall be such as are included in Part I of the Annexure.]  
(3) Any reference  in the First Schedule to the territory of any High Contracting Party to the 
Convention shall be construed as a reference to all the territories in respect of which he is a party.  
(4) Any reference in the First Schedule to agents of the carrier shall be co nstrued as including a 
refere nce to servants of the carrier.  
5[(5) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this Act, and if it considers 
necessary or expedient so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the case may be, 
omit from, Part I of the Annexure, any High Contracting Party and on such addition, or as the case may 
be, omission, such High Contracting Party shall be or shall cease to be, a High Contracting Party .] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2009, s. 2, for “and to make provision for” ( w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  
2. 15th May, 1973, vide notification No. S.O. 170(E), dated 23rd March, 1973, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,             
sec. 3( ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 28 of 2009, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  3 
 4. Application of amended Convention to India .—(1) The rules contained in the Second Schedule, 
being the provisions of the amended Convention relating to the rights and liabilities of carriers, 
passengers, consignors, consignees and other persons, shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have the 
force of law in India in relation to any carriage by air to which those rules apply, irrespective of the 
nationality of the ai rcraft performing the carriage.  
1[(2) For the purpose of this Act, the High Contracting Parties to the amended Convention and the 
date of enforcement of the said amended Convention shall be such as are included in Part II of the 
Annexure.  
(2A) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this Act, and if it considers 
necessary or expedient so to do, by notification  in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the case may be, 
omit from, Part II of the Annexure, any High Contracting Party and on such addition, or, as the case may 
be, omission, such High Contracting Party shall be or shall cease to be, a High Contracting P arty.] 
(3) Any reference in the Second Schedule to the territory of any High Contracting Party to the 
amended Convention shall be construed as a reference to all the territories in respect of which he is a 
party.  
(4) Any reference in the Second Schedule to  agents of the carrier shall be construed as including a 
reference to servants of the carrier.  
2[4A. Application of Montreal Convention to India .—(1) The rules contained in the Third 
Schedule, being the provisions of the Montreal Convention relating to the  rights and liabilities of carriers, 
passengers, consignors, consignees and other persons, shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have the 
force of law in India in relation to any carriage by air to which those rules apply, irrespective of the 
natio nality of the aircraft performing the carriage.  
(2) For the purpose of this Act, the State Parties to the Montreal Convention and the date of 
enforcement of the said Montreal Convention shall be such as are included in Part III of the Annexure.  
(3) Any reference in the Third Schedule to the territory of any State Party to the Montreal Convention 
shall be construed as a reference to all the territories in respect of which he is party.  
(4) Any reference in the Third Schedule to agents of the carrier shall be construed as including a 
reference to servants of the carrier.  
(5) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this Act, and if it considers 
necessary or expedient so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the cas e may be, 
omit from, Part III of the Annexure, any State Party and on such addition, or, as the case may be, 
omission, such State Party shall be or shall cease to be, a State Party .] 
3[(6) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of the Act , and if it considers 
necessary or expedient so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, give effect to the limits of liability, 
revised by the depository under rule 24 of Chapter III of the Third Schedule to this Act, for the purposes 
of determinin g the liabilities of the carriers and extent of compensation for damages under the said 
Chapter of that Schedule.]  
5. Liability in case of death. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Fatal Accidents Act, 
1855 (13 of 1855) or any other enactment or rule of law in force in any part of India, the rules contained 
in 4[the First Schedule , the Second Schedule  and the Third Schedule] shall, in all c ases to which those 
rules apply, determine the liability of a carrier in respect of the death of a passenger.  
(2) The liability shall be enforceable for the benefit of such of the members of the passengers family 
as sustained damage by reason of his death.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2009, s. 5, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  
3. Ins. by Act 12 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-3-2016).   
4. Subs. by Act 28 of 2009, s. 7, for “the First Schedule and in the Second Schedule” ( w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  4 
 Explanation. —In this sub -section, the expression “member of a family ” means wife or husband, 
parent, step -parent, grand -parent, brother, sister, half -brother, half -sister, chil d, step -child  and grand child:  
Provided that in deducing any such relationship as aforesaid any illegitimate person and any adopted 
person shall be treated or being, or as having been, the legitimate child of his mother and reputed father 
or, as th e case may be, of his adopters.  
(3) An action to enforce the liability may be brought b y the personal representative of the passenger 
or by any person for whose benefit the liability is under sub -section ( 2) enforceable, but only one action 
shall be brought in India in respect of the death of any one passenger, and every such action by 
whoms oever brought shall be for the benefit of all such persons so entitled as aforesaid as either are 
domiciled in India or not being domiciled there express a desire to t ake the benefit of the action.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), the amou nt recovered in any such action, after 
deducting any costs not recovered from the defendant, shall be divided between the persons entitled in 
such proportion as the Co urt may direct.  
(5) The Court before which any such action is brought may, at any stage o f the proceedings, make 
any such order as appears to the Court to be just and equitable in view of the provisions of 1[the First 
Schedule or of the Second Schedule  or the Third Schedule] , as the case may be, limiting the liability of a 
carrier and of any proceedings which have been or are likely to be commenced outside India in respect of 
the death of the passenger in question.  
6. Conversion of franc es.—Any sum in francs mentioned in rule 22 of the First Schedule or of the 
Second Schedule, as the case may be, shall, for the purpose of any action against a carrier, be converted 
into rupees at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date on which the amount of damages to be paid by 
the carrier is ascertained by the Court.  
2[6A. Conversion of Special Drawing Ri ghts.—Any sum in Special Drawing Rights mentioned in 
rules 21 and 22 of the Third Schedule shall, for the purpose of any action against a carrier, be converted 
into rupees at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date on which the amount of damages to be paid by 
the carrier is ascertained by the Court in accordance with the provisions of rule 23 of the said Third 
Schedule.]  
 7. Provisions regarding suits against High Contracting Parties who undertake carriage by 
air.—(1) Every High Contracting Party to the  Convention or the amended Convention, as the case may 
be, who has not availed himself of the provisions of the Additional Protocol thereto, shall, for the 
purposes of any suit brought in a Court in India in  accordance with the provisions  of rule 28 of the  First 
Schedule, or of the Second Schedule, as the case may be, to enforce a claim in respect of carriage 
undertaken by him, be deemed to have submitted to the jurisdiction of that Court and to be a person for 
the purposes of the Code of Civ il Procedure, 1 908 (5 of 1908).  
(2) The High Court may make rules of procedure providing for all matters which may be expedient to 
enable such suits t o be instituted and carried on.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall authorise  any Court to attach or sell any property of a High 
Contracting Party to the Convention or to the amended Convention.  
8. Application of Act to carriage by air which is not international. —(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazet te, apply the rules contained in the First Schedule and any 
provision of section 3 or section 5 or section 6 to such carriage by air, not being international carriage by 
air as defined in the First Schedule, as may be specified in the notification, subject , however, to such 
exceptions, adaptations and modifications, if any, as may be so specified.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the rules contained in 
the Second Schedule and any provision of section 4 or sectio n 5 or section 6 to such carriage by air, not 
being international carriage by air as defined in the Second Schedule, as may be specified in the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2009, s. 7, for “ the First Schedule or of the Second Schedule” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid(w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  5 
 notification, subject, however, to such exceptions, adaptations and modifications, if any, as may be so 
specifie d. 
1[(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the rules contained 
in the Third Schedule and any provision of section 4A or section 5 or section 6A to such carriage by air, 
not being international carriage by air as defined in the Third Schedule, as may be specified in the 
notification, subject, however, to such exceptions, adaptations and modifications, if any, as may be so 
specified. ] 
2[8A. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made and every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,  for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any  modification in the rule or the notification or both Houses agree that the rule or 
notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, howe ver, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
notification.]  
9. [Repeal .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1978 (38 of 1978 ), s. 2 and First Schedule  
(w.e.f . 26-11-1978).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 o f 2009, s. 9, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f.  1-7-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 12 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -3-2016).  
 6 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
CHAPTER I  
RULES  
SCOPE —DEFINITIONS  
1. (1) These rules apply to all international carriage of persons, luggage or goods performed by 
aircraft for reward. They apply  also to such carriage when performed gratuitously b y an air transport 
undertaking.  
(2) In these rules, “High Contracting Party ” means a High Contr acting Party to the Convention.  
(3) For the purposes of these rules, the expression “international carriage ” means any carriage in 
which according to the contract made by the parties, the place of departure and the place of destination, 
whether or not there be a break in the carriage or a transhipment, are situated either within the territories 
of two High Contr acting Parties, or within the territory of a single High Contracting Party, if there is an 
agreed stopping place with in a territory subject to the sovereignty, suzerainty, mandate or authority of 
another Power, even though that Power is not a party to the Convention. A carriage without such an 
agreed stopping place between territories subject to the sovereignty, suzerainty, mandate or authority of 
the same High Contracting Party is not deemed to be international f or the purposes of these rules.  
(4) A carria ge to be performed by several successive air carriers is deemed, for the purposes of these 
rules, to be one undivided carriage, if it has been regarded by the parties as a single operation, whether it 
has been agreed upon under the form of a single contrac t or of a series of contracts, and it does not lose its 
international character merely because one contract or a series of contracts is to be performed entirely 
within a territory subject to the sovereignty, suzerainty, mandate or authority of the same Hig h 
Contracting Party.  
2. (1) These rules apply to carriage performed by the State or by legally constituted public bodies 
provided it falls within the conditions laid down in rule 1.  
(2) These rules do not apply to carriage performed under the terms of any  international postal 
Convention.  
CHAPTER II  
DOCUMENTS OF CARRIAGE  
PartI.—Passenger ticket  
3. (1) For the carriage of passengers the carrier must deliver a passenger ticket which shall cont ain the 
following particulars: — 
(a) the place and date of issue;  
(b) the place of departure and of destination;  
(c) the agreed stopping places, provided that the carrier may reserve the right to alter the stopping 
places in case of necessity, and that if he exercised that right, the alteration shall not have the effect of  
depriving the carriage of its internationa l character;  
(d) the name and addr ess of the carrier or carriers;  
(e) a statement that the carriage is subject to the rules relating to liability contained in this 
Schedule.  
(2) The absence, irregularity or loss of the passenger ticket does not affect the existence or the 
validity of the contract of carriage, which shall nonetheless be subject to these rules. Nevertheless, if the 
carrier accepts a passenger without a passenger t icket having been delivered he shall not be entitled to 
avail himself of those provisions of this Schedule which exclude or limit his liability.  
  7 
 Part II.—Luggage ticket  
4. (1) For the carriage of luggage, other than small personal objects of which the passenger takes 
charge himself, the carrier must deliver a luggage ticket.  
(2) The luggage ticket shall be made out in duplicate, one part for the passenger and the other part for 
the carrier.  
(3) The luggage ticket shall conta in the following particulars: — 
(a) the place and date of issue;  
(b) the place o f departure and of destination;  
(c) the name and addr ess of the carrier or carriers;  
(d) thenumber of the passenger ticket;  
(e) a statement that delivery of the luggage will be made to th e bearer of the lug gage ticket;  
(f) the num ber and weight of the packages;  
(g) the amount of the value declared in accordance with rule 22( 2); 
(h) a statement that the carriage is subject to the rules relating to liability contained in this 
Schedule.  
(4) The absence, irregu larity or loss of the luggage ticket does not affect the existence or the validity 
of the contract of carriage, which shall none the less be subject to these rules. Nevertheless, if the carrier 
accepts luggage without a luggage ticket having been delivered , or if the luggage ticket does not  contain 
the particulars  set out at ( d), (f) and ( h) of sub -rule ( 3), the carrier shall not be entitled to avail himself of 
those provisions of this Schedule which exclude or limit his liability.  
Part III.—Air consignment note  
5. (1) Every carrier of goods has the right to require the consignor to make out and hand over to him a 
document called an “air consignment note ”; every consignor has the right to require the c arrier to accept 
this document.  
(2) The absenc e, irregularity or loss of this document does not affect the existence or the validity of 
the contract of carriage which shall, subject to the provisions of rule 9, be nonetheless governed by these 
rules.  
6. (1) The air consignment note shall be made out by the consignor in three original parts and  be 
handed over with the goods.  
(2) The first part shall be marked “for the carrier ” and shall be signed by the consignor. The second 
part shall be marked “for the consignee ”; it shall be signed by the consignor and by the carrier and shall 
accompany the goods. The third part shall be signed by the carrier and handed by him to the consignor 
after the goods have been accepted.  
(3) The carrier shall s ign an acceptance of the goods.  
(4) The signature of the carrier may be stamped; that of the consi gnor may be printed or stamped.  
(5) If, at the request of the consignor, the carrier makes out the air consignment note, he shall be 
deemed, subject to proof to the contrary, to have done so on behalf of the consignor.  
7. The carrier of goods has the right to require the consignor to make out separate consignment notes 
when there is more than one package.  
8. The air consignment note shall conta in the following particulars: — 
(a) the p lace and date of its execution;  
(b) the place o f departure and of destination;  8 
 (c) the agreed stopping places, provided that the carrier may reserve the right to alter the stopping 
places in case of necessity, and that if  he exercises that right the alteration shall not have the effect of 
depriv ing the carriage of its international character;  
(d) the name and address of the consigno r; 
(e) the name an d address of the first carrier;  
(f) the name and address of the cons ignee, if the case so requires;  
(g) the nature of the goods;  
(h) the number of the packages, the method of packing and the particu lar marks or numbers upon 
them;  
(i) the weight, the quantity and the vol ume or dimensions of the goods;  
(j) the apparent condition of the goods and of the packing;  
(k) the freight, if it has be en agreed upon, the date and place of payment, and the person who is to 
pay it;  
(l) if the goods are sent for payment on delivery, the price of the goods, and if the case so 
requires, the amount of the expenses incurred;  
(m) the amount of the value decla red in accordance with rule 22( 2);  
(n) the number of par ts of the air consignment note;  
(o) the documents handed to the carrier to accompany the air consignment note;  
(p) the time fixed for the completion of the carriage and a brief note of the route to be followed, if 
these  matters have been agreed upon;  
(q) a statement that the carriage is subject to the rules relating to liability contained in this 
Schedule.  
9. If the carrier accepts goods without an air consignment note having been made out, or if the air 
consignment note does not contain all the particulars set out in rule 8 ( a) to ( i) inclusive and ( q), the 
carrier shall not be entitled to avail himself of the provisions of this Schedule which exclude or limit his 
liability.  
10. ( 1) The consignor  is responsible for the  correctness  of the particulars and statements relating to 
the goods which he inserts in the air consignment note.  
(2) The consignor will be liable for all damage suffered by the carrier or any other person by reason 
of the irregularity, incorrectness or incompleteness of the s aid particulars and statements.  
11. ( 1) The air consignment note is prima facie  evidence of the conclusion of the contract, of the 
receipt of the goods and  of the conditions of carriage.  
(2) The stateme nts in the air consignment note relating to the weight, dimensions and packing of the 
goods, as well as those relating to the number of packages, are prima facie  evidence of the facts stated; 
those relating to the quantity, volume and condition of the good s do not constitute evidence against the 
carrier except so far as they both have been, and are stated in the air consignment note to have been, 
checked by him in the presence of the consignor, or relate to the a pparent condition of the goods.  
12. ( 1) Subje ct to his liability to carry out all his obligations under the contract of carriage, the 
consignor has the right to dispose of the goods by withdrawing them at the aerodrome of departure or 
destination, or by stopping them in the course of the journey on a ny landing or, by calling for them to be 
delivered at the place of destination or in the course of the journey to a person other than the consignee 
named in the air consignment note, or by requiring them to be returned to the aerodrome of departure. He 
must not exercise the right of disposition in such a way as to prejudice the carrier or other consignors and 
he must repay any expenses occasioned  by the exercise of this right.  
(2) If it is impossible to carry out the orders of the consignor the carrier must  so inform him forthwith.  9 
 (3) If the carrier obeys the orders of the consignor for the disposition of the goods without requiring 
the production of the part of the air consignment note delivered to the latter, he will be liable, without 
prejudice to his r ight of recovery from the consignor, for any damage which may be caused thereby to any 
person who is lawfully in possession of that pa rt of the air consignment note.  
(4) The right conferred on the consignor ceases at the moment when that of the consignee b egins in 
accordance with rule13. Nevertheless, if the consignee declines to accept the consignment note or the 
goods, or if he cannot be communicated with, the consignor resumes his rights of dispositions.  
13. (1) Except in the circumstances set out in ru le 12, the consignee is entitled, on arrival of the goods 
at the place of destination, to require the carrier to hand over to him the air consignment note and to 
deliver the goods to him, on payment of the charges due and on complying with the conditions o f carriage 
set out in the air consignment note.  
(2) Uuless it is otherwise agreed, it is the duty of the carrier to give notice to the consign ee as soon as 
the goods arrive.  
(3) If the carrier admits the loss of the goods, or if the goods have not arrived  at the expiration of 
seven days after the date on which they ought to have arrived, the consignee is entitled to put into force 
against the carrier the rights which flow  from the contract of carriage.  
14. The consignor and the consignee can respectively e nforce all the rights given to them by rules 12 
and 13, each in his own name, whether he is acting in his own interest or in the interest of another, 
provided that he carries out the obligations imposed by the contract.  
15. ( 1) Rules 12, 13 and 14 do not affect either the relations of the consignor or the consignee, with 
each other or the mutual relations of third parties whose rights are derived either from the c onsignor or 
from the consignee.  
(2) The provisions of rules 12, 13 and 14 can only be varied b y express provisi on in the air 
consignment note.  
16. ( 1) The consignor must furnish such information and attach to the air consignment note such 
documents as are necessary to meet the formalities of customs, octroi  or police before the goods can be 
delivered to the consignee. The consignor is liable to the carrier for any damage occasioned by the 
absence, insufficiency or irregularity of any such information or documents, unless the damage is due to 
the faul t of the  carrier or his agents.  
(2) The carrier is under no obligation to enquire into the correctness or sufficiency of  such 
information or documents.  
CHAPTER III  
LIABILITY OF THE CARRIER  
17. The carrier is liable for damage sustained in the event of the death or  wounding of a passeng er or 
any other bodily injury  suffered by a passenger, if the accident which caused the damage so sustained 
took place on board the aircraft or in the course of any of the operations of embarking or disembarking.  
18. ( 1) The carrier is liable for damage sustained in the event of the destruction or loss of, or of 
damage to, any registered luggage or any goods, if the occurrence which caused the damage so sustained 
took pl ace during the carriage by air.  
(2) The carriage by air within th e meaning of sub -rule ( 1) comprises the period during which the 
luggage or goods are in charge of the carrier, whether in an ae rodrome or on board an aircraft  or, in the 
case of a landing outside an aero drome, in any place whatsoever.  
(3) The period of the  carriage by air does not extend to any carriage by land, by sea or by river 
performed outside an aerodrome. If, however, such a carriage takes place in the performance of a contract 
for carriage by air, for the purpose of loading, delivery or transhipment , any damage is presumed, subject 
to proof to the contrary, to have been the result of an event which took place during the carriage by air.  10 
 19. The carrier is liable for damage occasioned by delay in the carriage by air of passengers, luggage 
or goods.  
20. ( 1) The carrier is not liable if he proves that he and his agents have taken all necessary measures 
to avoid the damage or that it was impossible for him or them to take such measures.  
(2) In the carriage of goods and luggage the carrier is not liable if he proves that the damage was 
occasioned by negligent pilotage or negligence in the handling of the aircraft or in navigation and that , in 
all other respects, he and his agents have taken all necessary measures to avoid the damage.  
21. If the carrier p roves that the damage was caused by or contributed to by the negligence of the 
injured person the Court may exonerate the carrier wholly or partly from his liability.  
22. (1) In the carriage of passengers the liability of the carrier for each passenger is  limited to the sum 
of 1,25,000 francs. Where damages may be awarded in the form of periodical payments, the equivalent 
capital value of the sa id payments shall not exceed 1,25,000 francs. Nevertheless, by special contract the 
carrier and the passenger may  agree to a higher limit of liability.  
(2) In the carriage of registered luggage and of goods, the liability of the carrier is limited to a sum of 
250 francs per kilogramme, unless the consignor has made, at the time when the package was handed 
over to the carrier, a special declaration of the value at delivery and has paid a supplementary sum if the 
case so requires. In that case the carrier will be liable to pay a sum not exceeding the declared sum, unless 
he proves that that sum is greater than the ac tual valu e to the consignor at delivery.  
(3) As regards objects of which  the passenger takes charge him self the liability of the carrier is 
limited to 5,000 fra ncs per passenger.  
(4) The sums mentioned in this rule shall be deemed to refer to the French fr anc consisting of sixty -
five and a half milligrammes gold of millesimal fineness nine hundred.  
23. (1) Any provision tending to relieve the carrier of liability or to fix a lower limit then that which is 
laid down in these rules shall be null and void, bu t the nullity of any such provision does not involve the 
nullity of the whole contract which shall remain subject to the provisions of this Schedule.  
24. ( 1) In the cases covered by rules 18 and 19 any action for damages, however founded, can only 
brought  subject to the conditions and l imits set out in this Schedule.  
(2) In the cases covered by rule 17, the provisions of sub -rule ( 1) also apply, without prejudice to the 
questions as to who are the persons who have the right to bring suit and what are their  respective rights.  
25. ( 1) The carrier shall not be entitled to avail himself of the provisions of this Schedule which 
exclude or limit his liability, if the damage is caused by his wilful misconduct or by such default on his 
part as is in the opinion of  the Court e quivalent to wilful misconduct.  
(2) Similarly the carrier shall not be entitled to avail himself of the said provisions, if the damage is 
caused as aforesaid by any agent of the carrier acting within the scope of his employment.  
26. ( 1) Receip t by the person entitled to delivery of luggage or goods without complaint is prima 
facie evidence that the same have  been delivered in good condition and in accordance  with the document 
of carriage.  
(2) In the case of damage, the person entitled to delive ry must complain to the carrier forthwith after 
the discovery of the damage, and, at the latest, within three days from the date of receipt in the case of 
luggage and seven days from the date of receipt in the case o f goods. In the case of delay  the compla int 
must be made at the latest within fourteen days from the date on which the luggage or goods ha ve been 
placed at his disposal.  
(3) Every complaint must be made in writing upon the document of carriage or by separate notice in 
writing despatc hed within t he times aforesaid.  
(4) Failing complaint within the times aforesaid, no action shall lie against the carrier, save in  the case 
of fraud on his part.  11 
 27. In the case of the death of the person liable, an action for damages lies in accordance with these 
rules against those legally representing his estate.  
28. An action for damages must be brought at the option of the plaintiff, either before the Court 
having jurisdiction where the carrier is ordinarily resident, or has his principal place of business, or ha s an 
establishment by which the contract has been made or before the Court having jurisdicti on at the place of 
destination.  
29. The right of damages shall be extinguished if an action is not brought within two years, reckoned 
from the date of arrival at th e destination, or from the date on which the aircraft ought to have arrived, or 
from the date on which the carriage stopped.  
30. ( 1) In the case of carriage to be performed by various successive carriers and falling within  the 
definition set out in sub -rule (4) of rule 1, each carrier who accepts passengers, luggage or goods is 
subjected to the rules set out in this Schedule, and is deemed to be one of the contracting parties to the 
contract of carriage in so far as the contract deals with that part of the  carriage which is p erformed under 
his supervision.  
(2) In the case of carriage of this nature, the passenger or his representative can take action only 
against the carrier who performed the carriage during which the accident or the delay occurred, save in  
the case where, by express agreement, the first carrier has assumed l iability for the whole journey.  
(3) As regards luggage or goods, the passenger or consignor will have a right of action against the 
first carrier, and the passenger or consignee who is e ntitled to delivery will have a right of action against 
the last carrier, and further, each may take action against the carrier who performed the carriage during 
which the destruction, loss, damage or delay took place. These carriers will be jointly and se verally liable 
to the passenger or  to the consignor or consignee.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO COMBINED CARRIAGE  
31. ( 1) In the case of combined carriage performed partly by air and partly by any other mode of 
carriage, the provisions of this Schedule  apply only to the carriage by air, provided that the carriage by air 
falls within the terms of rule 1.  
(2) Nothing in this Schedule shall prevent the parties in the case of combined carriage from inserting 
in the document of air carriage conditions ralati ng to other modes of carriage, provided that the provisions 
of this Schedule are observed as regards the carriage by air.  
CHAPTER V  
GENERAL AND FINAL PROVIS IONS  
32. Any clause contained in the contract and all special agreements entered into before the dam age 
occurred by which the parties purport to infringe the rules laid down by this Schedule, whether by 
deciding the law to be applied, or by altering the rules as to jurisdiction, shall be null and void. 
Nevertheless for the carriage of goods arbitration c lauses are allowed, subject to these rules, if the 
arbitration is to take place in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties within one of the 
jurisdiction referred to in rule 28.  
33. Nothing contained in this Schedule shall prevent the carrier  either from refusing to enter into any 
contract of carriage, or from making regulations which do not conflict with t he provisions of this 
Schedule.  
34. This Schedule does not apply to international carriage by air performed by way of experimental 
trial by  air navigation undertakings with the view to the establishment of a regular line of air navigation, 
nor does it apply to carriage performed in extraordinary circumstances outside the normal scope of an 
aircarrier ’s business.  
35. The expression “days” when used in these rules means current days, not working days.  12 
 36. When a High Contracting Party has declared at the time of ratification of or of accession to the 
Convention that sub -rule ( 1) of rule 2 of these rules shall not apply to international carriage  by air 
performed directly by the State, its colonies, protectorates or mandated territories or by any other territory 
under its sovereignty suzerainty or authority, these rules shall not apply to international carriage by air so 
performed.  
  13 
 THE SECOND  SCHEDULE  
 (See section 4)  
RULES  
CHAPTER I  
SCOPE -DEFINITIONS  
1. (1) These rules apply to all international carriage of persons , baggage or cargo performed by 
aircraft for reward. They apply equally to gratuitous carriage by aircraft performed by an air tran sport 
undertaking.  
(2) In these rules, “High Contracting Party ” means a High Contracting P arty to the amended 
Convention.  
(3) for the purposes of these rules, the expression “International carriage ” means any carriage in 
which, according to the agreement between the parties, the place of departure and the place of destination, 
whether or not there be a break in the carriage or a transhipment, are situated either within the territories 
of two High Con tracting Parties or within the territory of a single High Contracting Party if there is an 
agreed stopping place within the territory of another State, even if that State is not a High Contracting 
Party. Carriage between two points within  the territory of a single High  Contracting Party without an 
agreed stopping place within the territory of another State is not international carriage f or the purposes of 
these rules.  
(4) Carriage to be performed by several successive air carriers is deemed, for the purpose s of these 
rules, to be one undivided carriage if it has been regarded by the parties as a single operation, whether it 
had been agreed upon under the form of a single contract or of a series of contracts, and it does not lose 
its international character m erely because one contract or a series of contracts is to be performed entirely 
within the territory of the same State.  
2. (1) These rules apply to carriage performed by the State or by legally constituted public bodies 
provided it falls within the condit ions laid down in rule 1.  
(2) These rules shall not apply to carria ge of mail and postal packages.  
CHAPTER II  
DOCUMENTS OF CARRIAGE  
Part I.—Passenger ticket  
3. (1) In respect of the carriage of passengers a ticket shall be delivered containing:  
(a) an indication of the place s of departure and destination;  
(b) if the places of departure and destination are within the territory of a single High Contracting 
Party, one or more agreed stopping places being within the territory of another State, an indicatio n of 
at least one such stopping place;  
(c) a notice to the effect that, if the passenger ’s journey involves an ultimate destination or stop in 
a country other than the country of departure, the amended Convention may be applicable and that the 
amended Conv ention governs and in most cases limits the liability of carriers for death or personal 
injury and in respect of loss, or damage to, baggage.  
(2) The passenger ticket shall constitute prima facie  evidence of the conclusion and conditions of the 
contract of  carriage. The absence, irregularity or loss of the passenger ticket does not affect the existence 
or the validity of the contract of carriage which shall, nonetheless,be subject to these rules. Nevertheless, 
if, with the consent of the carrier, the passen ger embarks without a passenger ticket having been 
delivered, or if the ticket does not include the notice required by sub -rule ( 1) (c) of this rule, the carrier 
shall not be entitled to avail himself of the provisions of rule 22.  
  14 
 Part II.—Baggage check  
4. (1) In respect of the carriage of registered baggage, a baggage check shall be delivered, which, 
unless combined with or incorporated in a passenger ticket which complies with the provisions of sub -
rule ( 1) of rul e 3 shall contain:  
(a) an indication of  the place s of departure and destination;  
(b) if the places of departure and destination are within the territory of a single High Contracting 
Party, one or more agreed stopping places being within the territory of another State, an indication of 
at least one such stopping place;  
(c) a notice to the effect that, if the carriage involves an ultimate destination or stop in a country 
other than the country of departure, the amended Convention may be applicable and that the amended 
Convention governs and in mos t cases limits the liability of carriers in respect of loss of, or damage 
to, baggage.  
(2) The baggage check shall constitute prima facie  evidence of the registration of the baggage and of 
the conditions of the contract of carriage. The absence, irregular ity or loss of the baggage check does not 
affect the existence or the validity of the contract of carriage which shall, nonetheless, be subject to these 
rules. Nevertheless, if the carrier takes charge of the baggage without a baggage check having been 
delivered or if the baggage check [unless combined with or incorporated in the passenger ticket which 
complies with the provisions of sub -rule ( 1) (c) of rule 3] does not include the notice required by sub -rule 
(1) (c) of this rule, he shall not be entitled to avail himself of the provisions of sub -rule ( 2) of rule 22.  
Part III.—Air waybill  
5. (1) Every carrier of cargo has the right to require the consignor to make out and hand over to him a 
document called an “air waybill ”; every consignor has the right to require the carrier to accept this 
document.  
(2) The absence, irregularity or loss of this document does not affect the existence or the validity of 
the contract of carriage which shall, subject to the provisions of rule  9, be nonetheless governed by these 
rules.  
6. (1) The air waybill shall be made out by the consignor in three original parts and be handed over 
with the cargo.  
(2) The first part shall be marked “for the carrier ”, and shall be signed by the consignor. T he second 
part shall be marked “for the consignee ”; it shall be signed by the consignor and by the carrier and shall 
accompany the cargo. The third part shall be signed by the carrier and handed by him to the consignor 
after the cargo has been accepted.  
(3) The carrier shall sign prior to the loading of the cargo or board the aircraft.  
(4) The signature of the carrier may be stamped; that of the consi gnor may be printed or stamped.  
(5) If, at the request of the consignor, the carrier makes out the air way bill, he shall be deemed, 
subject to proof to the contrary, to have done  so on behalf of the consignor.  
7. The carrier of cargo has the right to require the consignor to make out separate waybills when there 
is more than one package.  
8. The air waybill sh all contain:  
(a) an indication of the place s of departure and destination;  
(b) if the places of departure and destination are within the territory of a single High Contracting 
Party, one or more agreed stopping places being within the territory of another State, an indication of 
at least one such stopping place;  
(c) a notice to the consignor to the effect that, if the carriage involves an ultimate destination or 
stop in a country other than the country of departure, the amended Convention may by applicable and 
that the amended Convention governs and in most cases limits the liability of carriers in respect of 
loss of, or damage to, cargo.  15 
 9. If, with the consent of the carrier, cargo is loaded on board the aircraft without an air waybill 
having been made ou t, or if the air waybill does not includ e the notice required by rule 8 (c), the carrier 
shall not be entitled to avail himself of the provisions of sub -rule ( 2) of rule 22.  
10. ( 1) The  consignor is responsible for the correctness of the particulars and statements relating to 
the cargo which  he inserts in the air waybill.  
(2) The consignor shall indemnify the carrier against all damage suffered by him, or by any other 
person to whom the carrier is liable, by reason of the irregularity, incorrectness or incompleten ess of the 
particulars and statements furnished by the consignor.  
11. ( 1) The air waybill is prima facie  evidence of the conclusion of the contract, of the receipt of the 
cargo and of the conditions of carriage.  
(2) The statements in the air waybill relating to the weight, dimensions and packing of the cargo, as 
well as those relating to the number of packages, are prima facie  evidence of the facts stated; those 
relating to the q uantity, volume and condition of the cargo do not constitute evidence against the carrier 
except so far as they both have been, and are stated in the air waybill to have been, checked by him in the 
presence of the consignor, or relate to the a pparent condi tion of the cargo.  
12. ( 1) Subject to his liability to carry out all his obligations under the contract of carriage, the 
consignor has the right to dispose of the cargo by withdrawing it at the aerodrome of departure or 
destination, or by stopping it in the course of the journey on any landing, or by calling for it to be 
delivered at the place of destination or in the course of the journey to a person other than the consignee 
named in the air waybill, or by requiring it to be returned to the aerodrome of departure. He must not 
exercise this right of disposition in such a way as to prejudice the carrier or other consignors and he must 
repay any expenses occasioned  by the exercise of this right.  
(2) If it is impossible to carry out the orders of the consigno r the carrier must so inform him forthwith.  
(3) If the carrier obeys the orders of the consignor for the disposition of the cargo without requiring 
the production of the part of the air waybill delivered to the latter, he will be liable, without prejudice  to 
his right of recovery from the consignor, for any damage which may be caused thereby to any person who 
is lawfully in possession of that part of the air waybill.  
(4) The right conferred on the consignor ceases at the moment when that of the consignee  begins in 
accordance with rule.  
13. Nevertheless, if the consignee declines to accept the waybill or the cargo, or if he cannot be 
communicated with, the consignor re sumes his right of disposition.  
13. (1) Except in the circumstances set out in the precedi ng rule, the consignee is entitled on arrival of 
the cargo at the place of destination to require the carrier to hand over to him the air waybill and to deliver 
the cargo to him, on payment of the charges due and on complying with the conditions of carri age set out 
in the air waybill.  
(2) Unless it is otherwise agreed, it is the duty of the carrier to give notice to the consigne e as soon as 
the cargo arrives.  
(3) If the carrier admits the loss of the cargo, or if the cargo has not arrived at the expiration of seven 
days after the date on which it ought to have arrived, the consignee is entitled to put into force against the 
carrier the rights which flow from the contract of carriage.  
14. The consignor and the consignee can respectively enforce all the right s given to them by rules 12 
and 13, each in his own name, whether he is acting in his own interest or in the interest of another, 
provided that he carries out the obligations imposed by the contract.  
15. ( 1) Rules 12, 13 and 14 do not affect either the re lations of the consignor or the consignee with 
each other or the mutual relations of third parties whose rights are derived either from the consignor or 
from the consignee.  
(2) The provisions of rules 12, 13 and 14 can only be varied by express provision in the air waybill.  16 
 (3) Nothing in these rules prevents the issue of a negotiable air waybill.  
16. ( 1) The consignor must furnish such information and attach to the air waybill such documents as 
are necessary to meet the formalities of customs, octroi  or police before the cargo can be delivered to the 
consignee. The consignor is liable to the carrier for any damage occasioned by the absence, insufficiency 
or irregularity of any such information or documents, unless the damage is due to the fault of the  carrier 
or his servants or agents.  
(2) The carrier is under no obligation to enquire into the correctness or sufficiency of  such 
information or documents.  
CHAPTER III  
LIABILITY OF THE CARRIER  
17. The carrier is liable for damage sustained in the event of  the death or wounding of a passenger or 
a passenger or any other bodily injury suffered by a passenger, if the accident which caused the damage 
so sustained took place on board the aircraft or in the course of any of the operations of embarking or 
disemba rking.  
18. ( 1) The carrier is liabile for damage sustained in the event of the destruction or loss of, or of 
damage to, any registered baggage or any cargo, if the occurrence which caused the damage so sustained 
took place during the carriage by air.  
(2) The carriage by air within th e meaning of the preceding sub -rule comprises the period during 
which the baggage or cargo is in charge of the carrier, whether in an aerodrome or on board an aircraft, 
or, in the case of a landing outside an aerodrome, in any  place whatsoever.  
(3) The period of the carriage by air does not extend to any carriage by land, by sea or by river 
performed outside an aerodrome. If, however, such a carriage takes place in the performance of a contract 
for carriage by air, for the pur pose of loading, delivery or transhipment, any damage is presumed, subject 
to proof to the contrary, to have been the result of an event which took place during the carriage by air.  
19. The carrier is liable for damage occasioned by delay in the carriage by air of passengers, baggage 
or cargo.  
20. The carrier is not liable if he proves that he and his servants or agents have taken all necessary 
measures to avoid the damage or that it was impossible for him or them to take such measures.  
21. If the carrie r proves that the damage was caused by or contributed to by the negligence of the 
injured person the Court may, in accordance with the provisions of its own law, exonerate the carrier 
wholly or partly from his liability.  
 22. (1) In the carriage of persons  the liability of the carrier for each passenger is limited to the sum of 
2,50,000 francs. Where, in accordance with the law of the Court seized of the case, damages may be 
awarded in the form of periodical payments the equivalent capital value of the said  payments shall not 
exceed 2,50,000 francs. Nevertheless, by special contract, the carrier and the passenger may agree to a 
higher limit of liability.  
(2) (a) In the carriage of registered baggage and of cargo, the liability of the carrier is limited to a  sum 
of 250 francs per kilogramme, unless the passenger or consignor has made, at the time when the pac kage 
was handed over to the carrier, a special delaration of interest in delivery at destination and has paid a 
supplementary sum if the case so requires . In that case the carrier will be liable to pay a sum not 
exceeding the declared sum, unless he proves that that sum is greater than the passenger ’s or consignor ’s 
actual interest in delivery at destination.  
(b) In the case of loss, damage or delay of part of registered baggage or cargo, or of any object 
contained therein, the weight to be taken into consideration in determining the amount to which the 
carrier's liability is limited shall be only the total weigh t of the package or packages concerned. 
Nevertheless, when the loss, damage or delay of a part of the registered baggage or cargo, or of an object 
contained therein, affects the value of other packages covered by the same baggage check or the same air 17 
 wayb ill, the total weight of such package or packages shall also be taken into consideration in 
determining the limit of liability.  
(3) As regards objects of which the passenger takes charge himself the liability of the carrier is 
limited to  5,00 franc s per p assenger.  
(4) The limits prescribed in this rule shall not prevent the Court from awarding, in accordance with its 
own law, in addition, the whole or part of the Court costs and of the other expenses of the litigation 
incurred by the plaintiff. The forego ing provision shall not apply if the amount of the damages awarded, 
excluding Court costs and other expenses of the litigation, does not exceed the sum which the carrier has 
offered in writing to the plaintiff within a period of six months from the date of  the occurrence causing 
the damage, or before the commencement of the action, if that is later.  
 (5) The sums mentioned in franc s in this rule shall be deemed to refer to a currency unit consisting of 
sixty -five and a half milligrammes of gold of millesima l fineness nine hundred. This sums may be 
converted into national currencies in round figures. Conversion of the sums into national currencies other 
than gold shall, in case of judicial proceedings, be made according to the gold value of such currencies of  
the date of judgment.  
23. (1) Any provision tending to relieve the carrier of liability or to fix a lower limit than that which is 
laid down in these rules shall  be null and void, but the nullity of any such provision does not involve the 
nullity of the  whole contract, which shall remain subject to the provisions of these rules.  
(2) Sub -rule ( 1) of this rule shall not apply to provisions governing loss or damage resulting from the 
inherent defect, quality or vice of the cargo carried.  
24. (1) In the ca ses covered by rules 18 and 19 any action for damages, however founded, can only be 
brought subject to the conditions and limits set out in these rules.  
(2) In the cases covered by rule 17 , the provisions of the preceding sub -rule also apply, without 
prejudice to the questions as to who are the persons who have the right to bring suit and what are their 
respective rights.  
25. The limits of liability specified in rule 22 shall not apply if it is proved that the damage resulted 
from an act or omission of th e carrier, his servants or agents, done with intent to cause damage or 
recklessly and with knowledge that damage would probably result; provided that, in the case of such act 
or omission of a servant or agent, it is also proved that he was acting within th e scope of his employment.  
26. (1) If an action is brought against a servant or agent of the carrier arising out of damage to which 
these rules relate, such servant or agent, if he proves that he acted within the scope of his employment, 
shall be entitled  to avail himself of the limits of liability which that carrier himself is entitled to invoke 
under rule 22.  
 (2) The aggregate of the amounts recoverable from the carrier, his servants and agents, in that case, 
shall not exceed the said limits.  
(3) The provisions of sub -rules ( 1) and ( 2) of this rule shall not apply if it is proved that the damage 
resulted from an act or omission of the servant or agent done with intent to cause damage or recklessly 
and with knowledge that damage would probably result.  
27. ( 1) Receipt by the person entitled to delivery of baggage or cargo without complaint is prima 
facie  evidence that the same has been delivered in good condition and in accordance with the document of 
carriage.  
(2) In the case of damage, the person enti tled to delivery must complain to the carrier forthwith after 
the discovery of the damage, and at the latest, within seven days from the date of receipt in the case of 
baggage and fourteen days from the date of receipt in the case of cargo. In the case of delay the complaint 
must be made at the latest within twenty -one days from the date on which the baggage or cargo have been 
placed at his disposal.  
(3) Every complaint must be made in writing upon the document of carriage or by separate notice in 
writing despatched within the times aforesaid.  18 
 (4) Failing complaint within the times aforesaid, no action shall lie against the carrier, save in the case 
of fraud on his part.  
28. In the case of the death of the person liable, an action for damages lies in acco rdance with the 
terms of these rules against those legally representing his estate.  
29. (1) An action for damages must be brought, at the option of the plaintiff, in the territory of one of 
the High Contracting Parties, either before the Court having juri sdiction where the carrier is ordinarily 
resident, or has his principal place of business, or has an estabilishment by which the contract has been 
made or before the Court having jurisdiction at the place of destination.  
(2) Questions of procedure shall b e governed by the law of the Court seized of the case.  
30. ( 1) The right to damages shall be extinguished if an action is not brought within two years, 
reckoned from the date of arrival at the destination, or from the date on which the aircraft ought to h ave 
arrived, or from the date on which the carriage stopped.  
(2) The method of calculating the period of limitation shall be determined by the law of the Court 
seized of the case.  
31. ( 1) In the case of carriage to be performed by various successive carriers and falling within the 
definition set out in sub - rule ( 3) of rule 1, each carrier who accepts passengers, baggage or cargo is 
subjected to the rules set out in this Schedule, and is deemed to be one of the contracting parties to the 
contract of c arriage in so far as the contract deals with that part of the carriage which is performed under 
his supervision.  
(2) In the case of carriage of this nature, the passenger or his representative can take action only 
against the carrier who performed the car riage during which the accident or the delay occurred, save in 
the case where, by express agreement, the first carrier has assumed liability for  the whole journey.  
(3) As regards baggage or cargo, the passenger or consignor will have a right of action agai nst the 
first carrier, and the passenger or consignee who is entitled to delivery will have a right of action against 
the last carrier, and further, each may take action against the carrier who performed the carriage during 
which the destruction, loss, dam age or delay took place. These carriers will be jointly and severally liable 
to the passenger or to the consignor or consignee.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO COMBINED CARRIAGE  
32. ( 1) In the case of combined carriage performed partly by air and partly  by any other mode of 
carriage, the provisions of this Schedule apply only to the carriage by air, provided that the carriage by air 
falls wi thin the terms of rule 1.  
(2) Nothing in this Schedule shall prevent the parties in the case of combined carriage f rom inserting 
in the document of air carriage conditions relating to other modes of carriage, provided that the provisions 
of this Schedule are observed as regards the carriage by air.  
CHAPTER V  
GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS  
33. Any clause contained in the contract and all special agreements entered into before the damage 
occurred by which the parties purport to infringe the rules laid down by this Schedule, whether by 
deciding the law to be applied, or by altering the rules as to jurisdiction, shall be null  and void. 
Nevertheless for the carriage of cargo arbitration clauses are allowed, subject to these rules, if the 
arbitration is to take place within one of the jurisdictions referred to in sub -rule ( 1) of rule 29.  
34. Nothing contained in this Schedule s hall prevent the carrier either from refusing to enter into any 
contract of carriage, or from making regulations which do not conflict with the provisions of this 
Schedule.  19 
 35. The provisions of rules 3 to 9 (inclusive) relating to documents of carriage shall not apply in the 
case of carriage performed in extraordinary circumstances outside the normal scope of an air carrier ’s 
business.  
36. The expression “days” when used in these rules means current days, not working days.  
  20 
 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 4A)  
RULES  
CHAPTER I  
SCOPE OF APPLICATION  
1. (1) These  rules shall apply to all international carriage of persons, baggage or cargo performed by 
aircraft for reward. They shall apply also to such carriage when performed gratuitously by an air transport 
undertaking.  
(2) In these rules, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “baggage ” means both checked baggage and unchecked baggage;  
(b) “days” means calendar days and not working days;  
(c) “depository ” means the International Civil Aviation Organisation;  
(d) “State Party ” means a signatory or acceding S tate to the Montreal Convention whose 
instrument of ratification or accession has been deposited with the depository.  
(3) For the purposes of these rules, the expression “international carriage ” means any carriage in 
which, according to the agreement betwe en the parties, the place of departure and the place of destination, 
whether or not there be a break in the carriage or a tran shipment, are situated either within the territories 
of two State Parties, or within the territory of a single State Party if ther e is an agreed stopping place 
within the territory of another State, even if that State is not a State Party. A carriage between two points 
within the territory of a single State Party without an agreed stopping place within the territory of another 
State shall not be deemed to be international carriage for the purposes of these rules.  
(4) A carriage to be performed by several successive air carriers shall be deemed for the purposes of 
these rules, to be one undivided carriage if it has been regarded by the  parties as a single operation, 
whether it has been agreed upon under the form of a single contract or of a series of contracts, and it shall 
not lose its international character merely because one contract or a series of contracts is to be performed 
entirely within the territory of the same State.  
(5) These rules shall apply also to carriage as set out in Chapter V, subject to the terms contained 
therein.  
2. (1) These rules shall apply to carriage performed by the State or by legally constituted public 
bodies provided it falls within the conditions laid down in rule 1.  
(2) In the carriage of postal items, the carrier shall be liable only to the relevant postal administration 
in accordance with the rules applicable to the relationship between the carriers an d the postal 
administration.  
(3) Except as provided in sub -rule ( 2), these rules shall not apply to the carriage of postal items.  
CHAPTER II  
DOCUMENTATION AND DUTIES OF THE PARTIES RELATING TO THE CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS, BAGGAGE 
AND CARGO  
3. (1) In respect  of carriage of passengers, an individual or collective document of carriage  shall be 
delivered containing — 
(a) an indication of the places of departure and destination;  
(b) if the places of departure and destination are within the territory of a single State Party, one or 
more agreed stopping places being within the territory of another State, an indication of at least one of 
such stopping places.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2009).  21 
 (2) Any other means which preserves the information indicated in sub -rule ( 1) may be substituted for 
the delivery of the document referred to in that sub -rule. If any such other means is used, the carrier shall 
offer to deliver to the passenger a written statement of the informatio n so preserved.  
(3) The carrier shall deliver to the passenger a baggage identification tag for each piece of checked 
baggage.  
(4) The passenger shall be given written notice to the effect that where these rules are applicable it 
governs and may limit the liability of carriers in respect of death or injury and for destruction or loss of, 
or damage to, baggage, and for delay.  
(5) Non -compliance with the provisions of sub -rules ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall not affect the existence or 
the validity of the contract of  carriage, which shall, nonetheless, be subject to these rules including those 
relating to limitation of liability.  
4. (1) In respect of the carriage of cargo, an air waybill shall be delivered.  
(2) Any other means which preserves a record of the carriage to be performed may be substituted for 
the delivery of an air waybill. If such other means are used, the carrier shall, if so requested by the 
consignor, deliver to the consignor a cargo receipt permitting identification of the consignment and access 
to the information contained in the record preserved by such other means.  
5. The air waybill or t he cargo receipt shall include — 
(a) an indication of the places of departure and destination;  
(b) if the places of departure and destination are within the territor y of a single State Party, one or 
more agreed stopping places being within the territory of another State, an indication of at least one of 
such stopping places; and  
(c) an indication of the weight of the consignment.  
6. The consignor may be required, if n ecessary to meet the formalities of customs, police and similar 
public authorities, to deliver a document indicating the nature of the cargo. This provision shall not create 
for the carrier any duty, obligation or liability resulting therefrom.  
7.  (1) The  air waybill shall be made out by the consignor in three original parts. The first part shall be 
marked “for the carrier ” and it shall be signed by the consignor. The second part shall be marked “for the 
consignee ” and it shall be signed by the consignor and by the carrier. The third part shall be signed by the 
carrier who shall hand it to the consignor after the cargo has been accepted.  
(2) The signature of the carrier and of the consignor may be printed or stamped . 
(3) If, at the request of the consignor, the carrier makes out the air waybill, the carrier shall be 
deemed, subject to proof to the contrary, to have done so on behalf of the consignor.  
8. When there is more than one package — 
(a) the carrier has the right to require the consignor to make out separate air waybills;  
(b) the consignor has the right to require the carrier to deliver separate cargo receipts when the 
other means referred to in sub -rule ( 2) of rule 4 are used.  
9. Non -complia nce with the provisions of rules 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 shall not affect the existence or the 
validity of the contract of carriage, which shall, nonetheless, be subject to these rules including those 
relating to limitation of liability.  
10. ( 1) The consignor is responsible for the correctness of the particulars and statements relating to 
the cargo inserted by it or on its behalf in the air waybill or furnished by it or on its behalf to the carrier 
for insertion in the cargo receipt or for insertion in the record preserved by the other means referred to in 
sub-rule ( 2) of rule 4. The foregoing shall also apply where the person acting on behalf of the consignor is 
also the agent of the carrier.  22 
 (2) The consignor shall indemnify the carrier against all damage suffere d by it, or by any other person 
to whom the carrier is liable, by reason of the irregularity, incorrectness or incompleteness of the 
particulars and statements furnished by the consignor or on its behalf.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -rules ( 1) and (2), the carrier shall indemnify the consignor against 
all damages suffered by it, or by any other person to whom the consignor is liable, by reason of the 
irregularity, incorrectness or incompleteness of the particulars and statements inserted by the carr ier or on 
its behalf in the cargo receipt or in the record preserved by the other means referred to in sub -rule ( 2) of 
rule 4.  
11. ( 1) The air waybill or the cargo receipt shall be prima facie  evidence of the conclusion of the 
contract, of the acceptance of the cargo and of the conditions of carriage mentioned therein.  
(2) Any statements in the air waybill or the cargo receipt relating to the weight, dimensions and 
packing of the cargo, as well  as those relating to the number of packages, are prima facie  evidence of the 
facts stated therein; those relating to the quantity, volume and condition of the cargo do not constitute 
evidence against the carrier except so far as they both have been, and a re stated in the air waybill or the 
cargo receipt to have been, checked by it in the presence of the consignor, or relate to the apparent 
condition of the cargo.  
12. ( 1) Subject to its liability to carry out all its obligations under the contract of carria ge, the 
consignor has the right to dispose of the cargo by withdrawing it at the airport of departure or destination, 
or by stopping it in the course of the journey on any landing, or by calling for it to be delivered at the 
place of destination or in the course of the journey to a person other than the consignee originally 
designated, or by requiring it to be returned to the airport of departure. The consignor shall not exercise 
this right of disposition in such a way as to prejudice the carrier or other c onsignors and shall reimburse 
any expenses occasioned by the exercise of this right.  
(2) If it is impossible to carry out the instructions of the consignor, the carrier shall so inform the 
consignor forthwith.  
(3) If the carrier carries out the instruction s of the consignor for the disposition of the cargo without 
requiring the production of the part of the air waybill or the cargo receipt delivered to the latter, the carrier 
shall be liable, without prejudice to its right of recovery from the consignor, fo r any damage which may 
be caused thereby to any person who is lawfully in possession of that part of the air waybill or the cargo 
receipt.  
(4) The right conferred on the consignor ceases at the moment when that of the consignee begins in 
accordance with ru le 13. Nevertheless, if the consignee declines to accept the cargo, or cannot be 
communicated with, the consignor shall resume its right of disposition.  
13. ( 1) Except when the consignor has exercised its right under rule 12, the consignee shall be 
entitle d, on arrival of the cargo at the place of destination, to require the carrier to deliver the cargo to it, 
on payment of the charges due and on complying with the conditions of carriage.  
(2) Unless it is otherwise agreed, it shall be the duty of the carrie r to give notice to the consignee as 
soon as the cargo arrives.  
(3) If the carrier admits the loss of the cargo, or if the cargo has not arrived at the expiration of seven 
days after the date on which it ought to have arrived, the consignee shall be entitl ed to enforce against the 
carrier the rights which flow from the contract of carriage.  
14. The consignor and the consignee may respectively enforce all the rights given to them by rules 12 
and 13, each in its own name, whether it is acting in its own inter est or in the interest of another, provided 
that it carries out the obligations imposed by the contract of carriage.  
15. (1) The provisions of rules 12, 13 and 14 shall not affect either the relations of the consignor and 
the consignee with each other or the mutual relations of third parties whose rights are derived either from 
the consignor or from the consignee.  
(2) The provisions of rules 12, 13 and 14 shall be varied only by express provision in the air waybill 
or the cargo receipt.  23 
 16. (1) The consign or shall furnish such information and such documents as are necessary to meet the 
formalities of customs, police and any other public authorities before the cargo can be delivered to the 
consignee. The consignor shall be liable to the carrier for any damag e occasioned by the absence, 
insufficiency or irregularity of any such information or documents, unless the damage is due to the fault 
of the carrier, its servants or agents.  
(2) The carrier shall be under no obligation to enquire into the correctness or s ufficiency of such 
information or documents.  
CHAPTER III  
LIABILITY OF THE CARRIER AND EXTENT OF COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES  
17. ( 1) The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in case of death or bodily injury of a 
passenger upon condition only that the  accident which caused the death or injury took place on board the 
aircraft or in the course of any of the operations of embarking or disembarking.  
(2) The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in case of destruction or loss of, or of damage to 
checked baggage upon condition only that the event which caused the destruction, loss or damage took 
place on board the aircraft or during any period within which the checked baggage was in the charge of 
the carrier. However, the carrier shall not be liable i f and to the extent that the damage resulted from the 
inherent defect, quality or vice of the baggage. In the case of unchecked baggage, including personal 
items, the carrier is liable if the damage has resulted from its fault or that of its servants or ag ents. 
(3) If the carrier admits the loss of the checked baggage, or if the checked baggage has not arrived at 
the expiration of twenty -one days after the date on which it ought to have arrived, the passenger shall be 
entitled to enforce against the carrier  the rights which flow from the contract of carriage.  
18. ( 1) The carrier shall be liable for damages sustained in the event of the destruction or loss of, or 
damage to, cargo upon condition only that the event which caused the damage so sustained took pla ce 
during the carriage by air.  
(2) However, the carrier shall not be liable if and to the extent it proves that the destruction, or loss of, 
or damage to, the cargo resulted from  one or more of the following: — 
(a) inherent defect, quality or vice of that c argo;  
(b) defective packing of that cargo performed by a person other than the carrier or its servants or 
agents;  
(c) an act of war or an armed conflict; and  
(d) an act of public authority carried out in connection with the entry, exit or transit of the ca rgo. 
(3) The carriage by air within the meaning of sub -rule ( 1) comprises the period during which the 
cargo is in charge of the carrier.  
(4) The period of the carriage by air shall not extend to any carriage by land, by sea or by inland 
waterway performed outside an airport. If, however, such carriage takes place in the performance of a 
contract for carriage by air, for the purpo se of loading, delivery or tran shipment , any damage is presumed, 
subject to proof to the contrary, to have been the result of an event which took place during the carriage 
by air. If a carrier, without the consent of the consignor, substitutes carriage by another mode of transport 
for the whole  or part of a carriage intended by the agreement between the parties to be carriage by air, 
such carriage by another mode of transport is deemed to be within the period of carriage by air.  
19. The carrier shall be liable for damage occasioned by delay in t he carriage by air of passengers, 
baggage or cargo. Nevertheless, the carrier shall not be liable for damage occasioned by delay if it proves 
that it and its servants and agents took all measures that could reasonably be required to avoid the damage 
or tha t it was impossible for it or them to take such measures.  
20. If the carrier proves that the damages was caused or contributed to by the negligence or other 
wrongful act or omission of the person claiming compensation, or the person from whom he or she 
derives his or her rights, the carrier shall be wholly or partly exonerated from its liability to the claimant 24 
 to the extent that such negligence or wrongful act or omission caused or contributed to the damage. When 
by reason of death or injury of a passenger  compensation is claimed by a person other than the passenger, 
the carrier shall likewise be wholly or partly exonerated from its liability to the extent that it proves that 
the damage was caused or contributed to by the negligence or other wrongful act or  omission of that 
passenger. This rule applies to all the liability provisions of these rules, including sub -rule ( 1) of rule 21.  
21. ( 1) For damages arising under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 17 not exceeding one lakh Special Drawing 
Rights for each passenger, the carrier shall not be able to exclude or limit its liability.  
(2) The carrier shall not be liable for damages arising under sub -rule ( 1) of rule 17 to the extent that 
they exceed for each passenger one lakh Special Drawing Rig hts if the carrier proves t hat— 
(a) such damage was not due to the negligence or other wrongful act or omission of the carrier or 
its servants or agents; or  
(b) such damage was solely due to the negligence or other wrongful act or omission of a third 
party.  
22. ( 1) In the case of da mage caused by delay as specified in rule 19 in the carriage of persons, the 
liability of the carrier for each passenger is limited to four thousand one hundred and fifty Special 
Drawing Rights.  
(2) In the carriage of baggage, the liability of the carrier in the case of destruction, loss, damage or 
delay shall be limited to one thousand Special Drawing Rights for each passenger unless the passenger 
has made, at the time when the checked baggage was handed over to the carrier, a special declaration of 
intere st in delivery at destination and has paid a supplementary sum, if so required. In that case, the 
carrier shall be liable to pay a sum not exceeding the declared sum, unless it proves that the sum is greater 
than the passenger's actual interest in delivery  at destination.  
(3) In the carriage of cargo, the liability of the carrier in the case of destruction, loss, damage or delay 
is limited to a sum of seventeen Special Drawing Rights per kilogramme, unless the consignor has made, 
at the time when the packag e was handed over to the carrier, a special declaration of interest in delivery at 
destination and has paid a supplementary sum, if so required. In that case, the carrier shall be liable to pay 
a sum not exceeding the declared sum, unless it proves that th e sum is greater than the consignor's actual 
interest in delivery at destination.  
(4) In the case of delay, destruction, loss or damage of part of the cargo, or of any object contained 
therein, the weight to be taken into consideration in determining the a mount to which the carrier's liability 
is limited shall be only the total weight of the package or packages concerned. Nevertheless, when the 
delay, destruction, loss or damage of a part of the cargo, or of an object contained therein, affects the 
value of  other packages covered by the same air waybill, or the same receipt or, if they were not issued, 
by the same record preserved by other means referred to in sub -rule ( 2) of rule 4, the total weight of such 
package or packages shall also be taken into consi deration in determining the limit of liability.  
(5) The provisions of sub -rules ( 1) and ( 2) shall not apply if it is proved that the damage resulted from 
an act or omission of the carrier, its servants or agents, done with intent to cause damage or reckles sly and 
with knowledge that damage would probably result:  
Provided that, in the case of such act or omission of a servant or agent, it is also proved that such 
servant or agent was acting within the scope of its employment.  
(6) The limits prescribed in rul e 21 and in this rule shall not prevent the court from awarding, in 
accordance with its own law, in addition, the whole or part of the court costs and of the other expenses of 
the litigation incurred by the plaintiff, including interest. The foregoing prov ision shall not apply if the 
amount of the damages awarded, excluding court costs and other expenses of the litigation, does not 
exceed the sum which the carrier has offered in writing to the plaintiff within a period of six months from 
the date of the occ urrence causing the damage, or before the commencement of the action, if that is later.  
23. The sums mentioned in terms of Special Drawing Right in these rules shall be deemed to refer to 
the Special Drawing Right as defined by the International Monetary F und and its conversion into national 
currencies shall, in case of judicial proceedings, be made in accordance with the method of valuation 25 
 applied by the International Monetary Fund, in effect at the date of the judgment, for its operations and 
transaction s. 
24. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of rule 25 and subject to sub -rule ( 2), the limits of liability 
prescribed in rules 21, 22 and 23 shall be reviewed by the depository at five -year intervals, the first such 
review to take place at the end of t he fifth year following the date of coming into force of these rules. The 
measure of the rate of inflation to be used in determining the inflation factor shall be the weighted average 
of the annual rates of increase or decrease in the Consumer Price Indice s of the States whose currencies 
comprise the Special Drawing Right mentioned in rule 23.  
(2) If the review referred to in sub -rule ( 1) concludes that the inflation factor has exceeded ten per 
cent., the depositary shall notify State Parties of a revision of the limits of liability. Any such revision 
shall become effective six months after its notification to the State Parties. If within three months after its 
notification to the State Parties, a majority of the State Parties register their disapproval, the  revision shall 
not become effective and the depositary shall refer the matter to a meeting of the State Parties. The 
depositary shall immediately notify all States Parties about the coming into force of any revision.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained  in sub -rule ( 1), the procedure referred to in sub -rule ( 2) shall 
be applied at any time provided that one -third of the State Parties express a desire to that effect and upon 
condition that the inflation factor referred to in sub -rule ( 1) has exceeded thir ty per cent .since the previous 
revision or since the date of entry into force of the Montreal Convention if there has been no previous 
revision. Subsequent reviews using the procedure specified in sub -rule ( 1) shall take place at five -year 
intervals starting at the end of the fifth year following the date of the reviews under the provisions of this 
sub-rule. 
25. A carrier may stipulate that the contract of carriage shall be subject to higher limits of liability 
than those provided for in these rules o r to no limits of liability whatsover.  
26. Any provision tending to relieve the carrier of liability or to fix a lower limit than that which is 
laid down in these rules shall be null and void, but the nullity of any such provision does not involve the 
nullity of the whole contract, which shall remain subject to the provisions of these rules.  
27. Nothing contained in these rules shall prevent the carrier from refusing to enter into any contract 
of carriage, from waiving any defence available in these rules, or from laying down conditions, which are 
not contrary to the provisions of these rules.  
28. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, where the 
aircraft accident results in death or injury of passengers, the carrier shall make advance payments without 
delay to a natural person or persons who are entitled to claim compensation in order to meet the 
immediate economic needs of such persons. Such advance payments shall not constitute a recognition of 
liability and may be offset against any amounts subsequently paid as damages by the carrier.  
29. In the carriage of passengers, baggage and cargo, any action for damages, however founded, 
whether under these rules or in contract or in tort or otherwise, can only be brought subject to the 
conditions and such limits of liability as are set out in these rules without prejudice to the question as to 
who are the persons who have the right to bring suit and what are their respective rights. In any such 
action, punitive, exemplary or any other non -compensatory damages shall not be recoverable.  
30. (1) If an action is brought against a servant or agent of the carrier arising out of damage to which 
these rules relate, such servant or agent, if they prove that they acted within the sco pe of their 
employment, shall be entitled to avail themselves of the conditions and limits of liability which the carrier 
itself is entitled to invoke under these rules.  
(2) The aggregate of the amounts recoverable from the carrier, its servants and agents , in that case, 
shall not exceed the said limits.  
(3) Except in respect of the carriage of cargo, the provisions of sub -rules ( 1) and ( 2) shall not apply if 
it is proved that the damage resulted from an act or omission of the servant or agent done with int ent to 
cause damage or recklessly and with the knowledge that damage would probably result.  26 
 31. ( 1) Receipt by the person entitled to delivery of checked baggage or cargo without complaint is 
prima facie  evidence that the same has been delivered in good co ndition and in accordance with the 
document of carriage or with the record preserved by the other means referred to in sub -rule ( 2) of rule 3 
and sub -rule ( 2) of rule 4.  
(2) In the case of damage, the person entitled to delivery shall make a complaint to t he carrier 
forthwith after the discovery of the damage, and, at the latest, within seven days from the date of receipt 
in the case of checked baggage and fourteen days from the date of receipt in the case of cargo. In the case 
of delay, the complaint shall  be made at the latest within twenty -one days from the date on which the 
baggage or cargo have been placed at his disposal.  
(3) Every complaint shall be made in writing and given or dispatched within the period specified in 
sub-rule ( 2). 
(4) If no complain t is made within the period specified in sub -rule ( 2), no action shall lie against the 
carrier, except in the case of fraud committed by the carrier.  
32. In the case of the death of the person liable, an action for damages lies in accordance with these 
rules against those legally representing his or her estate.  
33. ( 1) An action for damages shall be brought, at the option of the claimant of damages, in the 
territory of one of the State Parties, either before the court of the domicile of the carrier or of it s principal 
place of business, or where it has a place of business through which the contract has been made or before 
the court at the place of destination.  
(2) In respect of damage resulting from the death or injury of a passenger, an action may be brough t 
before one of the courts mentioned in sub -rule ( 1), or in the territory of a State Party in which at the time 
of the accident the passenger has his or her principal and permanent residence and to or from which the 
carrier operates services for the carria ge of passengers by air, either on its own aircraft, or on another 
carrier's aircraft pursuant to a commercial agreement, and in which that carrier conducts its business of 
carriage of passengers by air from premises leased or owned by the carrier itself o r by another carrier with 
which it has a commercial agreement.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -rule ( 2)— 
(a) “commercial agreement ” means an agreement, other than an agency agreement, made 
between carriers and relating to the provision of their joint services for carriage of passengers by air;  
(b) “principal and permanent residence ” means the one fixed and permanent abode of the 
passe nger at the time of the accident. The nationality of the passenger shall not be the determining 
factor in this regard.  
(4) Questions of procedure shall be governed by the law of the court seized of the case.  
34.(1) Subject to the provisions of this rule, t he parties to the contract of carriage for cargo may 
stipulate that any dispute relating to the liability of the carrier under these rules shall be settled by 
arbitration. Such agreement shall be in writing.  
(2) The arbitration proceedings shall, at the op tion of the claimant, take place within one of the 
jurisdictions referred to in rule 33.  
(3) The arbitrator or arbitration tribunal shall apply the provisions of these rules.  
(4) The provisions of sub -rules ( 2) and ( 3) shall be deemed to be part of every arbitration clause or 
agreement, and any term of such clause or agreement which is inconsistent therewith shall be null and 
void.  
35. ( 1) The right to damages shall be extinguished if an action is not brought within a period of two 
years, reckoned from the  date of arrival at the destination, or from the date on which the aircraft ought to 
have arrived, or from the date on which the carriage stopped.  
(2) The method of calculating the period shall be determined by the law of the court seized of the 
case.  27 
 36. (1) In the case of carriage to be performed by various successive carriers and falling within the 
definition set out in sub -rule ( 4) of rule 1, each carrier which accepts passengers, baggage or cargo shall 
be subject to the provisions of these rules and sh all be deemed to be one of the parties to the contract of 
carriage in so far as the contract deals with that part of the carriage which is performed under its 
supervision.  
(2) In the case of carriage of this nature, the passenger or any person entitled to compensation shall be 
entitled to take action only against the carrier which performed the carriage during which the accident or 
the delay occurred, except where, by express agreement, the first carrier has assumed liability for the 
whole journey.  
(3) In r espect of baggage or cargo, the passenger or consignor shall have a right of action against the 
first carrier, and the passenger or consignee who is entitled to delivery shall have a right of action against 
the last carrier, and further, each may take acti on against the carrier which performed the carriage during 
which the delay, destruction, loss or damage took place. These carriers shall be jointly and severally liable 
to the passenger or to the consignor or consignee.  
37. Nothing in these rules shall pre judicially affect the right of a person liable for damages to take 
recourse against any other person.  
CHAPTER IV  
COMBINED CARRIAGE  
38. ( 1) In the case of combined carriage performed partly by air and partly by any other mode of 
carriage, the provisions of these rules shall, subject to the provisions of sub -rule ( 4) of rule 18, apply only 
to the carriage by air, provided that the carriage by air falls within the meaning of rule 1.  
(2) Nothing in these rules shall prevent the parties in the case of combined c arriage from inserting in 
the document of air carriage conditions relating to other modes of carriage, provided that the provisions of 
these rules are observed with regard to carriage by air.  
CHAPTER V  
CARRIAGE BY AIR PERORMED BY A PERSON OTHER THAN THE CO NTRACTING CARRIER  
39. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply when a person (hereinafter referred to as the 
contracting carrier) as a principal makes a contract of carriage under these rules with a passenger or 
consignor or with a person acting on behal f of the passenger or consignor, and another person (hereinafter 
referred to as the actual carrier) performs, by virtue of authority from the contracting carrier, the whole or 
part of the carriage, but is not with respect to such part, a successive carrier  within the meaning of these 
rules. Such authority shall be presumed in the absence of proof to the contrary.  
40. If an actual carrier performs the whole or part of carriage which, according to the contract referred 
to in rule 39, is governed by these rule s, both the contracting carrier and the actual carrier shall, except as 
otherwise provided in this Chapter, be subject to the provisions of these rules, the former for the whole of 
the carriage contemplated in the contract, the latter solely for the carria ge which it performs.  
41.(1) The acts and omissions of the actual carrier and of its servants and agents acting within the 
scope of their employment shall, in relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, be deemed to 
be also those of the contr acting carrier.  
(2) The acts and omissions of the contracting carrier and of its servants and agents acting within the 
scope of their employment shall, in relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, be deemed to 
be also those of the actual carrier. Nevertheles s, no such act or omission shall subject the actual carrier to 
liability exceeding the amounts referred to in rules 21, 22, 23 and 24. Any special agreement under which 
the contracting carrier assumes obligations not imposed by the provisions of these rule s or any waiver of 
rights or defences conferred by the provisions of these rules or any special declaration of interest in 
delivery at destination contemplated in rule 22 shall not affect the actual carrier unless agreed to by it.  
42. Any complaint to be m ade or instruction to be given under the provisions of these rules to the 
carrier shall have the same effect whether addressed to the contracting carrier or to the actual carrier. 28 
 Nevertheless, instructions referred to in rule 12 shall only be effective if  addressed to the contracting 
carrier.  
43. In relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, any servant or agent of that carrier or of 
the contracting carrier shall, if they prove that they acted within the scope of their employment, be 
entitle d to avail themselves of the conditions and limits of liability which are applicable under the 
provisions of these rules to the carrier whose servant or agent they are, unless it is proved that they acted 
in a manner that prevents the limits of liability f rom being invoked in accordance with the provisions of 
these rules.  
44. In relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, the aggregate of the amounts 
recoverable from that carrier and the contracting carrier, and from their servants and agents acting within 
the scope of their employment, shall not exceed the highest amount which shall be awarded against either 
the contracting carrier or the actual carrier under the provisions of these rules, but none of the persons 
mentioned shall be liable for a sum in excess of the limit applicable to that person.  
45. In relation to the carriage performed by the actual carrier, an action for damages may be brought, 
at the option of the complainant, against that carrier or the contracting carrier, or against bot h together or 
separately. If the action is brought against only one of these carriers, that carrier shall have the right to 
require the other carrier to be joined in the proceedings, the procedure and effects being governed by the 
law of the court seized o f the case.  
46. Any action for damages contemplated in rule 45 must be brought, at the option of the 
complainant, in the territory of one of the State Parties, either before a court in which an action may be 
brought against the contracting carrier, as prov ided under rule 33, or before the court having jurisdiction 
at the place where the actual carrier has its domicile or its principal place of business.  
47. Any contractual provision tending to relieve the contracting carrier or the actual carrier of liabili ty 
under this Chapter or to fix a lower limit than that which is applicable according to this Chapter shall be 
null and void, but the nullity of any such provision does not involve the nullity of the whole contract, 
which shall remain subject to the provis ions of this Chapter.  
48. Except as provided in rule 45, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and obligations of the 
carriers between themselves, including any right of recourse or indemnification.  
CHAPTER VI  
GENERAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS  
49. Any  clause contained in the contract of carriage and all special agreements entered into before the 
damage occurred by which the parties purport to infringe the rules laid down by these rules, whether by 
deciding the law to be applied, or by altering the rule s as to jurisdiction, shall be null and void.  
50. State Parties shall require their carriers to maintain adequate insurance covering their liability 
under the provisions of these rules. A carrier may be required to furnish evidence that it maintains 
adequa te insurance covering its liability under the provisions of these rules.  
51. The provisions of rules 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 relating to the documentation of carriage shall not apply in 
the case of carriage performed in extraordinary circumstances outside the nor mal scope of a carrier ’s 
business.  
52. The expression “days” when used in this Schedule means calendar days and not working days.  
  29 
 ANNEXURE  
[See sub-section ( 2) of section 3, sub -section ( 2) of section 4 and sub -section ( 2) of section 4A]  
PART-I 
 
  Sl.  
No. High Contracting  
Parties to Convention  Date of enforcement of  
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Afghanistan  21st May, 1969  
2. Algeria  31st August, 1964  
3. Angola  8th June, 1998  
4. Argentina  19th June, 1952  
5. Armenia  23rd February, 1999  
6. Australia  30th October, 1935  
7. Austria  27th December, 1961  
8. Azerbaijan  23rd April, 2000  
9. Bahamas  10th July, 1973  
10 Bahrain  10th June, 1998  
11. Bangladesh  26th March, 1971  
12. Barbados  30th November, 1966  
13. Belarus  25th December, 1959  
14. Belgium  11th October, 1936  
15. Benin  1st August, 1960  
16. Bolivia  29th March, 1999  
17. Bosnia and Herzegovina  6th March, 1992  
18. Botswana  30th September, 1966  
19. Brazil  13th February, 1933  
20. Brunei Darussalam  1st January, 1984  
21. Bulgaria  23rd September, 1949  
22. Burkina Faso  9th March, 1962  
23. Cambodia  12th March, 1997  
24. Cameroon  1st January, 1960  
25. Canada  8th September, 1947  
26. Cape Verde  8th May, 2002  
27. Chile  31st May, 1979  
28. China  18th October, 1958  
29. Colombia  13th November, 1966  
30. Comoros  9th September, 1991  30 
   Sl.  
No. High Contracting  
Parties to Convention  Date of enforcement of  
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
31. Congo  15th August, 1960  
32. Costa Rica  8th August, 1984  
33. Cote d’Ivoire  7th August, 1960  
34. Croatia  8th October, 1991  
35. Cuba  19th October, 1964  
36. Cyprus  16th August, 1960  
37. Czech Republic  1st January, 1993  
38. Democratic People ’s 30th May, 1961  
  Republic of Korea    
39. Democratic Republic of the  
Congo  30th June, 1960  
40. Denmark  1st October, 1937  
41. Dominican Republic  25th May, 1972  
42. Ecuador  1st March, 1970  
43. Egypt  5th December, 1955  
44. El Salvador    
45. Equatorial Guinea  19th March, 1989  
46. Estonia  14th June, 1998  
47. Ethiopia  12th November, 1950  
48. Fiji 10th October, 1970  
49. Finland  1st October, 1937  
50. France  13th February, 1933  
51. Gabon  16th May, 1969  
52. Germany  29th December, 1933  
53. Ghana  9th November, 1997  
54. Greece  11th April, 1938  
55. Grenada    
56. Guatemala  4th May, 1997  
57. Guinea  10th December, 1961  
58. Honduras  25th September, 1994  
59. Hungary  27th August, 1936  
60. Iceland  19th November, 1948  
61. India  15th August, 1947  31 
   Sl.  
No. High Contracting  
Parties to Convention  Date of enforcement of  
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
62. Indonesia  17th August, 1945  
63. Iran (Islamic Republic of)  6th October, 1975  
64. Iraq 26th September, 1972  
65. Ireland  19th December, 1935  
66. Israel  6th January, 1950  
67. Italy 15th May, 1933  
68. Japan  18th August, 1953  
69. Jordan  25th May, 1946  
70. Kazakhstan    
71. Kenya  12th December, 1963  
72. Kuwait  9th November, 1975  
73. Kyrgyzstan  9th May, 2000  
74. Lao People ’s Democratic 
Republic  19th July, 1949  
75. Latvia  13th February, 1933  
76. Lebanon  22nd November, 1943  
77. Lesotho  4th October, 1966  
78. Liberia  31st July, 1942  
79. Libyan Arab Jamahiriya  14th August, 1969  
80. Liechtenstein  7th August, 1934  
81. Lithuania    
82. Luxembourg  5th January, 1950  
83. Madagascar  26th June, 1960  
84. Malawi  25th January, 1978  
85. Malaysia  16th September, 1963  
86. Maldives  11th January, 1996  
87. Mali  26th April, 1961  
88. Malta  21st September, 1964  
89. Mauritania  4th November, 1962  
90. Mauritius  15th January, 1990  
91. Mexico  15th May, 1933  
92. Monaco    
93. Mongolia  29th July, 1962  32 
   Sl.  
No. High Contracting  
Parties to Convention  Date of enforcement of  
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
94. Morocco  5th April, 1958  
95. Myanmar  4th January, 1948  
96. Nauru  31st January, 1968  
97. Nepal  13th May, 1966  
98. Netherlands  29th September, 1933  
99. New Zealand  5th July, 1937  
100. Niger  3rd August, 1960  
101. Nigeria  1st October, 1960  
102. Norway  1st October, 1937  
103. Oman  4th November, 1976  
104. Pakistan  14th August, 1947  
105. Panama  10th February, 1997  
106. Papua New Guinea  16th September, 1975  
107. Paraguay  26th November, 1969  
108. Peru 3rd October, 1998  
109. Philippines  7th February, 1991  
110. Poland  13th February, 1933  
111. Portugal  18th June, 1947  
112. Qatar  22nd March, 1987  
113. Republic of Korea    
114. Republic of Moldova  19th June, 1997  
115. Romania  13th February, 1933  
116. Russian Federation  18th November, 1934  
117. Rwanda  1st July, 1962  
118. Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines  27th October, 1979  
119. Samona  1st January, 1962  
120. Saudi Arabia  27th April, 1969  
121. Senegal  17th September, 1964  
122. Serbia and Montenegro  27th April, 1992  
123. Seychelles  22nd September, 1980  
124. Sierra Leone  27th April, 1961  
125. Singapore  3rd December, 1971  33 
   Sl.  
No. High Contracting  
Parties to Convention  Date of enforcement of  
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
126. Slovakia  1st January, 1993  
127. Slovenia  25th June, 1991  
128. Solomon Islands  7th July, 1978  
129. South Africa  22nd March, 1955  
130. Spain  13th February, 1933  
131. Sri lanka  4th February, 1948  
132. Sudan  12th May, 1975  
133. Suriname  28th September, 2003  
134. Swaziland    
135. Sweden  1st October, 1937  
136. Switzerland  7th August, 1934  
137. Syrian Arab Republic  2nd March, 1959  
138. The former Yugoslav  17th September, 1991  
  Republic of Macedonia    
139. Togo  30th September, 1980  
140. Tonga  4th June, 1970  
141. Trinidad and Tobago  31st August, 1962  
142. Tunisia  13th February, 1964  
143. Turkey  23rd June, 1978  
144. Turkmenistan  20th March, 1995  
145. Uganda  22nd October, 1963  
146. Ukraine  12th November, 1959  
147. United Arab Emirates  3rd July, 1986  
148. United Kingdom  15th May, 1933  
149. United Kingdom for the  3rd March, 1935  
  following territories:    
 - Bermuda    
 - British Antarctic    
 Territory    
 -Cayman, Turks, and 
Calcos Islands    
 -Akrotiri and Dhekelia    
 -Falkland Islands and 
Dependencies    
 -Hong Kong    
 -Monsserrat St. Helena and 
Ascension    
150. United Republic of Tanzania  6th July, 1965  
151. United States  29th October, 1934  
152. Uruguay  2nd October, 1979  34 
  
 
PART-II 
 
Sl. No.  High Contracting Parties to 
Convention  Date of enforcement of  
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Afghanistan  21st May, 1969  
2. Algeria  31st August, 1964  
3. Angola  8th June, 1998  
4. Argentina  10th September, 1969  
5. Australia  1st August, 1963  
6. Austria  24th June, 1971  
7. Azerbaijan  23rd April, 2000  
8. Bahamas  10th July, 1973  
9. Bahrain  10th June, 1998  
10. Bangladesh  26th March, 1971  
11. Belarus  1st August, 1963  
12. Belgium  25th November, 1963  
13. Benin  1st August, 1963  
14. Bosnia and herzegovina  6th March, 1992  
15. Brazil  14th September, 1964  
16. Bulgaria  13th March, 1964  
17. Cambodia  12th March, 1997  
18. Cameroon  1st August, 1963  
19. Canada  17th July, 1964  
20. Cape Verde  8th May, 2002  
21. Chile  31st May, 1979  
22. China  18th November, 1975  
23. Colombia  13th November, 1966  
24. Congo  1st August, 1963  
25. Costa Rica  8th August, 1984  Sl.  
No. High Contracting  
Parties to Convention  Date of enforcement of  
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
153. Uzbekistan  28th May, 1997  
154. Vanuatu  24th January, 1982  
155. Venezuela  13th September, 1955  
156. Vietnam  9th January, 1983  
157. Yemen  4th August, 1982  
158. Zambia  24th October, 1964  
159. Zimbabwe  18th April, 1980  35 
    
Sl. No.  High Contracting Parties to 
Convention  Date of enforcement of 
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
26. Cote d’Ivoire  1st August, 1963  
27. Croatia  8th October, 1991  
28. Cuba  28th November, 1965  
29. Cyprus  21st October, 1970  
30. Czech Republic  1st January, 1993  
31. Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea  2nd February, 1981  
32. Denmark  1st August, 1963  
33. Dominican Republic  25th May, 1972  
34. Ecuador  1st March, 1970  
35. Egypt  1st August, 1963  
36. El Salvador  1st August, 1963  
37. Estonia  14th June, 1998  
38. Fiji 10th October, 1970  
39. Finland  23rd August, 1977  
40. France  1st August, 1963  
41. Gabon  16th May, 1969  
42. Germany  1st August, 1963  
43. Ghana  9th November, 1997  
44. Greece  21st September, 1965  
45. Grenada  13th November, 1985  
46. Guatemala  26th October, 1971  
47. Guinea  7th January, 1991  
48. Hungary  1st August, 1963  
49. Iceland  1st August, 1963  
50. India  15th May, 1973  
51. Iran (Islamic Republic of)  6th October, 1975  
52. Iraq 1st August, 1963  
53. Ireland  1st August, 1963  
54. Israel  3rd November, 1964  
55. Italy 2nd August, 1963  
56. Japan  8th November, 1967  
57. Jordan  13th February, 1974  
  36 
 Sl. No.  High Contracting Parties to 
Convention  Date of enforcement of 
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
58. Kazakhstan  28th November, 2002  
59. Kenya  4th October, 1999  
60. Kuwait  9th November, 1975  
61. Kyrgyzstan  9th May, 2000  
62. Lao People ’s Democratic 
Republic  1st August, 1963  
63. Latvia  31st December, 1998  
64. Lebanon  8th August, 1978  
65. Lesotho  15th January, 1976  
66. Libyan Arab Jamahiriya  14th August, 1969  
67. Liechtenstein  3rd April, 1966  
68. Lithuania  19th February, 1997  
69. Luxembourg  1st August, 1963  
70. Madagascar  1st August, 1963  
71. Malawi  7th September, 1971  
72. Malaysia  19th December, 1974  
73. Maldives  11th January, 1996  
74. Mali  29th March, 1964  
75. Mauritius  15th January, 1990  
76. Mexico  1st August, 1963  
77. Monaco  8th July, 1979  
78. Morocco  15th February, 1976  
79. Nauru  31st January, 1968  
80. Nepal  13th May, 1966  
81. Netherlands  1st August, 1963  
82. New Zealand  14th June, 1967  
83. Niger  1st August, 1963  
84. Nigeria  29th September, 1969  
85. Norway  1st August, 1963  
86. Oman  2nd November, 1987  
87. Pakistan  1st August, 1963  
88. Panama  10th February, 1997  
89. Papua New Guinea  16th September, 1975  
90. Paraguay  26th November, 1969  
91. Peru 3rd October, 1988  37 
 Sl. No.  High Contracting Parties to 
Convention  Date of enforcement of 
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
92. Philippines  28th February, 1967  
93. Poland  1st August, 1963  
94. Portugal  15th December, 1963  
95. Qatar  22nd March, 1987  
96. Republic of Korea  11th October, 1967  
97. Republic of Moldova  19th June, 1997  
98. Romania  1st August, 1963  
99. Russian Federation  1st August, 1963  
100. Rwanda  27th March, 1991  
101. Saint Vincent and  3rd March, 2002  
  the Grenadines    
102 Samona  14th January, 1973  
103.  Saudi Arabia  27th April, 1969  
104. Senegal  17th September, 1964  
105. Serbia and Montenegro  27th April, 1992  
106. Seychelles  22nd September, 1980  
107. Singapore  4th February, 1968  
108. Slovakia  1st January, 1993  
109. Slovenia  25th June, 1991  
110. Solomon Islands  7th July, 1978  
111. South Africa  17th December, 1967  
112. Spain  6th March, 1966  
113. Sri Lanka  25th May, 1997  
114. Sudan  12th May, 1975  
115. Suriname  17th January, 2005  
116. Swaziland  18th October, 1978  
117. Sweden  1st August, 1963  
118. Switzerland  1st August, 1963  
119. Syrian Arab Republic  1st August, 1963  
120. The former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia  17th September, 1991  
121. Togo  30th September, 1980  
122. Tonga  22nd May, 1977  
123. Trinidad and Tobago  8th August, 1983  
124. Tunisia  13th February, 1964  
125. Turkey  23rd June, 1978  
126. Ukraine  1st August, 1963  
127. United Arab Emirates  16th January, 1994  
128. United Kingdom  1st June, 1967  
129. United Kingdom for the 
following territories:  1st June, 1967  
 - Bermuda    
 - British Antarctic    
 Territory    
 - Cayman, Turks,    
 and   
 Calcos Islands    
  38 
 Sl. No.  High Contracting Parties to 
Convention  Date of enforcement of 
Convention  
(1) (2) (3) 
130. United States  14th December, 2003  
131. Uzbekistan  28th May, 1997  
132. Vanuatu  24th January, 1982  
133. Venezuela  1st August, 1963  
134. Vietnam  9th January, 1983  
135. Yemen  4th August, 1982  
136. Zambia  23rd June, 1970  
137. Zimbabwe  25th January, 1981  
PART-III 
 
Sl. No  State Parties  Date of enforcement  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Albania  19th December, 2004  
2. Austria  28th June, 2004  
3. Bahrain  4th November, 2003  
4. Barbados  4th November, 2003  
5. Belgium  28th June, 2004  
6. Belize  4th November, 2003  
7. Benin  29th May, 2004  
8. Botswana  4th November, 2003  
9. Bulgaria  9th January, 2004  
10. Cameroon  4th November, 2003  
11. Canada  4th November, 2003  
12. Cape Verde  22nd October, 2004  
13. China  31st July, 2005  
14. Colombia  4th November, 2003  
15. Cuba  13th December, 2005  
16. Cyprus  4th November, 2003  
17. Czech Republic  4th November, 2003  
18. Denmark  28th June, 2004  
19. Egypt  25th April, 2005  
20. Estonia  4th November, 2003  
21. Finland  28th June, 2004  
22. France  28th June, 2004  
  39 
 Sl. No  State Parties  Date of enforcement  
(1) (2) (3) 
23. Gambia  9th May, 2004  
24. Germany  28th June, 2004  
25. Greece  4th November, 2003  
26. Hungary  7th January, 2005  
27. Iceland  16th August, 2004  
28. Ireland  28th June, 2004  
29. Italy 28th June, 2004  
30. Japan  4th November, 2003  
31. Jordan  4th November, 2003  
32. Kenya  4th November, 2003  
33. Kuwait  4th November, 2003  
34. Latvia  15th February, 2005  
35. Lebanon  14th May, 2005  
36. Lithuania  29th January, 2005  
37. Luxembourg  28th June, 2004  
38. Maldives  30th December, 2005  
39. Malta  4th July, 2004  
40. Mexico  4th November, 2003  
41. Monaco  17th October, 2004  
42. Mongolia  4th December, 2004  
43. Namibia  4th November, 2003  
44. Netherlands  28th June, 2004  
45. New Zealand  4th November, 2003  
46. Nigeria  4th November, 2003  
47. Norway  28th June, 2004  
48. Panama  4th November, 2003  
49. Paraguay  4th November, 2003  
50. Peru 4th November, 2003  
51. Portugal  4th November, 2003  
52. Qatar  14th January, 2005  
53. Romania  4th November, 2003  
54. Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines  28th May, 2004  
55. Saudi Arabia  14th December, 2003  
56. Slovakia  4th November, 2003  
  40 
 Sl. No State Parties  Date of enforcement  
(1) (2) (3) 
57. Slovenia  4th November, 2003  
58. Spain  28th June, 2004  
59. Sweden  28th June, 2004  
60. Switzerland  5th September, 2005  
61. Syrian Arab Republic  4th November, 2003  
62. The Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia  4th November, 2003  
63. Tonga  19th January, 2004  
64. United Arab Emirates  4th November, 2003  
65. United Kingdom  28th June, 2004  
66. United Republic of Tanzania  4th November, 2003  
67. United States  4th November, 2003  
68. Vanuatu  8th January,  2006  
69. European Community  28th June, 2004. ] 
 
--------------------------The Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL SALES TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1972  
[30th November, 1972.]  
An Act further to a mend the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) 
Act, 1972.  
(2) This section and sub -section ( 1) of section 14 shall come into force at once and the remaining 
provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
2*                                    *                                      *                                       *                                    * 
14. Extension of t he principal Act to Kohima and Mokokchung districts in the State of 
Nagaland. —(1) The principal Act, as in force on the 5th day of August, 1971, is hereby extended to, and 
shall be in force in, the Kohima and Mokokchung districts in the State of Nagaland.  
(2) The amendments made to the principal Act by this Act shall come into force in the Kohima and 
Mokokchung di stricts in the State of Nagaland on the date on which this sub -section comes into force.  
15. Validation of assessments, etc. —(1) Notwithstanding a nything contained in any judgment, 
decree or order of any court or other authority to the contrary, any assessment, re -assessment, levy or 
collection of any tax made or purporting to have been made, any action or thing taken or done in relation 
to such ass essment, re -assessment, levy or collection under the provisions of the principal Act before the 
commencement of this section shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if such assessment,            
re-assessment, levy or collection or action or thing  had been made, taken or done under the principal Act 
as amended by clause ( a) of section 11 and clause ( a) of section 12 of this Act, and accordingly — 
(a) all acts , proceedings or things done or action taken by the State Government or by any other 
officer  of the State Government  or by any other authority in connection with the assessment,            
re-assessment, levy or collection of such tax shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have 
always been done or taken in accordance with law;  
(b) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court or before any 
authority for the refund of any such tax ; and  
(c) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any such tax.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is h ereby declared that nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall be construed 
as preventing any person — 
(a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this 
Act, the assessment, re -assessment, levy or collection of such tax for any  period, or  
(b) from claiming refund of any tax paid by him in excess of the amount due from him under the 
princ ipal Act as amended by this Act.  
                                                           
1. 1st April , 197 3, vide notification No. G.S.R. 55(E), dated 9th February , 197 3, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,    
sec. 3( i). 
2. Sections 2 to 13 rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 19 78 (38 of 19 78), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f . 26-5-1978). 
--------------------------The Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 THE COKING COAL MINES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1972  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to the policy of the State.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF COKING COAL MINES AND COKE OVEN PLANTS  
4. Acquisition of rights in coking coal mines.  
5. Acquisition of rights of owners of coke oven plants.  
6. Central Government to be the lessee of the State Government.  
7. Power of Central Government  to direct vesting rights in a Government company.  
8. Properties vesting in Central Government to be freed from mortgages, etc.  
9. Central Government not to be liable for prior liabilities.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
10. Payment of amount to owners of coking coal mines.  
11. Payment of amount to owners of coke oven plants.  
12. Payment of further amount.  
12A. Workers’ dues to be paid out of the amount.  
13. Income derived by the owners of coking coal mines and coke oven plants after the appointed day 
to be  refunded to the Central Government.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF COKING COAL MINES AND COKE OVEN PLANTS  
14. Management, etc., of coking coal mines and coke oven plants.  
15. Duty of persons in charge of management of coking coal mines or coke oven plant s to deliver all 
assets , etc. 
16. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF COKING COAL MINES AND COKE OVEN PLANTS  
17. Liability of officer or other employee of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant for transfer to any 
other coking coal mine or coke oven plant.  
18. Provident fund.  
19. Superannuation, welfare and other funds.  2 CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
SECTIONS  
20. Commissioner of Payments to be appointed.  
21. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
22. Statement of accounts in relation to the period of management by the Central Government,             
etc. 
22A. Validation of certain collections.  
23. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
23A. Application of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act.  
24. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner.  
24A. Interest on admitted claims.  
25. Recovery of excess payments made by Central Government or Custodian  
25A. Notice to owners of coking coal mines or coke oven plants and managing contractors, etc.  
26. Disputes how to be dealt with.  
27. Undisbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general revenue account  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Effect of Act on other laws.  
29. Contracts cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government.  
30. Penalties . 
31. Offences by companies.  
32. Mining companies not to be wound up by court.  
33. Delegation of powers.  
34. Power to make rules.  
35. Power to remove difficulties.  
36. Coking coal mines to which the Act shall not apply.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE .3 THE COKING COAL MI NES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 36 OF 1972  
[17th August , 1972.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest of the owners of 
the coking coal mines specified in the First Schedule, and the right, title and interest of the 
owners of such coke oven plants as are in or about the said coking coal mines with a view to 
reorgani sing and reconstructing such mines and plants for the purpose of protecting, 
conserving and promoting scientific development of the resources of coking coal needed to 
meet the growing requirements of the iron and steel industry and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Coking Coal Min es 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972.  
(2) The provisions of sections 30 and 31 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of May, 1972.  
2. Declaration as to the policy of the State. —It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect 
to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause ( b) of article 39 of the 
Constitution.  
Explanation .—In this section, “State ” has the same meaning as in article 12 of the Constitution.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of May, 1972;  
(b) “coke oven plant ” means the plant and equipment with which the manufacture of hard coke 
has been, or is b eing, carried on, and include s— 
(i) all lands, buildings, works, machinery and equipment, vehicles, railways, tramways and 
sidings, belonging to, or in, the coke oven plant,  
(ii) all workshops belonging to the coke oven plant, including buildings, machinery, 
instruments, stores, equip ment of such workshops and the lands on which such workshops stand,  
(iii) all coke in stock or under production, and other stores, stocks and instruments, belonging 
to the coke oven plant,  
(iv) all power stations belonging to the coke oven plant or operated for supplying electricity 
for the purpose of working the coke oven plant or a number of coke oven plants,  
(v) all lands, buildings and equipment belonging to the coke oven plant where the washing of 
coal is carried on, 
(vi) all other fixed assets,  movable or immovable, and current assets belonging to a coke oven 
plant, whether within its premises or outside.  
1[Explanation .—The expression “current assets ” does not include, — 
(a) dues representing the sale of coal and coal products effected at any tim e before the 
appointed day and outstanding immediately before the said day;  
(b) dues from the Coal Board, established under section 4 of the Coal Mines 
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), prior to the repeal of the 
said Act, with  respect to any period before the appointed day;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 2, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  4 (c) dues from sundry debtors, loans and advances to other parties and investments, not 
being investments in the coke oven plant;  
(d) security deposits made by the owners with the Coal Controller appoi nted by the 
Central Government or with the Railways for the fulfilment of contracts or with a State 
Electricity Board for the payment of bills;  
(e) earnest money deposited by the owners with the Rai lways for obtaining contracts;]  
(c) “coking coal mine ” means a coal mine in which there exists one or more seams of coking 
coal, whether exclusively or in addition to any seam of other coal;  
(d) “company ” means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), 
and includes a foreign compan y within the mean ing of section 591 of that Act;  
(e) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 20;  
(f) “Custodian ” means the  Custodian appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 14, to take over, 
or carry on, the management of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant;  
(g) “date of assent ” means the date on which assent is give n by the President to this Act;  
(h) “Government company ” has the meaning assigned to it by section 617 of the C ompanies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956);  
(i) “managin g contractor ” means the person, or body of persons, who, with the previous consent 
in writing of the State Government, has entered into an arrangement, contract or understanding, with 
the owner of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant under which the opera tions of the coking coal 
mine or coke oven plant are substantially controlled by such person or body of persons;  
(j) “mine ” means any excavation where any operation for the purpose of searching for or 
obtaining minerals has been or is  being carried on, and includes — 
(i) all borings and bore holes;  
(ii) all shafts adjacent to, and belonging to, or in, a mine, whether in the course of being sunk 
or not;  
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being driven;  
(iv) all open cas t working;  
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for bringing into or removal from a mine of 
minerals or other articles or for the r emoval of refuse therefrom;  
(vi) all lands, buildings, works, adits, levels, planes, machinery and equipment, vehicl es, 
railways, tramways and sidings belongi ng to, or in, or about, a mine;  
(vii) all workshops belonging to, or in, a mine, including buildings, machinery, instruments, 
stores, equipment of such workshops and the lands  on which such workshops stand;  
(viii) all coal in stock or in transit or under production and other stores, stocks and 
instrumen ts belonging to, or in, a mine;  
(ix) all power stations belonging to, or in, a mine or operated for supplying electricity for the 
purpose of working  the mine or a num ber of mines;  
(x) all lands, buildings and equipment belonging to, or in, a mine where the washing of coal 
or man ufacture of coke is carried on;  
(xi) all other fixed assets, movable or immovable, and current assets, belonging to a mine, 
whether within its premises or outside.  
1[Explanation .—The expression “current assets ” does not include, — 
(a) dues representing the sale of coal and coal products effected at any time before the 
appointed day and outstanding i mmediately before the said day;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 2, for  the Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  5 (b) dues from the  Coal Board, established under section 4 of the Coal Mines 
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), prior to the repeal of the 
said Act, with respect to any period before the appointed day;  
(c) dues from sundry debtors, loans and adva nces to other parties and investments, not 
being inves tments in the coking coal mine;  
(d) security deposits made by the owners with the Coal Controller appointed by the 
Central Government or with the Railways for the fulfilment of contracts or with a State  
Electricity Board for the payment of bills;  
(e) earnest money deposited by the owners with the Rai lways for obtaining contracts;]  
(k) “Mineral Concession Rules ” means the rules, for the time being in force, made under the 
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Devel opment) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957);  
(l) “mining company ” means a company owning a coking coal mine, and in relation to a foreign 
company within the meaning of  section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the undert aking 
of that company in India;  
(m) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(n) “owner ”,— 
(i) when used in relation to a mine, has the meaning assigned to it in the Mines Act, 1952              
(35 of 1952),  
(ii) when used in relation to a coke oven plant, means any person who is the immediate 
proprietor or lessee or occupier of the coke oven plant or any part thereof or is a contractor for the 
working of the coke oven plant or any part thereof;  
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(p) “scheduled bank ” means a bank included for the time being in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (1 of 1934);  
(q) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any 
provision of this Act, by notification, specify; and different dates may be specified for di fferent 
provisions of this Act;  
(r) words and expressions used herein and not defined but define d in the Coal Mines 
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), have the meanings, respectively , 
assigned to them in that Act;  
(s) words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act or in the Coal Mines 
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), but defined in the Mines Act,             
1952 (35 of 1952), shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned  to them in the Mines Act, 1952  
(35 of 1952) . 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF COKING COAL MINES AND COKE OVEN PLANTS  
4. Acquisition of rights in coking coal mines. —(1) On the appointed day, the right, title and interest 
of the owners in r elation to the coking coal mines specified in the First Schedule shall stand transferred to, 
and shall vest absolutely in, the Central Governme nt, free from all incumbrances.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[(3) If after the appointed day, the Central Government is satisfied, whether from any information 
received by it or otherwise, that there has been any error, omission or misdescription in relation to the 
particulars of a coking coal mine included in the First Schedule or the name and address of the owner of 
any s uch coking coal mine, it may, by notification, correct such error, omission or misdescription, and on 
the issue of such notification, the relevant entries in the First Schedule shall be, and shall be deemed 
always to ha ve been, corrected accordingly:  
                                                           
1. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by Act 57 of 1986 , s. 2 (w.e.f.  1-6-1972 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-5-1972).  6 Provided that no such correction in relation to the ownership of a coking coal mine shall be made 
where such ownership is in dispute.]  
5. Acquisition of rights of owners of coke oven plants. —1[(1)] On the appointed day, the right, title 
and interest of the  owners of each of the coke oven plants specified in the Second Schedule, being the 
coke oven plants which are situated in or about the coking coal mines specified in the First Schedule, 
shall stand transferred to, and shall vest absolutely in, the Central  Governme nt, free from all 
incumbrances.  
2[(2) If after the appointed day, the Central Government is satisfied, whether from any information 
received by it or otherwise, that there has been any error, omission or misdescription in relation to the 
particula rs of a coke oven plant included in the Second Schedule or the name and address of the owner of 
any such coke oven plant, it may, by notification, correct such error, omission or misdescription, and on 
the issue of such notification, the relevant entries i n the Second Schedule shall be, and shall be deemed 
always to ha ve been, corrected accordingly:  
Provided that no such correction in relation to the ownership of a coke oven plant shall be made 
where such ownership is in dispute.]  
6. Central Government to b e the lessee of the State Government. —(1) Where the rights of an 
owner under any mining lease granted, or deemed to have been granted, in relation to a coking coal mine, 
by a State Government or any other person, vest in the Central Government under sectio n 4, the Central 
Government shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee of the State 
Government or such other person, as the case may be, in rel ation to such coking coal mine 3[as if a fresh 
mining lease] in relation to such coking coal mine had been granted to the Central Government under the 
Mineral Concession Rules, the period of such lease 4[shall be the maximum period] for which such lease 
could have been granted by the Sta te Government or such other person under those Rules and, thereupon, 
all the rights under such mining lease, including surface, underground and other rights granted to the 
lessee shall be deemed to have been transferred to, and vested in, the Central Gover nment.  
(2) On the expiry of the term of  any lease, referred to in sub -section ( 1), such lease shall, if so desired 
by the Central Government be renewed  5***, by the lessor for the maximum period for which such lease 
can be renewed under the Mineral Concess ion Rules.  
7. Power of Central Government to direct vesting rights in a Government company. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 4 to 6 (both inclusive), the Central Government may, if it 
is satisfied that a Government company is willing to c omply, or has complied, with such terms and 
conditions as that Government may think fit to impose, direct, by an order in writing, that the right, title 
and interest of an owner in relation to a coking coal mine or coke oven plant referred to, respectively , in 
section 4 or section 5 shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in the 
Government company either on the date of publication of the direction or on such earlier or later date (not 
being a date earlier than the appointed day) , as may  be specified in the direction.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of an owner in relation to a coking coal mine or coke oven plant 
vest in a Government company under sub -section ( 1), the Government company shall, on and from the 
date of such vesting, be deemed to have become — 
(a) the lessee in relation to such coking coal mine as if a mining lease in relation to such coking 
coal mine had been granted to the Government company under the Mineral Concession Rules, the 
period of such lease being t he entire period for which such lease could have been gra nted under those 
Rules;  
                                                           
1. Section  5 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 41 of 197 3, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
2. Ins. by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 3, for “as if a mining lease” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “being the entire period” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
5. The words “ , on the same terms and conditions on which the lease was held on the appointed day” omitted by s. 3, ibid., 
(w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  7 (b) the owner of the coke oven plant,  
and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such coking coal mine or coke 
oven plant shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and 
liabilities, respectiv ely, of the Government company.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 6 shall apply to a lease which vests in a Government 
company as they apply to a lease v ested in the Central Government and, reference therein to the Central 
Government shall be construed as reference to the Government company.  
8. Properties vesting in Central Government t o be freed from mortgages, etc. —(1) All property 
which vests in the Cen tral Government or in a Government company under this Chapter shall, by force of 
such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all other 
incumbrances affecting it and any attachment, injunction or decree or or der of any court restricting the 
use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(2) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government or in 
a Government company, and every person holding a ny charge, lien or other interest in or in relation to 
any such property shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to 
the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(3) For the removal of doubts , it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim payment of the mortgage money or ot her dues, in whole or in part, out 
of the amount specified in relation to such property in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the 
case may be, but no such mortgage, charge or lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any such 
property of the Central Government or the Government company.  
9. Central Government not to b e liable for prior liabilities. —(1) Every liability of the owner, 
agent, manager, or managing contractor of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant, in relation to any 
period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of such owner, agent, manager or managing 
contractor, as the case may be, and shall be enforceable against him and not against the Central 
Govern ment or the Government company.  
(2) For the removal of dou bts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) save as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Act, no claim for wages, bonus, royalty, rate, 
rent, taxes, provident fund, pension, gratuity or any other dues in relation to a coking coal mine or 
coke oven plant in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable against the 
Central Govern ment or the Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to any coking 
coal mine or coke oven plant passed a fter the appointed day, but in relation to any matter, claim or 
dispute which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the 
Government company;  
(c) no liability for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being in force, made 
before the appointed day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the Government 
company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
10. Payment of amount to owners of coking coal mines. — 1[(1)] The owner of every coking coal 
mine or  group of coking coal mines specified in the second column of the First Schedule, shall be given 
by the Central Government, in cash and in the manner specified in section 21, for vesting in it, under 
section 4, the right, title and interest of the owner in  relation to such coking coal mine or group of coking 
coal mines, an amount equal to the amount specified against it in the corresponding entry in the fifth 
column of the said Schedule.  
                                                           
1. Section  10 renumbered as sub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 57 of 1986, s. 4  (w.e.f. 1-5-1972).  8 1[(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the amount  specified in the fifth column of 
the First Schedule against any coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines specified in the second 
column of the said Schedule and required to be given by the Central Government to its owner under            
sub-section  (1), shall be deemed to include, and deemed always to have included, the amount required to 
be paid to such owner in respect of all coal in stock or other assets referred to in clause ( j) of section 3 on 
the date immediately before the appointed day and n o further amount shall be payable to the owner in 
respect of su ch coal or other assets.]  
11. Payment of amount  to owners of coke oven plants. —2[(1)] The owner of every coke oven plant 
specified in the second column of the Second Schedule, shall be given by  the Central Government, in 
cash and in the manner specified in section 21, for vesting in it, under section 5, the right, title and interest 
of the owner in relation to such coke oven plant, an amount equal to the amount specified against it in the 
corres ponding entry in the fif th column of the said Schedule.  
3[(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the amount specified in the fifth column of 
the Second Schedule against any coke oven plant specified in the second column of the said Sched ule and 
required to be given by the Central Government to its owner under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to 
include, and deemed always to have included, the amount required to be paid to such owner in respect of 
all coke in stock or other assets referred to in clause ( b) of section 3 on the date immediately before the 
appointed day and no further amount shall be payable to the owner in respect of such coke or other 
assets.]  
12. Payment of further amount. —(1) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the 
provisions of section 4 and section 5, there shall be given by the Central Government, in cash, to the 
owner of every coking coal mine specified in the First Schedule or the owner of every coke oven plant 
specified in the Second Schedule, an amount equal to the amount which would have been, but for the 
provisions of the said section 4 or section 5, as the case may be, payable to such owner under the Coking 
Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (64 of 1971), for the period commencing on the 1st day of 
May, 1972, and ending on the date of assent.  
(2) In addition to the amount specified in sub -section ( 1), there shall be given by the Central 
Government, in cash, to the owner of every coking coal mine specified in the First Schedule                    
and the owner of every coke oven plant specified in the Second Schedule, simple interest at the rate of 
four per cent. per annum on the amount specified against such owner in the corresponding entry in the 
fifth column of the First Schedule or the Secon d Schedule, as the case may be, for the period commencing 
on the date of assent and ending on the date of payment of such amount to the Commissioner.  
(3) The amounts referred to in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall be in addition to the amount 
specified in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the case may be.  
4[12A. Workers ’ dues to be paid out of the amount. —(1) Out of the amount payable — 
(a) under section 10 and section 12 to the owner of every coking coal mine  or group of coking 
coal mines;  
(b) under section 1 0 and section 12 to the owner of every coke oven plant,  
there shall be paid to every person employed by such owner, a sum equal to the amount of arrears due, on 
the appointe d day, to such employee, — 
(i) in relation to a provident  fund, pension fund, gratuity fund or any other fund established for 
the welfare of such employee; and  
(ii) as wages.  
(2) Every employee to whom the whole or any part of the arrears referred to in sub -section ( 1) is due 
shall file the proof of his claim to  the Commissioner within such time, after the commencement of the 
Coking and Non -Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 1973  (41 of 1973) , as the 
Commissioner may fix.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).    
2. Section  11 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 5 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).   
4. Ins. by Act 41 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1972).   9 (3) The provisions of section 23 shall, as far as may be, apply to the filing, admission or rejection of 
the proofs referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after the admission or rejection of the claims made under                            
sub-section ( 2), determine the total amount of the arrears referred to in sub -section ( 1), and shall, after 
such determination, deduct, in the first instance, out of the amount paid to him under section 21, a sum 
equal to th e total amount of such arrear s. 
(5) All sums deducted by the Commissioner under sub -section ( 4) shall, in accordance with such rules 
as may be made under this Act, be credited by the Commissioner to the relevant fund or be paid to the 
persons to whom such sums are due, and on such cre dit or payment, the liability of the owner of the 
coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines or coke oven plant, as the case may be, in respect of the 
amounts of arrears due as aforesaid, shall stand discharged.  
(6) The deductions made by the Commissio ner under sub -section ( 4) shall have priority over all other 
debts , whether secured or unsecured.  
(7) Save as otherwise provided in the foregoing sub -sections, every secured debt due from the owner 
of a coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines or coke oven plant, as the case may be, shall have 
priority over all other debts and shall be paid in accordance with the rights and inter ests of the secured 
creditors.]  
13. Income derived by the owners of coking coal mines and coke oven plants after the appo inted 
day to be refunded to the Central Government. —(1) Where, in pursuance of any decree, order or 
injunction made by a court, the Central Government or the Custodian appointed under the Coking Coal 
Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (64 of 1971), was  prevented from taking over the management 
of any coking coal mine or coke oven plant, the owner of such coking coal mine or coke oven plant shall 
render, within sixty days from the date of assent, to the Central Government or the Government company, 
as th e case may be, accounts, in relation to the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on 
the date  of assent, with regard to the — 
(a) assets or stores of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant acquired or sold by him during the 
said period;  
(b) coa l or coke sold or despatched during the said period;  
(c) income derived by him from the coking coal mine or coke ove n plant during the said period.  
(2) If, on examination of the accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1), any income is found to have been 
derived by the owner from the coking coal mine or coke oven plant during the period referred to in that 
sub-section, such income shall be set off against the amount specified in the First Schedule or the Second 
Schedule, as the case may be, against the name of  such owner, and the balance of such amount shall be 
paid to him.  
(3) If no account is rendered by the owner of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant within the period 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) or if the Central Government or the Government company has any reason to 
believe that the account rendered by such owner is incorrect or false in material particulars, the Central 
Government or the Government company may refer the matter to the Commissio ner and thereupon the 
Commissioner shall determine the income derived by the owner from the coking coal mine or coke oven 
plant during the period referred to in sub -section ( 1), and set off such income against the amount specified 
in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the case may be, against the name of such owner and pay 
the balance to such owner.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF COKING COAL MINES AND COKE OVEN PLANTS  
14. Management, etc., of coking coal mines and coke oven plants. —(1) The gener al 
superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and business of a coking coal mine or  
coke oven plant, the right, title and interest of an owner in relation to which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 4 or section 5, as the case may be, shall, — 10 (a) in the case of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant, in relation to which a direction has been 
made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, vest in the Government company 
specified in such direction, o r 
(b) in the case of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant, in relation to which no such direction has 
been made by the Central Government, vest in one or more Custodians appointed by the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 2), 
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian so appointed, as the case may be, 
shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as the owner of the coking coal mine or 
coke oven plant is  authorised to exercise and do.  
(2) The Centra l Government may appoint an individual or a Government company as the Custodian 
of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant in relation to which no direction has been made by it under          
sub-section ( 1) of section 7.  
15. Duty of persons in charge of management of coking coal mines or coke ov en plants to 
deliver all assets , etc.—(1) On the vesting of the management of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant 
in a Government company or on the appointment of a Custodian, all persons in charge of the managem ent 
of such coking coal mine or coke oven plant immediately before such vesting or appointment, shall be 
bound to deliver to the Government company or Custodian, as the case may be, all assets, books of 
account, registers or other documents in their custod y relating to the coki ng coal mine or coke oven plant , 
and any contract, whether express or implied, providing for the management of the coking coal mine or 
coke oven plant made before the appointed day between such persons and the owners of such coking co al 
mine or coke oven plant, shall be deemed to have terminated on the date on which the management of the 
coking coal mine or coke oven plant vests in the Government company or the Custodian so appointed.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such direction s as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Government company or Custodian as to its or his powers and duties and the 
Government company or Custodian may, also if it or he so desires, apply to the Central Government at 
any time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the coking coal mine or coke oven 
plant shall be conducted by it or him or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such 
management.  
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, as the case 
may be, in relation to which he or it is the Custodian, such remuneration as the Central Government may 
fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
16. Accounts and audit. —The Custodian of every coking coal mine or coke oven plant shall 
maintain the accounts of such mine or plant in such manner and under such conditions as may be 
prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF COKING COAL MINES AND COKE OVEN PLANTS  
1[17. Liability of officer or other employee of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant for transfer 
to any other coking coal mine or coke oven plant. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any other law for  the time being in force, the services of 
any officer or other employee employed in a coking coal mine or coke oven plant shall be liable to be 
transferred to any other coking coal mine or coke oven plant and such transfer shall not entitle such 
officer or  other employee to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force 
and no such claim shall be entertained by any court , tribunal or other authority.]  
18. Provident fund. —(1) Where a coking coal mine or coke oven plant has estab lished a provident 
fund for the benefit of its employees, the monies relatable to the employees, whose services have become 
transferred, by or under this Act, to the Central Government or a Government company, shall, out of the 
monies standing, on the appo inted day, to the credit of such provident fund, stand transferred to, and vest 
in, the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 6, for section 17 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).   11 (2) The monies which stand transferred, under sub -section ( 1), to the Central Government or a 
Governme nt company shall be dealt with by that Government or company, as the case may be, in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
19. Superannu ation, welfare and other funds. —Where a superannuation, welfare or other fund has 
been established for the benefit of the em ployees whose services stand transferred to the Central 
Government or a Government company, the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, by which such 
employees were employed, shall distribute the amount due to each such employee as if the employee had 
superan nuated, or his services with the coking coal mine or coke oven plant had terminated, on the day 
immediately preceding the specified date.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
20. Commission er of Payments to be appointed. —(1) For the purpose of disbursing th e amounts 
payable to the owner of each coking coal mine or coke oven plant, the Central Government shall appoint 
such person as it may think fit to b e the Commissioner of Payments.  
1[(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think  fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons to also 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act, and different persons may be 
authorised to exerc ise different powers.  
(2A) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any powers may exercise those powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been conferred on that person directly by this 
Act and not by way of authorisa tion.]  
(3) The salaries an d allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
21. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. —(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from th e specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
owner of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant, a sum equal to the sum specified against the coking coal 
mine or coke oven plant, as the case may be, in the First Schedule or the Secon d Schedule together with 
the amount and interest, if any, referred to in section 12.  
(2) In addition to the sum referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall pay, in c ash, to 
the Commissioner, such amount as may become due to the owner of a coking coal mine or coke oven 
plant in relation to the period during which the management of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant 
remained ves ted in the Central Government 2[and simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum 
on such amount for the period commencing on the 1st day of April, 1973 and ending on the date of 
payment of such amount to  the Commissioner ]. 
(3) The Commissioner shall open an  d operate an account in a scheduled bank in respect of each 
cokin g coal mine or coke oven plant.  
(4) Every amount paid to the Commissioner shall be deposited to the credit of the account, referred to 
in sub -section ( 3), of the coking coal mine or coke oven plan t to which the payment relates.  
(5) Interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of  the account referred to in sub -section ( 3) 
shall enure to the benefit of the owner of the coking coal mine or coke o ven plant, as the case may be 
2[and shall also be payable to the Commissioner in addition to the sum r eferred to in sub -section ( 1).] 
(6) References in this section to the owner of a coking coal mine shall, in relation to a group of 
coking coal mines specified in the First Schedule, be construed as references to the owner of that group of 
coking coal mines.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 3, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  12 22. Statement of accounts in relation to the period of management by the Central Government,             
etc.—(1) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, shall cause the books 
in relation to each coking coal mine or coke oven plant, the management of which has vested in it under 
the Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (64 of 1971) , to be closed and balanced as on 
the 30th day of April, 1972, and shall cause a statement of accounts, as on that day, to be prepared,  within 
such time, in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, in relation to each such mine or plant in 
respect of the transactions effected by it during the period for which the management of such coking coal 
mine or coke ov en plant remained ve sted in it:  
Provided that where two or more coking coal mines or coke oven plants were owned, before the 
commencement of this Act, by the same owner, a consolidated statement of accounts may be prepared for 
all the coking coal mines or coke o ven plants own ed by such owner.  
(2) All amounts received by the Central Government or the Government company after the closure of 
such accounts shall, where such amounts relate to transactions effected before the appointed day, be 
included in the said statement of accounts in respect of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant to which 
the said receipt relates.  
(3) The Central Government or the Government company in which the right, title and interest of the 
coking coal mine or coke oven plant stands vested shall be entitled to receive, up to the specified date, to 
the exclusion of all other persons, any money, due to the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, as the case 
may be, realised after the appointed day notwithstanding that the realisations pertain to a period prior to 
the appointed day:  
Provided that where such realisations have not been included in the statement of accounts as on the 
30th day of April, 1972, a supplementary statement of accounts shall be prepared and furnished, at such 
intervals as may be pres cribed, by the Central Government or the Government company to the owner of 
the coking coal mine or the coke oven plant, as the case may be.  
1[(4) The liabilities of the coking coal mine or the coke ove n plant (not being liabilities arising out of 
advances  made by the Central Government or the Government company), which could not be discharged 
by the appointed day, may be discharged by the Central Government or the Government company up to 
the specified date out of the realisations effected before or after the appointed day or out of advances or 
borrowings made up to the specified date and every payment so made shall be included in the statement 
of accounts as on the date immediately before the appointed day indicating therein the period in relation 
to which  the payments were made and the payments so made shall not be c alled in question in any court:  
Provided that the liabilities in relation to the period prior to the appointed day, which have not been 
discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities of the owner of the coking coal mine or 
the coke oven plant, as the case may be.]  
(5) A copy of each statement of accounts prepared under this section shall be delivered by the Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, t o the Commissioner and also to the 
owner:  
Provided that where the number of owners is more than one, only one copy of the statement of 
accounts shall be given to the owners for the benefit of all of them.  
(6) The statement of accounts prepared under this s ection shall be audited by a person                          
who is qualified to be appointed as an auditor of a company under section 226 of the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) and the auditor so appointed shall receive, from the funds of the coking coal mine or 
coke oven plant, as the case may be, such remuneration as the Central Government may fix.  
(7) The audit of the statement of accounts shall be conducted in such manner as the  Central 
Government may direct.  
2[(8) The statement of accounts audited und er sub -section ( 6) shall, unless the contrary is proved, be 
conclusive proof in respect o f every matter entered therein.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 8, for sub -section (4) (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
2. Ins. by  s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  13 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “statement of accounts ” means a statement in the 
form of receipts and payments, and does not include any statement that may be prepared as a result of the 
closing and balancing of the books for the preparation of the profit and loss account and balance -sheet or 
any statement pre pared in accordance with the normal commercial practice.]  
1[22A. Validation of certain collections. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, as 
amended by section 2 of the Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978  (22 of 1978) , any 
money collected by the Central Government or the Government company during the period commencing 
on the appointed day and ending with the date specified under sub -section ( 3) of section 22 shall be 
deemed to have been validly collected by the Central Gover nment or the Government company, as the 
case may be, and any such money shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of section 22.  
(2) Any money collected as aforesaid shall not be called in question in any court of law.]  
23. Claims to be made to th e Commissioner. —(1) Every person having a claim against the owner 
of a coking coal mine or coke oven plant shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty  
days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the c laimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may, on the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days, entertain the claim within a further period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
2[(1A) Witho ut prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), claims in relation to a provident fund, 
pension fund, gratuity fund or any other fund established for the welfare of the persons employed by the 
owner of a coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines or  a coke oven plant may be filed on behalf of 
the persons so employed by the Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner appointed by the Central 
Government under section 3C of the Coal Mines Provident Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes 
Act, 1948 (46 of 1948 ); 3[and claims in relation to any other matter may be filed on behalf of all or any of 
the persons so employed or any group of such persons, by any Trade Union, registered under the Trade 
Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926), or, where no such claim has been filed by any Trade Union, by the Chief 
Labour Commissioner (Central) appointed by the Central Government or any officer subordinate to him;]  
and the claims so made shall be deemed to have been made by the persons having a claim against the 
owner of a cokin g coal mine or group of coking coal mines or a coke oven plant, as the case may be:  
Provided that no such claim shall be made by the Coal Mine s Provident Fund Commissioner 3[or the 
Trade Union or the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or any officer subor dinate to him,] in relation 
to a person who has already made a claim under sub -section ( 1).] 
4[(1AA) Where any claim, not being a claim which was time -barred on the 17th day of October, 1971, 
was preferred under sub -section ( 1) within the period specified therefor and was rejected merely on the 
ground that such claim was time -barred, such claim shall be deemed not to have been rejected and the 
Commissioner shall restore on his file such claim and shall deal with it in the manner specified in this 
section.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, there shall be 
paid in priority to all other unsecured debts, not being the amounts advanced by the Central Government 
or the Custodian appointed under the Coking Coal Min es (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (64 of 1971), 
for the management of the coking coal mine or coke ov en plant, as the case may be, — 
(a) all wages or salary (including wages payable for time or piece work and salary earned wholly 
or in part by way of comm ission) of any employee, in respect of services rendered to the coking coal 
mine or coke oven plant, as the case may be, and any compensation payable to any workman under 
any provisions of Chapter VA of the Industrial D isputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947);  
5*   *    *    *    * 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 1973, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).   
5. Clause ( b) omitted by Act 41 of 1973, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  14 (c) all amounts due in respect of any compensation or liability for compensation under the 
Workmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923) in respect of the death or disablement of any 
employee of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant unless such mine or plant has, under such a 
contract with insurers as is mentioned in section 15 of the said Act, rights capable of being transferred 
to, and vested in, the workmen;  
1[(d) all sums deducted by the employer from the salary or wages of any workman or other 
employee of the coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines or coke oven plant, as the case may 
be, for  credit to any provident fund, or any other fund established for the welfare of such workmen or 
other employees but not deposited to the credit of the said fund;]  
(e) all sum s due to the State Government 2[including royalty, rent and dead rent .] 
(3) The de bts specified in sub -section ( 2) shall rank equally among themselves and be paid in full, 
unless the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions and be 
paid accordingly.  
(4) The Commissioner shall fix a certain  date on or before which every claimant shall file the proof of 
his claim or be excluded from the benefit of the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(5) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of the daily newspaper in the English language and one issue of such daily newspaper in the 
regional language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall c all upon the 
claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the 
advertisement.  
(6) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(7) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the owner of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, as the case may be, an opportunity of 
refuting the clai m and after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, in writing admit 
or reject  the claim in whole or in part.  
(8) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his fu nctions including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while t rying a suit, in respect of t he following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any wit ness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material  object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the r eception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(9) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal  Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Crimina l 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) . 
3[(9A) The Commissio ner may, on receipt of a claim, — 
(a) elect to settle the claim himself; or  
(b) transfer the claim for settlement to a person authorised in this behalf under su b-section ( 2) of 
section 20; or  
(c) withdraw the claim from the person referred to in clause ( b) and either settle the claim   
himself or transfer it for disposal to any other person who has been authorised in this behalf under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 20.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1973 , s. 5, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “as royalty, rent or dead rent, as the case may be” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).  15 (10) 1[A claimant or owner who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an 
appeal, within a period of sixty days from the date  of the decision,] to the principal civil court of original 
jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, a s the 
case may be, is situated:  
2[Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court i s appointed to be the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court for the State in which the coking coal mine or coke oven plant, as 
the case may be, is situated, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of 
that High Court: ] 
3[Provided further that any appeal which has not been preferred before the date on which the Coal 
Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978 (22 of 1978), receives the assent of the President, 
shall be preferred within a period of sixty days from such date.]  
4[23A. Application of section s 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act. —The provisions of sections 5 and 
12 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals under section 23.]  
24. Disbursemen t of money by the  Commissioner. —Where the total amount of the claim admitted 
by the Commissioner does not exceed the total amount of the money credited to the account of a coking 
coal mine or coke oven plant, every such admitted claim shall rank equally among themselves an d be paid 
in full, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner, but where such amount is insufficient to meet in 
full the total amount of the admitted claims, every such claim shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly.  
5[24A. Interes t on admitted claims. —Notwithstanding any award, decree or order of any court, 
tribunal or other authority, passed before the appointed day, in relation to any coking coal mine or coke 
oven plant, where any amount is payable in respect of a claim admitted under this Act, the interest 
payable on such amount for any period after the appointed day shall be at such rate not exceeding the rate 
of interest accruing on any amount deposited by the Commissioner under section 21.]  
6[25. Recovery of excess payments ma de by Central Govern ment or Custodian. —Any amount in 
excess of payments over receipts in the statement of accounts prepared under section 22 shall be deemed 
to be an amount advanced by the Central Government or the Custodian, as the case may be, for the 
management of a coking coal mine or a coke oven plant during the period in which the management of 
such mine or plant remained vested in the Central Government and the Central Government may make a 
claim to the Commissioner for such excess payment and such c laim shall have priority over the claims of 
all other unsecured creditors of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant.  
Explanation .—In this section, “ Custodian ” means the Custodian appointed under the Coking Coal 
Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971  (64 of 1971) .] 
7[25A. Notice to owners of coking coal mines or coke oven plants  and managing contractors, 
etc.—(1) After meeting the liabilities of persons whose claims have been admitted under this Act, the 
Commissioner shall notify, in such manner as he  may think fit, the amount of money available with him 
and specify in such notification a date within which the owners of the coking coal mines or coke oven 
plants, the managing contractors and the owners of any machinery, equipment or other property which  
has vested in the Central Government or a Government company under this Act and which does not 
belong to the owners of the coking coal mines or coke oven plant s may apply to him for payment.  
(2) Where any application is made under sub -section ( 1), the Com missioner shall, after satisfying 
himself as to the right of the applicant to receive the whole or any part of the amount, pay the amount to 
the person concerned and in the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right of the person to 
receive th e whole or any part of the amount, the Commissioner shall deal with the application in the 
manner specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 26.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978 , s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
2. The proviso ins. by Act 41 of 1973, s. 5  (w.e.f. 1-5-1972). 
3. The proviso i ns. by Act 22 of 1978 , s. 5  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
5. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).  
6. Subs. by Act 5 7 of 1986, s. 9, for section 25  (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).   
7. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978 , s. 8 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  16 26. Disputes how to be dealt with. —(1) In the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right 
of a person  to receive the whole or any part of the amount referred to in sections 10, 11 and 12, the 
Commissioner shall refer the matter to the court for a decision, and shall make the disbursements in 
accordance with the decision of the court.  
(2) In relation to a coking coal mine or coke oven plant, the operations of which were, immediately 
before the 17th day of October, 1971 under the control of a managing contractor, the amount specified in 
the First Schedule against such coking coal mine or i n the Second Schedule against such coke oven plant 
shall be apportioned between the owner of the coking coal mine or coke oven plant and such managing 
contractor in such proportions as may be agreed upon by or between the owner and such managing 
contractor , and in the event of there being no such agreement, in such proportions as may be determined 
by the court.  
1[(3) Where the amount specified in the fifth column of the First Schedule is relatable to a group of 
coking coal mines, the Commissioner shall have  power to apportion such amount among the owners of 
such group, and in making such apportionment, the Commissioner shall have regard to the highest annual 
production in the coking coal mine during the three years immediatel y preceding the appointed day.]  
Explanation .—In this section, “court ”, in relation to a coking coal mine or coke oven plant, means the 
principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the coking coal 
mine or coke oven plant is situated.  
27. Undi sbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general revenue account. —Any 
money paid to the Commissioner 2[which remains undisbursed or unclaimed for a period of three years 
from the day on which the last order for disbursement was made] shall be tr ansferred by the 
Commissioner to the general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money so 
transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall 
be dealt with as if such transfer ha d not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being 
treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Effect of Act on other laws. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
29. Contracts cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government. —(1) Every 
contract entered into by the owner or occupier of any coking coal mine or coke oven plant for any service, 
sale or supply before the appointed day shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and twenty days 
from the date of assent, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, 
ratified, in writing, by the Central Government and in ratifying such contract the Central Government 
may make such alterations or modificatio ns therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government shall not omit to ratify a contract unless it is satisfied that such 
contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of the 
cokin g coal mine or co ke oven plant.  
(2) The Central Government shall not omit to ratify a contract or make any alteration or modification 
therein except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing it s reasons for refusal to ratify the contract.  
30. Penalties. —Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control of any property forming part of the undertaking of 
any coking coal mine or coke oven plant referred to in the First Schedule or t he Second Schedule, as 
the case may be, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Gover nment or Government 
company, or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1972).   
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 9, for “which remains undisbursed or unclaimed after such payment for a period of three 
years” (w.e.f. 29 -3-1976).  17 (b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of the undertaking of 
any coking coal mine or coke oven plant referred to in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as 
the case may be, or wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or any person 
specified by that Government, any document relating to such coking coal mine or coke oven plant, 
which may be in his possession, custody or control, or fails to deliver to the Custodian any assets, 
books of account, registers or other documents in his custody relating to the coking coal mine or coke 
oven plant in respect of which a Custodi an has been appointed, or  
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property of any coking coal mine or coke oven plant or 
prefers any claim under this Act in relation to such mine or plant, which he knows or has reasonable 
cause to believe to be false or gro ssly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
31. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due dil igence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any direc tor, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
32. Mining companies not to be wound up by court. —No proceeding for the w inding up of a 
mining company, the right, title and interest in relation to the coking coal mine or coke oven plant owned 
by which have vested in the Central Government or in a Government company under this Act or for the 
appointment of a receiver in respe ct of such business, shall lie in any court except with the consent of the 
Central Government.  
33. Delegation of powers. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act may also be exer cised by any person or persons as may be  
specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Centr al Government.  
34. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the coking coal mines or coke oven plants shall be managed by a 
Government company or a Custodian;  
(b) the manner in which provident fund monies referred to in section 18 shall be dealt with ; 
(c) the form and manner in which the statement of accounts referred to in section 22 shall be 
prepared;  18 (d) any other matter in relation to which such rule is required to be, or may be, made.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act s hall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
sessi on immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or b e of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
35. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of t his Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
assent.  
36. Coking coal mines to  which the Act shall not apply. —Nothing in this Act shal l apply to any 
coking coal mine — 
(a) owned or managed by a Government company or corporation own ed or controlled by 
Government;  
(b) owned or managed by a company engaged in t he pro duction of iron or steel:  
Provided that this section shall not extend to such mine or part thereof which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, is in excess of the requirements for the production of iron and steel by that 
company.  19 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 4 and 10)  
 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of the 
owners of  the mine  Amount  
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
1. Dhori (EB -I) Post Office Bermo, District 
Hazaribagh . Ownership under dispute . 6,77,500  
2. Kalyani Seleted  
Kargali (E B-2) Post Office Pichri, District 
Hazaribagh.  Gouri Shanker and Others, Post 
Office Bermo, Hazaribagh.  7,19,000  
3. Khas Dhori  
(EB-3) Post Office Pichri, District 
Hazaribagh . Khas Dhori Colliery Company, 
Post Office Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad . 4,07,000  
4. Pipradih (EB -4) Post Office Gomia, District 
Hazaribagh . Pacific Coal Company, Post 
Office Gomia, District 
Hazaribagh.  14,13,500  
5. Pichri (EB -5) Post Office Pichri District 
Hazaribagh . Pichri Colliery Company 
Private Limited Post Office 
Bermo, Hazaribagh . 3,21,800  
6. Selected Dhori  
(EB-6) Post Office Bermo, District 
Hazaribagh . Selected Dhori Colliery, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad . 7,43,500  
7. Turiyo (EB -7) Post Office Turiyo, District 
Hazaribagh.  Bhubaneswar Singh and 
Shivdayal Rathi, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  5,74,000  
8. Tarmi (EB -8) Post Office Turiyo , District 
Hazaribagh . Tarmi Colliery Company,  
Industrial Bank Building , Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad . 8,30,500  
9. Albion (J -1) Post Office Karmatand  Albion Colliery Company, Post 
Office Karmatand, Dhanbad . 4,02,000  
10. Bokaro Jharia  
(J-2) Post Office Karmatand  Messrs. Agarwalla Brothers, 
Post Office Karmatand, 
Dhanbad . 4,64,000  
11. North Damuda  
(J-3) Post Office Nudkhurkee  Hazaribagh Coal Syndicate 
Private Limited, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  8,39,300  
12. Kessurgarh  (J-4) Post Office Nudkhurkee  Manbh oom Coal Syndicate 
Limited, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  27,50,000  
13. Madhuband  (J-5) Post Office Nudkhurkee    
14. Kankanee (J -67) Post Office Bansjora   
 
 
Oriental Coal Company  
Limited, 25, Brabourne Road, 
Calcutta -1.  
15. Pootkee  (J -69) Post Office Kusunda   
16. Amlabad (J -188) Post Office Bhowrah  1,97,99,500  
17. Bhowrah North  
(J-189)   
18. Bhowrah South  
 (J-190) Post Office Bhowrah   
19. Mohalbani  
(J-191)   
20. Begunia (R -6) Post Office Barakar, 
District Burdwan .   
21. Khas Benedih  
(J-6) Post Office Nawagarh  K. C. Mukherjee and Others, 
Post Office Hirapur, Dhanbad . 2,88,000  20  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of the owners of  
the mine  Amount 
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
22. Benedih (J -7) Post Office Nudkhurkee  Benedih Coal Concern, Post Office 
Katras, Dhanbad . 3,03,000  
23. Khas Ganeshpur  
(J-8) Post Office Nawagarh  Khas Ganeshpur Coal Mines 
Limited, 135, Canning Street, 
Calcutta . 37,500  
24. Ganeshpur (J -9) Post Office Nawagarh  Ganeshpur Coal Company Private 
Limited, Post Office Ganeshpur 
Dhanbad . 37,500  
25. Ashakuti 
Phularitand (J -10) Post Office Kharkharee  Ashakuti Coal Company Limited 
1/1, Rowland Road, Calcutta -20. 18,19,000  
26. Mohanpur (J -11) Post Office Kharkharee  Shrimati Par bati Devi , Post Office 
Kharkharee, Dhanbad . 5,000  
27. New Bansjora  
(J-12) Post Office Kharkharee  S. K. Sahana and Sons Private 
Limited, Post Office Kharkharee, 
Dhanbad . 1,49,000  
28. Khas Bhurangya  
(J-13). Post Office Mohuda  Khas Bhurangya Coal Company, 
Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad . 5,000  
29. Raneedih/ 
Pipratand (J -14) Post Office Mohuda  Shri K. L. Sablok, c/o Sudarsan 
Motors, Post Office Dhansar, 
Dhanbad.  35,000  
30. East Mucheraidih  
(J-15) Post Office Mohuda  East Mucheraidih Coal Company 
Limited, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad . 5,000  
31. New Huntodih  
(J-16) Post Office Mohuda  New Huntodih Coal Company 
Limited, 178, Mahatma Gandhi 
Road, Calcutta -1. 21,300  
32. Bhatdee (J -19) Post Office Mohuda  Bengal Bhatdee Coal Company 
Limited, 14, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta.  19,60,800  
33. Kharkharee (J -20) Post Office Kharkharee  Bharat Mining Corporation 
Limited, 91, Stephen House, 
Dalhousie Square East, Calcutta -1. 19,66,000  
34. New Sinidih  
(J-21) Post Office Kharkharee  Messrs. Bamandiha Coal Company 
Limited, 3, Synagogue Street, 
Calcutta -1. 39,500  
35. Dharmaband  
 (J-22) Post Office Katrasgarh  H. M. Barat and M. C. Barat, Post 
Office, Katrasgarh Dhanbad . 16,300  
36. New Dharmaband  
(J-23) Post Office Malkera  Sethia Mining and Manufacturing 
Company Limited , 4, Bakul Bagan 
Road, Calcutta.  12,05,000  
37. Sinidih (J -25) Post Office Katrasgarh  Sinidih Colliery Concern Private 
Limited, Post Office Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad.  5,13,500  
38. Tundoo Khas  
(J-26) Post Office Tundoo  J. P. Lala & Sons Collieries Private 
Limited, Post Box No. 76, Dhanbad . 4,79,000  
39. Bilbera (J -27) Post Office Katrasgarh  B. N. Mondal and Company 22, 
Canning Street, Culcutta . 3,93,500  
40. Jealgora  
Govindpur (J -28) Post Office Sonardih  Jealgora Govindpur Colliery 
Company Limited , Post Office 
Sonardih, Dhanbad . 2,90,500  21  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of the 
owners of  the mine  Amount  
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
41. South Govindpur  
(J-29) Post Office Katrasgarh  H.I. Pathak, Post Office   
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad . 4,22,500  
42. Diamond Tettuliya  
(J-30) Post Office  Sonardih  Bihar Collieries Limited, 
District  Dhanbad . 5,000  
43. Central Tetturya  
(J-31) Post Office Malkera  Sri Tarapada Lodha & Others, 
Post Office Katrasgarh, District 
Dhanbad . 7,500  
44. New Tentulia  
(J-32) Post Office Malkera  Tentulia Khas Colliery 
Company Limited, 25, 
Brabourne Road, Calcutta  16,86,500  
45. Central Kooridih  
Sonardih (J -33) Post Office Katrasgarh  Central Kooridih Colliery 
Company,  Post Office 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad . 12,23,500  
46. New Gobindpur (J -34) Post Office  Sonardih  New Gobindpur Coal 
Company   Limited, 33, 
Canning Street, Calcutta -1. 13,92,300  
47. Khas Mehtadih (J -35) Post Office Katrasgarh  Messrs.  Khas Mehtadih 
Colliery Company, Post Office 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad . 13,80,000  
48. Agardih (J -36) Post Office Katrasgarh  Agardih Colliery Company, 
Post Office Katrasgarh, District 
Dhanbad . 3,78, 800 
49. Katras Choitodih  
(J-37) Post Office  Katrasgarh   
Barrakar Coal Company 
Limited , Chartered Bank 
Building, Calcutta -1. 1,68,56,000  
  
50. Mudidih (J -62)    Post Office  Sijua   
51. Badruchuk (J -63)  
52.  Loyabad (J -68)  Post Office   Bansjora   
53.  Lakurka (J -38)    Post Office  Katrasgarh  Lakurka Coal  Company 
Limited,  3,  Synagogue Street, 
Calcutta . 7,27,000   
54. Koiludih (J -39)  
 
Post Office Katrasgarh  
 Messrs.  East Katras Colliery 
Company Private Limited, 
Post Office Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad . 20,08,000    
55. East Katras  (J-41)   
56. Khas Govindpur (J-40) Post Office Katrasgarh  Khas Govindpur Coal Company 
Private Limited, Post  Office 
Katrasgarh,  Dhanbad . 2,65,000  
57. East Salanpur (J -42)  
Post Office,  Katrasgarh  East Salanpur Colliery      
Company, Post Office, 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad .  
58. Joint Salanpur (J -43) 2,97,500   
59. Khas Salanpur (J -44)  
60. North Salanpur (J -45)   Post Office  Katrasgarh  Sahai Brothers (Receiver H.S.  
Sahai) , Post Office  Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad . 1,00,000   
61. Selected Salanpur  
(J-46). Post Office  Katrasgarh   Selected Salanpur  Colliery 
Company, Post Office,  
Katrasgarh,  Dhanbad . 5,000    
     22  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of the owners of  
the mine  Amount 
(in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
62. Central Salanpur  
(J-47)   Post Office  Katrasgarh  Central Salanpur Coal Concern, 
Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad . 1,84,500  
63.  Lakurka Khas  
(J-48)                         Post Office Katrasgarh  Bharat ’s Debutter Estate, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad . 1,96,800  
64 Salanpur (J-49)  
Post Office  Katrasgarh  M/s. New Lakurka Colliery 
Company and Shrimati Sarojini 
Devi , Post Office Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad .  
65.  New Lakurka  
(J-50)  4,14,500  
66. National Angarpathra  
(J-135)                     Post Office  Katrasgarh   National Coal  Company Private   
Limited, 48/1, Ram  Tarun Bose  
Lane Calcutta -1. 2,89,000  
67. Union Angarpathra  
(J-52)      Post Office  Sijua    Union Coal Company Limited, 
Biplabi Rash Behari Basu 
Road,  Calcutta -1. 4,51,000  
68. Gaslitam (J -53)        Post Office  Sijua    New Manbhum Coal Company, 
138,      Biplabi Rash Behari Basu 
Road,   Calcutta -1. 12,42,000  
69. Ramkanali (J -54)    Post Office  Katrasgarh  Bijali Kanti Roy, Keshalpur 
House,  Post Office Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad . 4,70,000  
70. Trigunait (J -55)  
 
 
 
Post Office Katrasgarh   
 
 
East Angarpathra Colliery 
Company Limited, Post Office 
 Katrasgarh, Dhanbad .  
71. Kanta pahari (J -56)  
72. Khas Angarpathra  
(J-157)  
16,20,000  
73. Jharia Khas (J -58)  
74. East Angarpathra  
(J-59)  
75. Mahabir Angarpathra  
(J-60)  
76.  Diamond 
Angarpathra  (J-61) Post Office  Katrasgarh  Diamond Angarpathra Colliery  
Company,  Post Office Katrasgarh , 
Dhanbad . 5,000  
77. Jogta (J -64)               Post Office Sijua  Jogta Coal Company Limited, Post 
Office Sijua, Dhanbad . 6,82,000  
78. Sendra (J -65)            Post Office Bansjora  Messrs.Hind Shippers Limited, 
135, Biplabi Rash Behari Basu 
Road  Calcutta -1. 9,99,000  
79. Sendra Banslora -
Gopal  Gararia (J -66)  
 
Post Office Bansjora    
80. North Ekra (J -78)  Messrs.Sendra Bansjora Colliery 
Company Private   Limited ,  135, 
Canning Street, Calcutta -1. 18,29,000  
81. Gararia (J -79)   
82. Gopalichuck (West)  
(J-70)  
Post Office  Kusunda  Central Kirkend 
Coal  Company  Limited, 91, 
Stephen House,   Dalhousie Square 
East, Calcutta -1.  
6,94,000   
83. Central Kirkend (J -71 
 23  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of the 
owners of  the mine  Amount 
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
84. Motiram ’s Kirkend  
(J-72) Post Office Kusunda  Motiram Roshanlal Coal 
Company  Private Limited, 
Kusunda, Dhanbad . 48,800  
85.  Khas Kirkend (J -73) Post Office  Kusunda  Phuramal Agarwal, Post 
Office   Dhansar, Dhanbad .  18,800  
86. Kirkend (J -74)   
Post Office  Kusunda  New Marine Coal Company 
(Bengal) Limited, III, 
Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta.   
87. New Marine (J -75) 16,24,000  
88. Bansdeopur (J -77) Post Office Kusunda  New Bansdeopur Coal 
Company  Limited, 28 -B, Netaji 
Subhas Road , Calcutta .  4,44,500  
89.  Central Gararia (J -80)  Post Office  Bansjora  Central Gararia Colliery 
Company   Private Limited, Post 
Office Bansjora, Dhanbad . 58,800  
90. Gararia (J -81) Post Office Bansjora   Tikmani and Company, Post 
Office  Bansjora, Dhanbad . 1,34,000  
91. Chhota Bowa (J -82)  Post Office  Bansjora  Chhota Bowa Colliery 
Company  Limited, Post Office 
Bansjora,  Dhanbad . 3,27,500  
92. Murulidih (J -17) Post Office  Mohuda   
Kalyanji Mavji and 
Company,  14, Netaji Subhas 
Road,  Calcutta -1.  
 
21,33,000  93. West Bhuggatdih (J -95) Post Office  Jharia  
94. Industry (J -96) Post Office  Dhansar  
95. West Ena (J -97) Post Office  Dhansar   
96. Murulidih 20 and 21 
Pits (J-18) Post Office  Mohuda   
Bengal Coal Company   Limited, 
8, Clive Row, Calcutta -1.  
49,49,000  
97. Chanch (R -3) Post Office Chirkunda, 
District Dhanbad  
98. Maheshpur (J -24) Post Office Katrasgarh  Messrs.Sahu Minerals 
and  Properties Limited, A -3, 
Prithviraj   Road, Jaipur  .  29,68,000   
99.  Ekra Khas (J -76) Post Office Kusunda  
100 . Busseriya (J -83)  
Post Office  Kusunda    
101 . Busseriya North and 
Sought (J -85) Busseriya Coal Company  
(Private) Limited, 13, Radha 
Bazar Land, Calcutta -1. 4,29,500  
102 . East Ekra (J -84)  Post Office  Bansjora  East Ekra Coal Company, 
C/o.K.Worah, Jora 
Bangalow,  Dhanbad .  11,300  
103 . North Busseriya  
(J-86) Post Office  Bansjora  North Busseriya Colliery 
Company , Post Office Bansjora, 
Dhanbad.  1,75,300  
104 . Surendra East Loyabad 
(J-87) Post Office Kirkend  Surendra East Loyabad 
Colliery  Company, Post Office 
Jharia,     Dhanbad . 1,24,500  
105 . Gondudih (J -88)   Post Office  Kusunda  Central Alkusa Colliery 
Company, Post Office Kusunda, 
Dhanbad . 3,57,000  
106 . Dhariajoba (J -89) Post Office  Kirkend   M/s.H.D.  Agarwalla & Sons, 
Post Office Jharia, Bihar . 13,65,000  
107 . West Godhur (J -90) Post Office Kusunda  
108 . Godhur (J -91) Post Office   Kusunda  Godhur Colliery Company, 
Post Office Kusunda, Dhanbad .  33,07,000  
109 . Pure Kustore (J -92) Post Office Kusunda  Pure Kustore Colliery 
Company,   Post Office  
Kusunda, Dhanbad . 19,27,500  
 24  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of the 
owners  of  the mine  Amount 
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
110 . Nayadee Kusunda  
(J-93) Post Office Kusunda  Kusunda Nayadee Colliery 
Company (Private) Limited, 
Post Office Kusunda, Dhanbad . 27,42,000  
111 . Kusunda (J -94)    Post Office  Kusunda  Not available . 5,000  
112 . Kendwadih (J -98)  Post Office Kusunda    
 
East India Coal Company Ltd, 
Post Office Jealgora, Dhanbad .  
113 . South Bulliary (J -101) Post Office Kusunda    
114 . Jealgora (J -184)  
 
Post Office Jealgora   93,28,500  
115 . Bararee Joyarampur (J -
168)  
116 . Bararee (J -185)   
117 .  Balihari C.T.C.(J -99) Post Office  Kusunda   Not available . 22,500  
118 . Kutchi Balihari (J -100) Post Office  Kusunda  Balihari Collier y Company 
Limited, 14, Netaji Subhash 
Road, Calcutta -1. 6,53,000  
119 . Bhagaband (J -102) Post Office  Bhagaband  The Borrea Coal Company 
Limited  Chartered Bank 
Building , Calcutta -1. 32,58,000  
120 . Gonshadih (J -104) Post Office  Kusunda         
        Sri Biswanath Roy, Keshalpur 
House, Post Office Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad . 12,90,500  
121 . Kendwadih (J-103)  
 
Post Office  Bhaga    
98,800  122 . Bhutgoria (J -109) Equitable Coal Company 
Limited, 1/2, Lord Sinha Road, 
Calcutta -16. 
123 . Hurriladih (J -110) Post Office Kustore    
124 .  Alkusa South (J -105) Post Office Kustore     
Raneegunge Coal Association 
 Limited, 3A, Chowringhee 
Place,   Calcutta -1.  
91,95,000  125 .  Kustore (J -106)           Post Office  Kustore   
126 .  Burragarh (J -107)  
Post Office  Jharia   
127 . Pure Burragarh (J -108)    
128 . Simlabahal (J -111)  Post Office  Jharia  Shri P.  Roy, Director and 
nominated owner, Bhalgora Coal 
Company, 3, Synagogue Street, 
Calcutta -1. 4,93,000  
129 . Bhuggatdih  
 (J-112)                          Post Office Dhansar    Bengal Nagpur Coal Company, 
5, Synagogue Street, Calcutta -1. 6,47,000  
130 . Ena (J -113) Post Office  Dhansar    North West Coal Company 
Limited,  5, Synagogue Street, 
Calcutta -1. 9,77,500  
131 . East Bhalgora (J -114)      
132 . Khas Jharia (J -115)     
133 . East Ena (J -116)    
134 . East Bhuggatdih  
(J-117)    
135 . Selected Khas Jharia  
(J-118) Post Office Jharia  East Bhuggatdih Colliery 
Company (Private) Limited, Post 
Office  Jharia, Dhanbad . 17,08,000  
136 .  Selected Jharia  
(J-119)     
137 . Selected Model Jharia  
(J-121)    
138 . Bhalgora (J -120) Post Office  Jharia  Bhalgora Coal Company Limited, 
3, Synagogue Street, Calcutta -I. 4,86,000  25  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the 
mine  Name and address of the owners 
of  the mine  Amount 
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
139 . New Khas Jharia   
(J-122)  
Post Office  Jharia   
Fularibad Colliery Company , 
Post   Office Jharia, Dhanbad.   
15,000  
140 . Fularibad (J -123)  
141 . Sonalibad (J -138)  
142 .  Rajapur (J -125)    Post Office  Jharia  Rajapur Colliery Company 
Limit ed, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  2,39,000  
143 . Khas Bhuggatdih (J -
126) Post Office  Jharia     Khas Bhuggatdih Colliery 
Company, Post Office Jharia 
Dhanbad . 2,67,000  
144 . New Pure Jharia  
(J-124)  
Post Office Jharia   
D.D.Thacker and Sons, Dhanbad.   
10,000  
145 . Pure Jharia (J -127)   
146 . K.P.Dobari (J-128) Post Office Jharia  K.P. Dobari Post Office Jharia .  54,300  
147 .  South Jharia (J -129)  
Post Office  Jharia   
J.K. Banerjee and Others, Post 
Box  No.46, Hirapur, District 
Dhanbad .  
1,45,800  
148 .  Model Jharia (J -133)  
149 . East Pure Jharia (J-130) Post Office  Jharia      Owner not known . 5,000  
150 . Dobari (J -131)  Post Office Jharia  R.N.Bagchi and Brothers, 5/8 
Middle Row, Calcutta . 3,42,300  
151 . East Model Jharia (J -132)  Post Office  Jharia   Not available . 5,000  
152 . Golden Jharia (J -134)  Post Office Jharia  Khora Ramji, Post Office 
Jharia,  Dhanbad . 5,000  
153 . Fatehpur  (J -135)   Post Office  Jharia  G.K.Dossa and Company, 
Post  Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  5,000  
154 .  Pure Durgapur (J -136) Post Office  Jharia   Pure  Durgapur Colliery 
Company  Private Limited, Post 
Office Jharia , Dhanbad . 5,000  
155 . Khas Jharia (J -137)     Post Office  Jharia      Fularibad Colliery Company, 
Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad . 5,000  
156 . Ganhoodih (J -139)           Post Office Jharia  S.B.Banerjee and Sons, Post  Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad . 27,52,000  
157 .  East Jharia (J -140) Post Office Jharia  Not available . 5,000  
158 . K. P. Kujama (J -141)   
Post Office Jharia  Jayantilal Keshavji Bale, Dave 
House, Joraphatak , Post Office 
Dhansar, Dhanbad.  96,800  
159 . Kujama (J-142)  
160 . North Kujama (J -143) Post Office  Jharia  Ganji Dossa and Company, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad  63,500  
161 . Central Kujama (J -144)  
 
 
Post Office  Jharia    
162 . Nanji Kujama (J -145)  
Central Kujama Coal Concern, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad .  
163 . Pandebera (J -146) 5,26,000  
164 . Pure Kujama (J -147) 
165 .  Kujama Pandebera  
(J-148)     
166 .  South Kujama (J -149) Post Office  Jharia  Bagdigi Kujama Collieries 
Company (1946) Limited, 
Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad . 25,84,000  26  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of the owners 
of  the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
167 . Goluckdih (J -150) Post Office  Jharia  Goluckdih Colliery Company, 
22, Burtolla Street, Calcutta.  13,96,000  
168 . South Goluckdih  
(J-151)  
 
 
Post Office  Jharia  
                  Messrs.Khimji Dossa and Sons, 
Post   Office Jharia, Dhanbad .  8,78,500  
  and  
169 .  Central Jharia (J -152) South Goluckdih Coal 
Company,   Post Office, Jharia, 
Dhanbad .  
170 . Indian Jharia (J -153)   
171 . Lower Upper Jharia  
(J-154) Post Office  Jharia  Khimji Dossa & Sons, Post 
Office  Jharia, Dhanbad . 1,33,300  
172 . Central Tisra (J -155)  Post Office Jharia  Shri K.D.Singh, Post Office 
Jharia,  Post Box.No.111, 
Dhanbad . 2,71,000  
173 . Tisra (D.D) (J -156) Post Office Jharia            Dhanji Devji and Sons, Post 
Office,  Jharia, Dhanbad . 2,72,800  
174 . Tisra (Diamond)  
(J-157) Post Office  Jharia  The Diamond Coal Company 
Limited, Post Office 
Jharia,   Dhanbad . 2,56,000  
175 .  Tisra (A.G) (J-158) Post Office Jharia     Amarsing Gowamal & Sons, 
Post Box No.47, Jharia, Dhanbad  3,38,500  
176 . Sree Commercial  
(J-159)                          
Post Office South Tisra  Bengal Jharia Colliery 
Company  Private Limited, Post 
Office   South   Tisra, Dhanbad . 8,50,000  
177 . Bengal Jharia (J -160)   
178 . East India (J -161)  
 
Post Office 
Khas  Jeenagora .  
 
Khas Joyrampur Colliery 
Company,  Post Office Khas 
Jeenagora,  Dhanbad .  
179 . Khas Joyrampur  
(J-163)  
31,51,000  
180 . Lower Joyrampur  
(J-165) 
181 . Pure Joyrampur  
(J-169)  
182 . South Tisra  
(J-162) Post Office Tisra  South Tisra Colliery 
Company  Private Limited, Post 
Office Jharia,  Dhanbad.  6,68,000  
183 .  Kalithan Jeenagora     
(J-164) Post Office  Khas 
Jeenagora.  K.B.Seal and Sons, 28, 
Raja K.L.Goswami Street, Post 
Office  Serampur, Dis trict 
Hooghly (West  Bengal) . 4,42,500  
184 .  Kalithan Suratand       
(J-175) Post Office  Jharia   
185 .  New Jeenagora  
(J-166)      
 
 
 
Post Office  Khas 
Jeenagora.   
186 . Central Jeenagora  
(J-167)    
187 . North Bararee 
Jeenagora  (J-170)  Khas Jeenagora Colliery 
Limited,   135, Biplabi Rash 
Bihari, Basu  Road, Calcutta -1. 8,99,000  
188 . Khas Jeenagora (J -171)   
189 . Sri Jeenagora (J -173)    
190 . East Bararee (J -172) Post Office Khas  
Jeenagora . Jeenagora East Bararee 
Colliery   Company, Post Office 
Khas Jeenagora, Dhanbad . 3,05,500  27  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of the owners of  
the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
191 .  New Suratand (J -174)  Post Office  Jharia  Not Available  5,000  
192 .  Niluri Patra (J -176) Post Office  Jharia            Niluri Patra Coal Company 
Limited, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad . 5,000  
193 . North Burrakar Suratand 
(J-177)   
 
 
Post Office Jharia    
194 . North Burrakar Lodna  
(J-178) The New Standard Coal 
Company   (Private) Limited, 27, 
Palace Court, 1, Kyd Street, 
Calcutta -16. 1,12,500  
195 . Lodna (J -179)    
196 . Standard (J -180) Post Offic  e Bhaga  Standard Coal Company, Post 
Office Bhaga, Dhanbad . 24,800  
197 .  Lodna (J-181)  
Post Office Jharia   
Lodna Colliery Company (1920) 
Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta .  
198 .  Madhuban Lodna  
(J-182)  81,80,800  
199 . Bagdigi (J -183)  
200 . Bhulanbararee (J -186)  Post Office  Patherdih  Bhulanbararee Coal Company, 
4, Clive Row, Calcutta -1 .  15,13,300  
201 . Lachmi (J -187)  Post Office Patherdih   lachmi Coal Company 31, 
Mullick  Street, Calcutta . 76,500  
202 . Central Bhowrah  
(J-192)          Post Office  Bhowrah  Central Bhowrah 1[Coal Company  
Private Limited] , Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad . 30,000  
203 . Sitanala (J -193)            Post Office  Bhojudih  Mohatta Brothers, 19, British 
Indian Street, Calcutta -1. 56,300  
204 . East Bhowra (J -194) Post Office  Patherdih  Shrimati Jyotsna Devi, Post 
Office  Sitarampur, District  
Burdwan . 3,49, 000 
205 . East Sowardih (J -195) Post Office  Patherdih  J.N.Supakar Brothers and 
Company Post Office Patherdih, 
Dhanbad . 5,000  
206 . Patherdih (J -196) Post Office Patherdih  Patherdih Sudamdih Colliery   
(Private) Limited, Post Office 
Patherdih, Dhanbad . 56,500  
207 . New Sudamdih (J -197) Post Office  Patherdih  New Sudamdih Colliery Company, 
Post Office Patherdih, Dhanbad . 1,97,000  
208 . Selected Patherdih  
(J-198) Post Office  Patherdih  Selected Patherdih Coal Company  
Limited  12, Tarachand Dutta 
Street, Calcutta -1. 13,000  
209 New Chasnalla (J -199) Post Office Jharia  New Chasnalla Coal Concern, 
Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad . 5,000  
210
. Pure Chasnalla (J -200) Post Office Patherdih        Pure Chasnalla Colliery Company   
192, Cross Street, Calcutta 07 . 49,800  
211
. Junkundar (R -1) Post Office Chirkunda, 
District  Dhanbad . D.Mondal and Company 
Limited,  Post Office Dishergarh, 
District  Burdwan, West Bengal  1,56,000  
212 . Laikdih Deep (R -2) Post Office Chirkunda,   
District  Dhanbad . Katras-Jharia Coal Company 
Limited,  8, Clive Row, Calcutta -1. 16,53,000  
213 . Victoria (R -4)      
Post Office  Kulti, District 
Burdwan .  
New Birbhoom Coal Company   
Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta -1. 23,38,300  
214. Victoria West (R -5)  
Note:—The number specified, in brackets, against the name specified in the second column indicates the corresponding serial number of the coking coal mine in the 
First Schedule to the Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (64 of 1971) .The abbreviati ons “EB” stand for “East Bokaro Coal field ”; “J” 
stands for Jharia Coalfield and “R” stands for “Raneegunge Coalfield ”. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 595, dated. 12 -4-1978.  28 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See sections 5 and 11)  
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the coke 
oven plant  Location of the coke oven 
plant  Name and address of the 
owners of  the coke oven plant  Amount 
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
1 Bararee Coke Plant  South Balliary Kendwadih 
Colliery , Post  Office 
Kusunda, District 
Dhanbad.  Bararee Coke Company 
Limited, 4, Clive Row, 
Calcutta -1. 21,42,000  
2 Bhowra Coke Plant  Bhowra South Colliery, 
Post Office Bhowra, 
District Dhanbad . Messrs. Bhowra Coke   
Company  Bhattacharya’ s 
House , Lubi Circular  Road, 
Dhanbad . 11,76,900  
3 Bhulanbararee  Bhulanbararee Colliery, 
Post Office Patherdih, 
District Dhanbad . Bararee Coke Company 
Limited, 4,  Clive Row, 
Calcutta -1. 2,03,500  
4 Central Bhowra    Central Bhowra  Colliery, 
Post Office  Bhowra,  
District Dhanbad . Central Bhowra Coal 
Company  (Private) Limited, 
Post Office  Jharia; and G.D.  
Kumar and Sons,  Bastacolla, 
Post Office Dhansar, Dhanbad . 2,98,000  
5 Central Kooridih  Central Kooridh -Sonardih 
Colliery, Post  Office 
Katrasgarh,    Dhanbad . Shivram Singh and Company   
(Private) Limited, Post Office 
 Katrasgarh, District Dhanbad . 1,50,00 0 
6 Junkundar Valley 
Beehive Coke  Plant . Junkundar Colliery , Post 
Office Chirkunda, District 
Dhanbad . D.Mondal and Company 
Limited, Panchayat Road, Post 
Office   Chirkunda, District 
Dhanbad . 1,08,800  
7 New Gobindpur   New Gobindpur  Colliery, 
Post Office  Sonardih, 
District  Dhanbad.   Ghosh ’s Estate Private 
Limited, 33, Canning Street, 
Calcutta -1. 1,12,500  
8 New Standard Lodna  New Standard Lodna   
Colliery, Post Office    
Jharia, District Dhanbad .  Messrs.Singh Sachdeva, Post 
Office  Dhansar, Dhanbad . 1,05,000  
9 New Sudamdih  New Sudandih   Colliery,  
Post Office Patherdih, 
District Dhanbad . Sanjive Coke  Manufacturing  
Company, c/o H.D.  Adjmera , 
Post Office Patherdih, 
Dhanbad . 3,21,000  
10 North Kujama  North Kujama Colliery,  
Post Office  Jharia,  District 
Dhanbad.  Beehive Hard Coke  
Manufacturing  Company 
Chowra Construction Company 
Private Limited, III,  Central 
Avenue, Calcutta . 2,57,500  
11 Ramkanaly  Ramkanaly Colliery,   
Office Katrasgarh, District 
Dhanbad . Bijali Kanti Roy, Keshalpur 
House , Post Office Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad and M.C.  Coal 
Company,  Post Office  Jharia, 
Dhanbad . 2,02,000  
12 Union Angarpathra   Union Angarpathra 
Colliery, Post Office 
Katrasgarh,  District 
Dhanbad . Satyadeo Singh Coal Company  
(Private) Limited,138, Biplabi 
Rash  Bihari Basu Road, 
Calcutta -1. 1,84,000  
 
--------------------------The Delhi Co-operative Societies Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES ACT, 197 2                                                                                                                                       
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
3. Registrar.  
4. Societies which may be registered.  
5. Restrictions on registration.  
6. Restrictions on holding of shares.  
7. Application for registration.  
8. Power of the Registrar to decide certain questions.  
9. Registration.  
10. Registration certificate.  
11. Amendment of bye -laws of a co -operative society.  
12. When amendments of bye -laws come into force.  
13. Change of name.  
14. Change of liability.  
15. Amalgamation, transfer of assets and liabilities and division of co -operative societies.  
16. Power to direct amalgamation, division and reorganisation in public interest etc.  
17. Registrar to prepare scheme of amalgamation of co -operative bank in certain cases.  
18. Liability of a co -operative bank to the Deposit Insurance Corporation.  
19. Cancellation of registration certificates of co-operative societies in certain cases.  
CHAPTER III  
MEMBERS OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AND THEIR RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES  
20. Persons who may become members.  
21. Nominal or associate members.  
22. Member not to exercise rights till due payment made.  
23. Votes  of members.  
24. Manner of exercising vote.  
25. Restriction on transfer of shares or interest.  
26. Transfer of interest on death of members.  2 
  
SECTIONS  
27. Liability of past member and estate of deceased member.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
28. Final authority in a co -operative society.  
29. Annual general meeting.  
30. Special general meeting.  
31. Election and nomination of members of committees.  
32. Supersession of committee.  
33. Securing possession of records, etc.  
34. Acts of co-operative societies not to be invalidated by certain defects.  
CHAPTER V  
PRIVILEGES OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
35. Co -operative societies to be bodies corporate.  
36. First charge of co -operative society on certain assets.  
37. Charge on immovable property of members borrowing loans from certain societies.  
38. Charge and set -off in respect of share or contribution or interest of members.                
39. Share or contribution or interest not liable to attachment.  
40. Register of members.  
41. Admissibility o f copy of entry as evidence.  
42. Exemption from compulsory registration of instruments.  
43. Exemption from certain taxes, fees and duties.  
44. Deduction from salary to meet co -operative society’s claim in certain cases.  
45. Other forms of State aid to co -operative societies.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
46. Funds not to be divided by way of profit.  
47. Contribution to charitable purpose.  
48. Contribution to Co -operative Education Fund.  
49. Investment of funds.  
50. Restrictions on loans.  
51. Restrictions on borrowings.  
52. Restrictions on other transactions with non -members.  
  3 
 CHAPTER VII  
AUDIT, INQUIRY, INSPECTION AND SURCHARGE  
SECTIONS   
53. Audit.  
54. Inspection of societies.  
55. Inquiry by Registrar.  
56. Inspection of books of  indebted societies . 
57. Costs of inquiry.  
58. Recovery of costs.  
59. Surcharge.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES  
60. Disputes which may be referred to arbitration.  
61. Reference of disputes to arbitration.  
62. Power of financing bank to proceed.  
CHAPTER IX  
WINDING UP OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
63. Winding up of co -operative societies.  
64. Winding up of co -operative banks at the direction of the Reserve Bank.  
65. Reimbursement to the Deposit Insurance Corporation by the liquidator.  
66. Liquidator.  
67. Powers of liquidator.  
68. Priority of contributions assessed by liquidator.  
69. Power of Registrar to cancel registration of a co -operative society.  
CHAPTER X  
EXECUTION OF AWARDS, DECREES, ORDERS AND DECISIONS  
70. Enforcement of charge.  
71. Execution of  orders, etc.  
72. Execution of orders of liquidator.  
73. Attachment before award.  
74. Registrar or person empowered by him to be civil court for certain purposes.  
75. Recovery of sums due to Government.  
CHAPTER XI  
APPEALS AND REVISION  
76. Appeals.  
77. No appeal or revision in certain cases.  
78. Delhi Co -operative Tribunal.  4 
 SECTIONS   
79. Review of orders of Tribunal.  
80. Revision.  
81. Interlocutory orders.  
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
82. Offences.  
83. Cognizance of offence.  
84. Address of societies.  
85. Copy of Act, rules and bye -laws, etc., to be open to inspection.  
86. Prohibition against the use of the word “co -operative”.  
87. Power to exempt societies from conditions as to registration.  
88. Power to exempt co -operative societies from provisions of the Act.  
89. Liquidator to be public servant.  
90. Notice necessary in suits.  
91. Companies Act not to apply.  
92. Saving of existing societies.  
93. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.  
94. Powers of civil court.  
95. Indemnity.  
96. Qualifications, re muneration and other conditions of service of employees of co -operative 
societies.  
97. Rules.  
98. Repeal and savings.  
  5 
 THE DELHI CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 35 OF 1972  
[17th June, 1972 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to co-operative societies in the Union territory 
of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1972 .  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Lieutenant -Governor may, by notification in the Delhi 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “bye-laws” means the registered bye -laws for the time being in force, and includes registered 
amendments of such bye -laws;  
(b) “committee ” means the governing body of a co -operative society, by whatever name called, to 
which the management of the affairs of the society is entrusted;  
(c) “co-operative bank ” shall have the same meaning as is assigned to it in the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961);  
(d) “co-operative society ” means a society registered or deemed to be registered under this Act;  
(e) “co-operative society with limited liability ” means a co -operative society the liability of 
whose members is limited by its bye -laws to the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares indi vidually 
held by them or to such amount as they may individually undertake to contribute to the assets of the 
society, in the event of its being wound up;  
(f) “co-operative society with unlimited liability ” means a co -operative society the liability of 
whose members is unlimited for the purpose of contributing jointly and severally to any deficiency in 
the assets of the society in the event of its being wound up;  
(g) “Deposit Insurance Corporation ” means the Deposit Insurance Corporation established under 
section 3 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961);  
(h) “federal society ” means a society — 
(a) not less than five members of which are themselves societies ; and 
(b) in which the voting rights are so regulated that the members which are societies have not 
less than four -fifth of the total number of votes in the general meeting of such society;  
(i) “financing bank ” means a co -operative society, the objects of which include the creation of 
funds to be lent to other co -operative societies;  
(j) “Lieutenant -Governor ” means the administrator of the Union territory of Delhi appointed by 
the President under article 239 of the Constitution;  
  
                                                           
1. 2nd April , 197 3, vide notification No. 7(15)/65 -73/coop/3613, Delhi Gazette , Extraordinary, Part IV, dated                   
16th March  1973.  6 
 (k) “member ” means a person joining in the application for the registration of a co -operative 
society and a  person admitted to membership after such registration in accordance with this Act, the 
rules and the bye -laws, and includes a nominal and an associate member and the Central Government 
when it subscribes to the share capital of a society;  
(l) “officer ” means the president, vice -president, chairman, vice -chairman, managing director, 
secretary, manager, member of committee, treasurer, liquidator, administrator and includes any other 
person empowered under the rules or the bye -laws to give directions in regar d to the business of a   
co-operative society;  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules;  
(n) “Registrar ” means a person appointed to perform the functions of the Registrar of                
Co-operative Societies under this Act, and includes any person appointed to assist the Registrar when 
exercising all or any of the powers of the Registrar;  
(o) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(p) “rules ” means the rules made under this A ct; 
(q) “Tribunal ” means the Delhi Co -operative Tribunal constituted under section 78.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
3. Registrar .—(1) The Lieutenant -Governor may appoint a person to  be the Registrar of                 
Co-operative Societies for the Union territory of Delhi  and may appoint other persons to assist him.  
(2) The Lieutenant -Governor may, by general or  special order, confer on any person appointed to 
assist the Registrar all or  any of the powers of the Registrar under thi s Act.  
(3) Every person appointed to assist the Registrar  shall exercise the powers conferred on him under 
sub-section ( 2) subject to the  general guidance, superintendence and control of the Registrar.  
(4) The Lieutenant -Governor may, by notification in  the Delhi Gazette and subject to such conditions 
as he may think fit to impose,  confer all or any of the powers of the Registrar under this Act on any 
federal  society, or an officer of such federal society; and every such federal society  or officer on whom 
the powers of the Registrar are so conferred shall exercise such  powers under the general guidance, 
superintendence and control of the  Registrar.  
4. Societies which may be registered .—(1) Subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, a society 
which has as its object the promotion of the economic interests of its members in accordance with          
co-operative principles, or a society established with the object of facilitating the op erations of such a 
society, may be registered under this Act with or without limited liability:  
Provided that no society shall be registered if it is likely to be economically unsound or the 
registration of which may have an adverse effect on development o f co-operative movement:  
Provided further that, unless the Lieutenant -Governor by general or special order otherwise directs, 
the liability of the society of which a member is a co -operative society shall be limited.  
(2) The word “limited ” or its equivalen t in any Indian language shall be the last word in the name of 
every society registered under this Act with limited liability.  
5. Restrictions on registration .—No society other than a federal society shall be registered under 
this Act unless it consists of  at least ten persons (each of such persons being a member of different 
family), who are qualified to be members under this Act and who reside in the area of operation of the 
society.  
  7 
 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section the expression “member of a family ” means wife, 
husband, father, mother, grand -father, grand -mother, step -father, step -mother, son, unmarried daughter, 
unmarried step -daughter, step -son, grand -son, unmarried grand -daughter, unmarried sister, unmarried 
half-sister, brother, half -brother and wife of brother or half -brother.  
6. Restrictions on holding of shares .—No member other than the Central Government or a           
co-operative society shall hold more than such portion of the share -capital of a co -operative society, 
subject to a maximum of one -fifth, as may be prescribed or have or claim any interest in the shares of 
such society exceeding ten thousand rupees, whichever is less.  
 7. Application for registration .—(1) For  the purposes of registration, an application shall be made 
to the Registrar.  
(2) The application shall be signed, — 
(a) in the case of a society of which no member is a co -operative society, by at least ten persons 
qualified in accordance with the requirem ents of section 5; and  
(b) in the case of a society of which a member is a co -operative society, by a duly authorised 
person on behalf of every such society and where all the members of the society are not co -operative 
societies, by ten other members, or, when there are less than ten other members, by all of them.  
8. Power of the Registrar to decide certain questions .—Where any question arises whether for the 
purpose of this Act a person resides in the area of operation of a society or not, or whether a soc iety is of 
same type as another society or of different type, the question shall be decided by the Registrar whose 
decision shall be final.  
9. Registration .—(1) If the Registrar is satisfied — 
(a) that  the application complies with the provisions of this Act and the rules;  
(b) that the objects of the proposed society are in accordance with section 4;  
(c) that the proposed bye -laws are not contrary to the provisions of this Act and the rules; and  
(d) tha t the proposed society has reasonable chances of success, the Registrar may register the 
society and its bye -laws.  
(2) When the Registrar refuses to register a society, he shall communicate the order of refusal, 
together with the reasons therefor, to such of the applicants as may be prescribed.  
(3) The application for registration shall be disposed of by the Registrar within a period of three 
months from the date of receipt thereof by him:  
Provided that if the Registrar is unable to dispose of the applicati on within the aforesaid period, he 
shall make a report to the Lieutenant -Governor stating therein the reasons for his inability to do so, and 
the Lieutenant -Governor may allow him further time not exceeding three months to dispose of such 
application.  
10. Registration certificate .—Where a society is registered under this Act, the Registrar shall issue a 
certificate of registration signed by him, which shall be conclusive evidence that the co -operative society 
therein mentioned is duly registered under this Act. 
11. Amendment of bye -laws of a co -operative society .—(1) No amendment of any bye -laws of a 
co-operative society shall be valid unless such amendment has been registered under this Act.  
(2) Every proposal for such amendment shall be forwarded to the Registrar and if the Registrar is 
satisfied that the proposed amendment — 
(a) is not contrary to the provisions of this Act and the rules;  
(b) does not conflict with co -operative principles; and  
(c) will promote the economic interests of the members of the society,  
he may register the amendment.  8 
 (3) The Registrar shall forward to the society a copy of the registered amendment together with a 
certificate signed by him and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence that the amendment has been 
duly registered.  
(4) Where the Registrar refuses to register an amendment of the bye -laws of a co -operative society, he 
shall communicate the order of refusal together with the reasons therefor, to the society in the manner 
prescribed.  
12. When amendments of by e-laws come into force .—An amendment of the bye -laws of a          
co-operative society shall, unless it is expressed to come into operation on a particular day, come into 
force on the day on which it is registered,  
13. Change of name .—(1) A co -operative society may, by an amendment of its bye -laws, change its 
name but such change shall not affect any right or obligation of the society or of any of its members or 
past members, and any legal proceedings pending may be continued by or against the society und er its 
new name.  
(2) Where a co -operative society changes its name, the Registrar shall enter the new name on the 
register of co -operative societies in place of the former name and shall amend the certificate o f 
registration accordingly.  
14. Change of liab ility.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, a co -operative 
society may, by an amendment of its bye -laws, change the form or extent of its liability.  
(2) When a co -operative society has passed a resolution to change the form or extent of  its liability, it 
shall give notice thereof in writing to all its members and creditors and, notwithstanding any bye -law or 
contract to the contrary, any member or creditor shall, during a period of one month from the date of 
service of the notice upon hi m, have the option of withdrawing his shares, deposits or loans, as the case 
may be.  
(3) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his option within the period specified in            
sub-section ( 2) shall be deemed to have assented to the change.  
(4) An amendment of a bye -law of a co -operative society changing the form or extent of its liability 
shall not be registered or take effect until either — 
(a) the assent thereto of all members and creditors has been obtained; or  
(b) all claims of members and cre ditors who exercise the option referred to in sub -section ( 2) 
within the period specified therein have been met in full.  
15. Amalgamation, transfer of assets and liabilities and division of co -operative societies .—(1) A 
co-operative society may, with the previous approval of the Registrar and by a resolution passed by a        
two-thirds majority of the members present and voting at a general meeting of the society, — 
(a) transfer its assets and liabilities in whole or in part to any other co -operative soci ety; 
(b) divide itself into two or more co -operative societies.  
(2) Any two or more co -operative societies may, with the previous approval of the Registrar and by a 
resolution passed by a two -thirds majority of the members present and voting at a general m eeting of each 
such society, amalgamate themselves and form a new co -operative society.  
(3) The resolution of a co -operative society under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall contain all 
particulars of the transfer, division or amalgamation, as the case may be:  
Provided that in the case of a co -operative bank, the Registrar shall not accord approval to any such 
resolution without the previous sanction in writing of the Reserve Bank.  
(4) When a co -operative society has passed any such resolution, it s hall give notice thereof in writing 
to all its members and creditors and, notwithstanding any bye -laws or contract to the contrary, any 
member or creditor shall, during the period of one month of the date of service of the notice upon him, 
have the option of withdrawing his shares, deposits or loans, as the case may be.  9 
 (5) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his op tion within the period specified in             
sub-section ( 4) shall be deemed to have assented to the proposals contained in the reso lution.  
(6) A resolution passed by a co -operative society under this section shall not take effect until, either — 
(a) the assent thereto of all the members and creditors has been obtained; or  
(b) all claims of members and creditors who exercise the option referred to in sub -section ( 4) 
within the period specified therein have been met in full.  
(7) Where a resolution passed by a co -operative society under this section involves the transfer of any 
assets and liabilities, the resolution shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, be a sufficient conveyance to vest the assets and liabilities in the transferee without any 
further assurance.  
16. Power to direct amalgamation, division and reorganisation in public interest etc .—(1) Where 
the Registrar is satisfied that it is essential in the public interest, or in the interest of the co -operative 
movement, or for the purpose of securing the proper management of any co -operative society that two or 
more co -operative societies shou ld be amalgamated or any co -operative society should be divided to form 
two or more co -operative societies or should be reorganised, then, notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 15, but subject to the provisions of this section, the Registrar may, b y order, provide for the 
amalgamation, division or reorganisation of these co -operative societies into a single society or into 
societies with such constitution, property rights, interests and authorities and such liabilities, duties and 
obligations as may  be specified in the order:  
Provided that no such order of amalgamation, division or reorganisation in respect of a co -operative 
bank shall be made without the previous sanction in writing of the Reserve Bank.  
(2) No order shall be made under this section,  unless — 
(a) a copy of the proposed order has been sent in draft to the co -operative society or each of the 
co-operative societies concerned; and  
(b) the Registrar has considered and made such modifications in the draft order as may seem to 
him desirable i n the light of any suggestions and objections which may be received by him within 
such period (not being less than two months from the date on which a copy of the order aforesaid is 
received by the society or societies, as the case may be), as the Registra r may fix in that behalf, either 
from the society or from any of the societies concerned or from any member or class of members 
thereof or from any creditor or class of creditors thereof.  
(3) The order referred to in sub -section ( 1) may contain such incide ntal, consequential and 
supplemental provisions as may, in the opinion of the Registrar, be necessary to give effect to the 
amalgamation, division or reorganisation, as the case may be.  
(4) Every member or creditor of each of the co -operative societies to be amalgamated, divided or 
reorganised, who has objected to the scheme of amalgamation, division or reorganisation, within the 
period specified, shall be entitled to receive, on the issue of the order of amalgamation, division or 
reorganisation, his share or interest, if he be a member, and the amount in satisfaction of his dues, if he be 
a creditor.  
(5) On the issue of an order under sub -section ( 1), the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of 
section 19 shall apply to the co -operative societies so amalgamated, divided or reorganised as if the 
amalgamation, division or reorganisation had been made under section 15.  
17. Registrar to prepare scheme of amalgamation of co -operative bank in certain cases .—When 
an order of moratorium has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2) of section 45 of 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), in respect of a co -operative bank, the Registrar, with the 
previous approval of the Reserve Bank in writing, may, during the period of moratorium, prep are a 
scheme — 
(a) for the reorganisation of the co -operative bank; or  
(b) for the amalgamation of the co -operative bank with any other co -operative bank.  10 
 18. Liability of a co -operative bank to the Deposit Insurance Corporation .—Notwithstanding 
anything co ntained in sections 15 and 16 or any other provision of this Act, where a co -operative bank, 
being an insured bank within the meaning of the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961), is 
amalgamated or reorganised and the Deposit Insurance Corpo ration has become liable to pay to the 
depositors of the insured bank under sub -section ( 2) of section 16 of that Act, the bank with which such 
insured bank is amalgamated, or the new co -operative bank formed after such amalgamation, or as the 
case may be,  the insured bank or transferee bank shall be under an obligation to repay to the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation in the circumstances, to the extent of and in the manner referred to in section 21 of 
the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961).  
19. Cancellation of registration certificates of co -operative societies in certain cases .—(1) Where 
the whole of the assets and liabilities of a co -operative society are transferred to another co -operative 
society in accordance with the provisions of section 15 or section 16, the registration of the first 
mentioned co -operative society shall stand cancelled and the society shall be deemed to have been 
dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate body.  
(2) Where two or more co -operative societies a re amalgamated into a new co -operative society in 
accordance with the provisions of section 15 or section 16, the registration of each of the amalgamating 
societies shall stand cancelled on the registration of the new society, and each society shall be dee med to 
have been dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate body.  
(3) Where a co -operative society divides itself into two or more co -operative societies in accordance 
with the provisions of section 15 or is divided by the Registrar in accordance wi th the provisions of 
section 16, the registration of that society shall stand cancelled on the registration of the new societies, 
and that society shall be deemed to have been dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate body.  
(4) The amalgamation and  splitting of co -operative societies shall not in any manner whatsoever 
affect any right or obligation of the resulting co -operative society or societies or render defective any 
legal proceedings by or against the co -operative society or societies, and any  legal proceedings that might 
have been continued or commenced by or against the co -operative society or societies, as the case may 
be, before the amalgamation or splitting, may be continued or commenced by or against the resulting    
co-operative society or societies.  
(5) Where a co -operative society has not commenced business within a reasonable time of its 
registration or has ceased to function or if the Registrar is satisfied , after making such inquiry as he thinks 
fit, that the society no longer has ge nuinely as its objects one or more of the objects specified in section 4 
and that its registration ought in the interests of the general public be cancelled, he shall make an order 
cancelling the registration of the co -operative society. The co -operative s ociety shall, from the date of 
such order of cancellation, be deemed to be dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate body.  
CHAPTER III  
MEMBERS OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AND THEIR RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES  
20. Persons who may become members .—(1) No person shall be admitted as member of a           
co-operative society except the following, namely: — 
(a) an individual competent to contract under section 11 of the Indian Contract                               
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872);  
(b) any other co -operative society;  
(c) the Central Government; and  
(d) such class or classes of persons or association of persons as may be notified by the 
Lieutenant -Governor in this behalf:  
Provided that the provisions of clause ( a) shall not apply to an individual seeking admission to a 
society exclusively formed for the benefit of students of a school or college.  
  11 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Lieutenant -Governor may, having 
regard to the fact that the interest of any person or cla ss of persons conflicts or is likely to conflict with 
the objects of any society or class of societies, by general or special order, published in the Delhi Gazette, 
declare that any person or class of persons engaged in or carrying on any profession, busin ess or 
employment shall be disqualified from being admitted, or for continuing, as members or shall be eligible 
for membership only to a limited extent of any specified society or class of societies, so long as such 
person is or such persons are engaged in  or carrying on that profession, business or  employment, as the 
case may be.  
21. Nominal or associate members .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( d) of 
section 20, a co -operative society may admit any person as a nominal or associate member in accordance 
with its bye -laws.  
(2) A nominal or associate member shall not be entitled to any share in any form whatsoever, in the 
assets or profits of the co -operative society.  
(3) Save as provided in this section, a nominal or associate member shall ha ve such privileges and 
rights of a member and be subject to such liabilities of a member, as may be specified in the bye -laws of 
the society.  
22. Member not to exercise rights till due payment made .—No member of a co -operative society 
shall exercise the ri ghts of a member unless he has made such payment to the society in respect of 
membership or has acquired such interest in the society as may be specified in the bye -laws.  
23. Votes of members .—Every  member of a co -operative society shall have one vote in the affairs of 
the society:  
Provided that — 
(a) in the case of an equality of votes, the chairman shall have a second or casting vote;  
(b) a nominal or associate member shall not have the right of vot e; 
(c) where the Central Government is a member of the co -operative society, each person 
nominated by the Central Government on the committee shall have one vote.  
24. Manner of exercising vote .—(1) Every member of a co -operative society shall exercise his vote 
in person and no member shall be permitted to vote by proxy.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a co -operative society which is a member 
of another co -operative society, may, subject to the rules, appoint one of its members to vote on its behalf 
in the affairs of that other society.  
25. Restriction on transfer of shares or interest .—The transfer of the share or interest of a member 
in the capital of a co -operative society shall be subject to such conditions as to maximum holding  as are 
specified in section 6.  
26. Transfer of interest on death of members .—(1) On the death of a member a co -operative 
society may transfer the share or interest of the deceased member to the person nominated in accordance 
with the rules made in this behalf, or, if there is no person so nominated, to such person as may appear to 
the committee to be the heir or legal representative of the deceased member, or pay to such nominee, heir 
or legal representative, as the case may be, a sum representing the va lue of such member ’s share or 
interest as ascertained in accordance with the rules or bye -laws:  
Provided that — 
(i) in the case of a co -operative society with unlimited liability, such nominee, heir or legal 
representative, as the case may be, may require p ayment by the society of the value of the share or 
interest of the deceased member ascertained as aforesaid ; 
  12 
 (ii) in the case of a co -operative society with limited liability, the society shall transfer the share 
or interest of the deceased member to suc h nominee, heir or legal representative, as the case may be, 
being qualified in accordance with the rules and bye -laws for membership of the society, or on his 
application within one month of the death of the deceased member to any person specified in the 
application who is so qualified;  
(iii) no such transfer or payment shall be made except with the consent of the nominee, heir or 
legal representative, as the case may be.  
(2) A co -operative society shall, subject to the provisions of section 36 and unless within six months 
of the death of member prevented by an order of a competent court, pay to such nominee, heir or legal 
representative, as the case may be, all other moneys due to the deceased member from the society.  
(3) All transfers and payments made by  a co-operative society in accordance with the provisions of 
this section shall be valid and effectual against any demand made upon the society by any other person.  
 27. Liability of past member and estate of deceased member .—(1) Subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2), the liability of a past member or of the estate of a deceased member of a co -operative 
society for the debts of the society as they existed, — 
(a) in the case of a past member, on the date on which he ceased to be a member;  
(b) in the case of a deceased member, on the date of his death, shall continue for a period of two 
years from such date.  
(2) Where a co -operative society is ordered to be wound up under section 63, the liability of a past 
member or of the estate of a deceased me mber who ceased to be a member or died within two years 
immediately preceding the date of the order of winding up, shall continue until the entire liquidation 
proceedings are completed, but such liability shall extend only to the debts of the society as th ey existed 
on the date of his ceasing to be a member or death, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
28. Final authority in a co -operative society .—(1) The final authority in a co -operative society shall 
vest in the general bo dy of members:  
Provided that where the bye -laws of a co -operative society provide for the constitution of a smaller 
body consisting of delegates of members of the society elected or selected in accordance with such      
bye-laws the smaller body shall exercise such powers of the general body as may be prescribed or as may 
be specified in the bye -laws of the society.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 24 each delegate shall have one 
vote in the affairs of the society.  
 29. Annual general meeting .—(1) Every co -operative society shall, within a period of six months 
next after the date fixed for making -up its accounts for the year under the rules for the time being in force, 
call a general meeting of its members for the purp ose of — 
(a) approval of the programme of the activities of the society prepared by the committee for the 
ensuing year;  
(b) election, if any, of the members of the committee other than nominated members subject to 
the provisions of section 31;  
(c) considera tion of the audit report and the annual report;  
(d) disposal of the net profits; and  
(e) consideration of any other matter which may be brought forward in accordance with bye -laws:  
Provided that the Registrar may, by general or special order, extend the pe riod for holding such 
meeting for a further period not exceeding three months:  13 
 Provided further that, if in the opinion of the Registrar no such extension is necessary, or such 
meeting is not called by the society within the extended period, if any, grante d by him, the Registrar or 
any person authorised by him may call such meeting in the manner prescribed, and that meeting shall be 
deemed to be a general meeting duly called by the society; and the Registrar may order that the 
expenditure incurred in callin g such a meeting shall be paid out of the funds of the society or by such 
person or persons who, in the opinion of the Registrar, were responsible for the refusal or failure to 
convene the general meeting.  
(2) At every annual general meeting of a co -operat ive society, the committee shall lay before the 
society a statement showing the details of the loans, if any, given to any of the members of the committee 
during the preceding year.  
30. Special general meeting .—(1) The committee of a co -operative society m ay, at any time, call a 
special general meeting of the society and shall call such meeting within one month after the receipt of a 
requisition in writing from the Registrar or from such number of member s or a proportion of the total 
number of members, as may be provided in the bye -laws.  
(2) If a special general meeting of a co -operative society is not called in accordance with the 
requistion referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Registrar or any person auth orised by him in this behalf shall 
have the power to call such meeting and that meeting shall be deemed to be a meeting called by the 
committee, and the Registrar may order that the expenditure incurred in calling such a meeting shall be 
paid out of the fu nds of the society or by any such person or persons who, in the opinion of the Registrar, 
were responsible for the refusal or failure to convene the special general meeting.  
31. Election and nomination of members of committees .—(1) The superintendence, direction and 
control of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, elections of the members of the 
committees of such co -operative societies or class of co -operative societies as may be prescribed shall be 
veste d in such returning officers not below the rank of gazetted officers as may be appointed by the 
Lieutenant -Governor in this behalf.  
(2) The vote at such elections shall be by secret ballot.  
(3) The term of office of the elected members of the committee sha ll be such, not exceeding three   
co-operative years including the co -operative year of their election, as may be specified in the bye -laws of 
the society:  
Provided that the elected members shall continue to hold office till their successors are elected or  
nominated under the provisions of the Act or the rules or bye -laws.  
(4) No person shall be eligible to be elected as a member of the committee of a co -operative society 
unless he is shareholder of that co -operative society.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in this Act, a person shall be disqualified for election as, or 
for being , the president, vice -president, chairman, vice -chairman, managing director, secretary, joint 
secretary or treasurer of a committee, — 
(a) if he has held any such office on tha t committee during two consecutive terms, whether full or 
part; 
(b) if he holds any such office on a committee of another co -operative society of the same type;  
(c) if he holds any such office on the committees of three or more co -operative societies of a 
different type or different types : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall be deemed to disqualify any such person for 
election as, or for being, a delegate of a society or a member of another committee.  
Explanation 1.—Where any person holding any office as aforesaid at the commencement of this Act 
is again elected to any such office after such commencement, he shall for the purpose of this sub -section 
be deemed to have held that office for one term before such election.  
Explanation 2.—A person who has ceased to hold any such office as aforesaid continuously for one 
full term shall again be qualified for election to any of those offices.  14 
 (6) On the committee of such co -operative societies or class of co -operative societies as may be 
presc ribed, two seats shall be reserved, one for the members who belong to the Scheduled Castes and one 
for economically weaker sections of the members who as land -owners or tenants or as both do not hold 
more than the prescribed area of agricultural land or fu lfil the prescribed conditions, and if no such 
persons are elected, the committee shall co -opt the required number of members from amongst the 
persons entitled to such representation:  
Provided that in the case of a primary agricultural credit society such number of seats, being not less 
than one -half of the total number of members of the Committee, shall be reserved for members belonging 
to the Scheduled Castes and the aforesaid economically weaker sections of the members as may be 
prescribed, and if no suc h persons are elected, the Committee shall co -opt the required number of 
members from amongst the persons entitled to such representation.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, — 
(i) “Scheduled Castes ” means any of the Scheduled Castes specifie d in Part I of the Schedule to 
the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951;  
(ii) “primary agricultural credit society ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( cii) of section 2 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any dispute relating to election of members of 
any committee of a co -operative society mentioned in sub -section ( 1) shall be referred to the      
Lieutenant -Governor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(8) The Lieutenant -Governor may make rules generally to provide for or to regulate matters in respect 
of elections of members of the committees.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 8),— 
(a) where the Central Government has subscr ibed to the share capital of a co -operative society, 
the Central Government or any person authorised by it in this behalf shall have the right to nominate 
on the committee such number of persons not exceeding three or one -third of the total number of 
membe rs thereof, whichever is less, as the Central Government may determine;  
(b) where the Industrial Finance Corporation, the State Finance Corporation or any other 
financing institution notified in this behalf by the Central Government has provided finance to  a      
co-operative society, the Industrial Finance Corporation, State Finance Corporation or other financing 
institution, as the case may be, shall have the right to nominate one person on the committee.  
(10) A person nominated under sub -section ( 9) shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
Government or the Corporation or other financing institution, as the case may be.  
32. Supersession of committee .—(1) If, in the opinion of the Registrar, the committee of any          
co-operative society persistently makes default or is negligent in the performance of the duties imposed 
on it by this Act or the rules or the by -laws, or commits any act which is prejudicial to the interest of the 
society, or its members, the Registrar may, after givi ng the committee an opportunity to state its 
objections, if any, by order in writing , remove the committee; and  
(a) order fresh election of the committee, or  
(b) appoint one or more administrators who need not be members of the society,  
to manage the affai rs of the society for a period not exceeding one year specified in the order, which 
period may, at the discretion of the Registrar be extended from time to time, so, however, that the 
aggregate period does not exceed three years.  
(2) The Registrar may fix any remuneration for the administrator, as he may think fit. Such 
remuneration shall be paid out of the funds of the society.  
(3) The administrator shall, subject to the control of the Registrar and to such instructions as he may 
from time to time give, ha ve power to exercise all or any of the functions of the committee or of any 
officer of the society and take all such actions as may be required in the interest of the society.  15 
 (4) The administrator shall, at the expiry of his term of office, arrange for the constitution of a new 
committee in accordance with the bye -laws of the society.  
(5) Before taking any action under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a co -operative society, the Registrar 
shall consult the financing institution to which it is indebted.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Registrar shall in the case of a co -operative 
bank, if so required in writing by the Reserve Bank in the public interest o r for preventing the affairs of 
the co -operative bank being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of the depositors or for 
securing the proper management of a co -operative bank pass an order for the supersession of the 
committee of that co -operative bank and appointment of an administrator therefor for such period or 
period s not exceeding five years in the aggregate, as may from time to time be specified by the Reserve 
Bank.  
33. Securing possession of records, etc .—(1) (a) If the record, registers or the books of accounts of 
a co-operative society are likely to be tampered w ith or destroyed and the fund and property of a society 
are likely to be misappropriated or misapplied; or  
(b) if the committee of a co -operative society is reconstituted at a general meeting of the society or 
the committee of a society is removed by the R egistrar under section 32 or if the society is ordered to be 
wound up under section 63 and the outgoing members of the committee refuse to hand over charge of the 
records and property of the society to those having or entitled to receive such charge,  
the R egistrar may apply to the magistrate, within whose jurisdiction the society functions, for securing the 
records and property of the society.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the magistrate may, by a warrant, authorise any 
police offi cer, not below the rank of sub -inspector to enter and search any place where the records and the 
property are kept or are believed to be kept and to seize such records and property; and the records and 
property so seized shall be handed over to the new com mittee or administrator of the society or the 
liquidator, as the case may be.  
34. Acts of co -operative societies not to be invalidated by certain defects .—No act of a              
co-operative society or of any committee or of any officer shall be deemed t o be invalidated by reason 
only of the existence of any defect in procedure or in the constitution of the society or of the committee or 
in the appointment or election of an officer or on the ground that such officer was disqualified for his 
appointment.  
CHAPTER V  
PRIVILEGES OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
35. Co-operative societies to be bodies corporate .—The registration of a co -operative society shall 
render it a body corporate by the name under which it is registered having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, and with power to hold property, enter into contract, institute and defend suits and other 
legal proceedings and to do all things necessary for the purposes for which it is constituted.  
36. First charge of co -operative society on certain assets .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in force, but subject to any prior claim of the Government in 
respect of land revenue or any money recoverable as land revenue, any debt or outstanding demand owing 
to a co -operative society by any member or past member or deceased member shall be a first charge upon 
the crops  and other agricultural produce , cattle, fodder for cattle, agricultural or industrial implements or 
machinery, raw materials for manufacture and any finished products ma nufactured from such raw 
materials, belonging to such member, past member or forming part of the estate of the deceased member, 
as the case may be.  
(2) No person shall transfer any property which is subject to a charge under sub -section ( 1) except 
with the  previous permission in writing of the co -operative society which holds the charge.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, any transfer of 
property made in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall be void.  16 
 (4) The charge created under sub -section ( 1) shall be available as against any claim of the 
Government arising from a loan granted under the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 (19 of 1883), or 
the Agriculturists ’ Loans Act, 1884 (12 of 1884), after the grant of the loan by the society.  
37. Charge on immovable property of members borrowing loans from certain             
societies .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in   
force, — 
(i) any person who makes an application to a society of which he is a member for a loan shall, if 
he owns any land or has interest in any land as a tenant, make a declaration in the prescribed form 
which shall state that the applicant thereby creates a charge on such land or interest specified in the 
declaration for the payment of the amount of the loan which the society may make to the member in 
pursuance of  the application and for all future advances, if any, required by him which the society 
may make to him as such member subject to such maximum as may be determined by the society 
together with interest on such amount of the loan and advances;  
(ii) any pers on who has borrowed a loan from a society of which he is a member before the date 
of the coming into force of this Act, and who owns any land or has any interest in land as a tenant 
shall, as soon as possible , make a declaration in the form and to the effe ct referred to in clause ( i); 
(iii) a declaration made under clause ( i) or clause ( ii) may be varied at any time by a member with 
the consent of the society in favour of which such charge is created;  
(iv) no member shall alienate the whole or any part of t he land or interest therein specified in the 
declaration made under clause ( i) or clause ( ii) until the whole amount borrowed by the member 
together with interest thereon is paid in full:  
Provided that for the purpose of paying in full to the society the w hole amount borrowed by the 
member together with interest thereon, the member may, with the previous permission in writing of 
the society and subject to such conditions as the society may impose, alienate the whole or any part of 
such land or interest ther eon: 
Provided further that standing crops on any land may be alienated with the previous permission of 
the society;  
(v) any alienation made in contravention of the provisions of clause ( iv) shall be void;  
(vi) subject to the prior claims of the Government in respect of land revenue or any money 
recoverable as land revenue, there shall be a first charge in favour of the society on the land or 
interest specified in th e declaration made under clause  (i) or clause ( ii) for and to the exten t of the 
dues owing by him on account of the loans and advances;  
(vii) the record of rights shall also include the particulars of every charge on land or interest 
created under a declaration under clause ( i) or clause ( ii) notwithstanding anything contained  in any 
law relating to land revenue for the time being in force;  
(viii) any sum due to a society in consequence of charge created under a declaration under        
clause ( i) or clause ( ii) shall, on application for its recovery being made by such society accompanied 
by a certificate signed by the Registrar, be recoverable by the Collector, according to the law and 
under the rules for the time being in force for the recovery of land revenue.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “society ” shall mea n any co -operative society or class 
of co -operative societies specified in this behalf by the Lieutenant -Governor by a general or special order.  
38. Charge and set -off in respect of share or contribution or interest of members .—A              
co-operative society shall have a charge upon the share or contribution or interest in the capital and on the 
deposits of a member or past member, or deceased member and upon any dividend, bonus or profits 
payable to a member or past member or the estate of a deceased member in respect of any debt due from 
such member or past member or the estate of such deceased member to the society, and may set -off any 
sum credited or payable to a member or past member or the estate of deceased member in or towards 
payment of any suc h debt.  17 
 39. Share or contribution or interest not liable to attachment .—Subject to the provisions of 
section 38, the share or contribution or interest of a member or past member or deceased member in the 
capital of a co -operative society shall not be liabl e to attachment or sale under any decree or order of any 
court in respect of any debt or liability incurred by such member, and a receiver under the Provincial 
Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920) shall not be entitled to or have any claim on such share or con tribution 
or interest.  
40. Register of members .—Any register or list of members or shares kept by any co -operative 
society shall be prima facie  evidence of any of the following particulars entered therein: — 
(a) the date on which any person entered in such register or list became a member;  
(b) the date on which any such person ceased to be a member.  
41. Admissibility of copy of entry as evidence .—(1) A copy of any entry in a book of a co -operative 
society regularly k ept in the course of its business shall, if certified in such manner as may be prescribed, 
be received in any suit or legal proceedings as prima facie  evidence of the existence of such entry, and 
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters, transactions a nd accounts therein recorded in every case 
where, and to the same extent as, the original entry itself is admissible.  
(2) No officer of a co -operative society and no officer in whose office the books of a co -operative 
society are deposited after liquidation shall, in any legal proceedings to which the soceity or the liquidator 
is not a party, be compelled to produce any of the society ’s books or documents the contents of which can 
be proved under this section, or to appear as a witness to prove the matters, transactions and accounts 
therein recorded, except under order of the court or the arbitrator made for special cause.  
42. Exemption from compulsory registration of instruments .—Nothing in clauses ( b) and ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) shall apply to — 
(1) any instrument relating to shares in a co -operative society notwithstanding that the assets of 
the society consist in whole or in part of immovable property; or  
(2) any debenture issued by any such society and not creating, declaring, assigning, limiting or 
extinguishing any right, title or interest to or in immova ble property, except in so far as it entitles the 
holder thereof to the security afforded by a registered instrument whereby the society has mortgaged, 
conveyed, or otherwise transferred the whole or part of its immovable property or any interest therein 
to trustees upon trust for the benefit of the holders of such debentures; or  
(3) an endorsement upon or transfer of any debenture issued by any such society.  
43. Exemption from certain taxes, fees and duties .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, remit the income -tax payable in respect of the profits of any class of 
co-operative societies or the dividends or other payments received by members of any class of such 
societies on account of profits.  
(2) The Central Government m ay, by notification in the Official Gazette, remit in respect of any class 
of co -operative societies — 
(a) the stamp du ty chargeable under any law for the time being in force in respect of any 
instrument executed by or on behalf of a co -operative society or  by an officer or member thereof and 
relating to the business of such society or any class of such instruments or in respect of any award or 
order made under this Act, in cases, where, but for such remission the co -operative society, officer or 
member, as the case may be, would be liable to pay such stamp duty;  
(b) any fee payable under any law for the time being in force relating to the registration of 
documents or court -fee. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any class of co -operative  societies from — 
(a) land revenue;  
(b) taxes on agricultural income;  
(c) taxes on sale or purchase of goods; and  18 
 (d) taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.  
44. Deduction from salary to meet co -operative society ’s claim in certain cases .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, a member of a co -operative 
society may execute an agreement in favour of the society providing that his employer shall be competent 
to deduct from the salary or wages payable to h im by the employer, such amount as may be specified in 
the agreement and to pay the amount so deducted to the society in satisfaction of any debt or other 
demand owing by the member to the society.  
(2) On the execution of such agreement, the employer shall , if so required by the co -operative society 
by a requisition in writing and so long as the society does not intimate that the whole of such debt or 
demand has been paid, make the deduction in accordance with the agreement and pay the amount so 
deducted to  the society, as if it were a part of the salary or wages payable on the day as required under the 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936) . Such payment shall be valid discharge of the employer for his 
liability to pay the amount deducted.  
(3) Where a requi sition in writing from any society registered or deemed to be registered in any 
reciprocating State in respect of a member of that society, who has executed any such agreement as is 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) and who for the time being is employed in t he Union territory of Delhi, is 
received by his employer, the requisition shall be acted upon as if it had been made by a society in Delhi 
and the provisions of this sectio n shall have effect accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, “reciprocating State ” means any State or Union 
territory which the Lieutenant -Governor may, by notification in the Delhi Gazette, declare to be a 
reciprocating State.  
(4) If after the receipt of a requisition made under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), the employer at 
any time fails to deduct the amount specified in the requisition from the salary or wages payable to the 
member concerned or makes default in remitting the amount deducted to the society, the society shall be 
entitled to recover any such amo unt from the employer as arrears of land revenue and the amount so due 
from the employer shall rank in priority in respect of the liability of the employer equal to that of the 
wages in arrears.  
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to establis hment under a railway administration 
operating any railway as defined in clause ( 20) of article 366 of the Constitution.  
45. Other forms of State aid to co -operative societies .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force, the Central Government may — 
(a) subscribe to the share capital of a co -operative society;  
(b) give loans or make advances to co -operative societies;  
(c) guarantee the repayment of principal and pa yment of interest on debentures issued by a        
co-operative society;  
(d) guarantee the repayment of share capital of a co -operative society and dividends thereon at 
such rates as may be specified by the Central Government;  
(e) guarantee the repayment o f principal and payment of interest on loans and advances to a       
co-operative society; and  
(f) give financial assistance in any other form, including subsidies, to any co -operative society.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
46. Funds not to be divided by way of profit .—No part of the funds of a co -operative society shall 
be divided by way of bonus or dividend or otherwise among its members:  
  19 
 Provided that after at least one -fourth of the net profits in any year has been carried  to the reserve 
fund, payments from the remainder of such profits and from any profits of past years available for 
distribution may be made to the members to such extent and under such conditions as may be prescribed 
by the rules or bye -laws.  
47. Contribut ion to charitable purpose .—Any co -operative society may, with the sanction of the 
Registrar, after one -fourth of the net profits in any year has been carried to the reserve fund, contribute an 
amount not exceeding five per cent. of the remaining net profit s to any purpose connected with the 
development of co -operative movement or charitable purpose as defined in section 20 of the Charitable 
Endowments Act, 1890 (6 of 1890).  
48. Contribution to Co -operative Education Fund .—A co -operative society shall out of  its net 
profits in any year credit such portion of the profits not exceeding five per cent. as may be prescribed to 
the Co -operative Education Fund constituted under the rules.  
49. Investment of funds .—(1) A co -operative society may invest or deposit its fund— 
(a) in the post office savings bank; or  
(b) in any of the securities specified in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882); or  
(c) in the shares or securities of any other co -operative society; or  
(d) with any bank carrying on the busine ss of banking approved for this purpose by the     
Registrar; or  
(e) in any other mode permitted by the rules.  
(2) Any investment s or deposits made before the commencement of this Act which would have been 
valid if this Act had been in force are hereby ratified and confirmed.  
50. Restrictions on loans .—(1) A co -operative society shall not make a loan to any person other than 
a member : 
Provided that with the general or special sanction of the Registrar a co -operative society may make a 
loan to another co -operative society.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a co -operative society may make a loan to 
a depositor w ithin his deposit on its security.  
51. Restrictions on borrowings .—A co -operative society shall receive deposits and loans only to 
such extent and under such conditions as may be prescribed or as may be specified in the bye -laws.  
52. Restrictions on other transactions with non -members .—Save as provided in sections 50       
and 51, the transactions of a co -operative society with any person other than a member shall be subject to 
such prohibitions and restrictions, if any, as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VII  
AUDIT, INQUIRY, INSPECTION AND SURCHARGE  
53. Audit .—(1) The Registrar shall audit or cause to be audited by a person authorised by him by 
general or special order in writing in this behalf, the accounts of every co -operative society at least once 
in each ye ar. 
(2) The audit under sub -section ( 1) shall include an examination of overdue debts, if any, the 
verification of the cash balance and securities, and a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the society.  
(3) The person auditing the accounts of a co -operative society shall have free access to the books, 
accounts, papers, vouchers, stock and other property of such society and shall be allowed to verify its 
cash balance and securities.  
(4) The directors, managers, administrators and other officers of the  society shall furnish to the person 
auditing the accounts of a co -operative society all such information as to its transactions and working as 
such person may require.  20 
 (5) The Registrar or the person authorised by him under sub -section ( 1) to audit the ac counts of a    
co-operative society shall have power where necessary — 
(a) to summon at the time of his audit any officer, agent, servant or member of the society, past or 
present, who he has reason to believe can give valuable information in regard to transactions of the 
society or the management of its affairs; and  
(b) to require the production of any book or document relating to the affairs of, or any cash or 
securities belonging to, the society by any officer, agent, servant, or member in possession of such 
books, documents, cash or securities and in the event of serious irregularities discovered during audit, 
to take them into custody.  
(6) If at the time of audit the accounts of a society are not complete, the Registrar or the person 
authorised by hi m under sub -section ( 1) to audit, may cause the accounts to be written up at the expense 
of the society.  
(7) Audit fee, if any, due from any co -operative society shall be recoverable in the same manner as is 
provided in section 75.  
54. Inspection of societ ies.—The Registrar, or any person authorised by general or special order in 
this behalf by him, may inspect a co -operative society . For the purpose of inspection, the Registrar or the 
person so authorised by him shall at all times have access to all books, accounts, papers, vouchers, 
securities, stock and other property of the society and may in the event of serious irregularities dis covered 
during inspection take them into custody and shall have power to verify the cash balance of the society 
and subject to the general or special order of the Registrar to call a committee meeting and a general 
meeting. Every officer or member of the s ociety shall furnish such information with regard to the working 
of the society as the Registrar or the person making such inspection may require.  
55. Inquiry by Registrar .—(1) The Registrar may of his own motion or on the application of a 
majority of the committee or of not less than one -third of the members , hold an inquiry or direct some 
person authorised by him by order in writing in this behalf to hold an inquiry into the constitution, 
working and financial condition of a co -operative society.  
(2) The Registrar or the person authorised by him under sub -section ( 1) shall have the following 
powers, namely: — 
(a) he shall at all times have, for purpose of examination, free access to the books, accounts, cash 
and other properties belonging to or in the custo dy of the society and may summon any person in 
possession or responsible for the custody of any such books, accounts, documents, securities, cash or 
other properties to produce the same, at any place specified by him;  
(b) he may, notwithstanding any rule o r bye -law specifying the period of notice for a general 
meeting of the society, require the officers of the society to call a general meeting at such time and 
place at the headquarters of the society to consider such matters, as may be directed by him; and  
where the officers of the society refuse or fail to call such a meeting he shall have power to call it 
himself;  
(c) he may summon any person who is reasonably believed by him to have any knowledge of the 
affairs of the society to appear before him at any place at the headquarters of the society or any 
branch thereof and may examine such person on oath.  
(3) Any meeting cal led under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) shall have all the powers of a general 
meeting called under the bye -laws of the society and its proceedings shall be regulated by such bye -laws.  
(4) The Registrar shall communicate a brief summary of the report of th e inquiry to the society, the 
financing institutions, if any, to which the society is affiliated, and to the person or authority, if any, at 
whose instance the inquiry is made.  
56. Inspection of books of indebted societies .—(1) The Registrar shall, on the application of a 
creditor of a co -operative society, inspect or direct some person authorised by him by order in writing in 
this behalf to inspect the books of the society:  21 
 Provided that no such inspection shall be made unless the applicant — 
(a) satisfies  the Registrar that the debt is a sum then due, and that he has demanded payment 
thereof and has not received satisfaction within a reasonable time; and  
(b) deposits with the Registrar such sum as security for the costs of proposed inspection as the 
Regist rar may require.  
(2) The Registrar shall communicate the result of any such inspection to the creditor.  
57. Costs of inquiry .—Where an inquiry is held under section 55, or an inspection is made under 
section 56, the Registrar may apportion the costs, or su ch part of the costs, as he may think fit, between 
the society, the members or creditor demanding an inquiry or inspection, and the officers or former 
officers and the members or past members of the society:  
Provided that — 
(a) no order of the apportionment of the costs shall be made under this section unless the society 
or the person liable to pay the costs thereunder has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard;  
(b) the Registrar shall state in writing under his own hand the g rounds on which the costs are 
apportioned.  
58. Recovery of costs .—Any sum awarded by way of costs under section 57 may be recovered, on 
application to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place where the person from whom the money is 
claimable, actually  and voluntarily resides or carries on business, and such magistrate shall recover the 
same as if it were a fine imposed by himself.  
59. Surcharge .—(1) If in the course of an audit, inquiry, inspection or the winding up of a                 
co-operative society, it is found that any person, who is or was entrusted with the organisation or 
management of such society or who is or has at any time been an officer or an employee of the society, 
has made any payment contrary to this Act, the rules or the bye -laws or has caused any deficiency in the 
assets of the society by breach of trust or wilful negligence or has misappropriated or fraudulently 
retained any money or other property belonging to such society, the Registrar may, of his own motion or 
on the appli cation of the committee, liquidator or any creditor, inquire himself or direct any person 
authorised by him, by an order in writing in this behalf, to inquire into the conduct of such person:  
Provided that no such inquiry shall be held after the expiry of six years from the date of any act or 
omission referred to in this sub -section.  
(2) Where an inquiry is made under sub -section ( 1), the Registrar may, after giving the person 
concerned an opportunity of being heard, make an order, requiring him to repay or  restore the money or 
property or any part thereof, with interest at such rate, or to pay contribution and costs or compensation to 
such exten t, as the Registrar may consider just and equitable.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES  
60. Disputes which may be  referred to arbitration .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any law for the time being in force, if any dispute touching the constitution, management or the business 
of a co -operative society other than a dispute regarding disciplinary action taken  by the society or its 
committee against a paid employee of the society arises — 
(a) among members, past members and persons claiming through members, past members and 
deceased members, or  
(b) between a member, past member or person claiming through a membe r, past member or 
deceased member and the society, its committee or any officer, agent or employee of the society or 
liquidator, past or present, or  
(c) between the society or its committee and any past committee, any officer, agent or employee, 
or any pas t officer, past agent or past employee or the nominee, heirs or legal representatives of any 
deceased officer, deceased agent, or deceased employee of the society, or  22 
 (d) between the society and any other co -operative society, between a society and liquida tor of 
another society or between the liquidator of one society and the liquidator of another society,  
such dispute s shall be referred to the Registrar for decision and no court shall have jurisdiction to 
entertain any suit or other proceedings in respect of such dispute.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the following shall be deemed to be disputes touching the 
constitution, management or the business of a co -operative society, namely: — 
(a) a claim by the society for any debt or de mand due to it from a member or the nominee, heirs 
or legal representatives of a deceased member, whether such debt or demand be admitted or not;  
(b) a claim by a surety against the principal debtor where the society has recovered from the 
surety any amount in respect of any debt or demand due to it from the principal debtor as a result of 
the default of the principal debtor, whethe r such debt or demand is admitted or not;  
(c) any dispute arising in connection with the election of any officer of a society other than a 
society mentioned in sub -section ( 1) of section 31.  
(3) If any question arises whether a dispute referred to the Regi strar under this section is or is not a 
dispute touching the constitution, management or the business of a co -operative society, the decision 
thereon of the Registrar shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court.  
(4) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), but subject to 
the specific provisions made in this Act, the period of limitation in the case of a dispute referred to the 
Registrar under sub -section ( 1) shall — 
(i) when the dispute relates to t he recovery of any sum including interest thereon due to a           
co-operative society by a member thereof, be computed from the date on which such member dies or 
ceases to be a member of the society;  
(ii) save as otherwise provided in sub -clause ( iii), when the dispute relates to any act or omission 
on the part of any of the parties referred to in clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), be six years 
from the date on which the act or omission with reference to which the dispute arose, took place;  
(iii) when the dispute relates to a co -operative society which has been ordered to be wound up 
under section 63 or in respect of which an administrator has been appointed under section 32, be six 
years from the date of the order issued under section 63 or s ection 32, as the case may be;  
(iv) when the dispute is in respect of an election of an officer of a co -operative society other than 
a society referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 31, be one month from the date of the declaration of 
the result of the election.  
(b) The period of limitation in the case of any other dispute except those mentioned in the foregoing 
clause which are required to be referred to the Registrar under the last preceding section shall be regulated 
by the provisions of the Limitatio n Act, 1963 (3 6 of 1963), as if the dispute was a suit and the Registrar a 
civil court.  
(c) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses ( a) and ( b), the Registrar may admit a dispute after 
the expiry of the period of limitation, if the applicant satisfie s the Registrar that he had sufficient cause for 
not referring the dispute within such period and the dispute so admitted shall be a dispute which shall not 
be barred on the ground that the period of limitation has expired.  
61. Reference of disputes to arb itration .—(1) The Registrar may, on receipt of the reference of 
dispute under section 60, — 
(a) decide the dispute himself, or  
(b) transfer if for disposal to any person who has been invested by the Lieutenant -Governor with 
powers in that behalf, or  
(c) refer it for disposal to one arbitrator.  23 
 (2) The Registrar may withdraw any reference transferred under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) or 
referred under clause ( c) of that sub -section and decide it himself or refer the same to another arbitrator 
for decisio n. 
(3) The Registrar or any other person to whom a dispute is referred for decision under this section 
may, pending the decision of the dispute, make such interlocutory orders as he may deem necessary in the 
interest of justice.  
62. Power of financing bank  to proceed .—(1) If a co -operative society is unable to pay its debts to a 
financing bank by reason of its members committing default in the payment of the moneys due by them, 
the financing bank may direct the committee of such a society to proceed against  such members under 
section 60 and if the committee fails to do so within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of 
such direction, the financing bank itself may proceed against such members in which case the provisions 
of this Act, the rules or the bye -laws shall apply as if all references to the society or its committee in the 
said provisions were references to the financing bank.  
(2) Where a financing bank has obtained a decree or award against a society in respect of moneys due 
to it from the society, the financing bank may proceed to recover such moneys firstly from the assets of 
the society and secondly from the members to the extent of their debts due to the society.  
CHAPTER IX  
WINDING UP OF CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
63. Winding up of co-operative societies .—(1) If the Registrar, after an inquiry has been held under 
section 55, or an inspection has been made under section 56, or on receipt of an application made by not 
less than three -fourths of the members of a co -operative society, is  of opinion that the society ought to be 
wound up, he may issue an order directing it to be wound up.  
(2) The Registrar may of his own motion make an order directing the winding up of a co -operative 
society — 
(a) where it is a condition of the registration of the society that the society shall consist of at least 
ten members and the number of members has been reduced to less than ten, or  
(b) where  the co -operative society has not commenced working or has ceased to function in 
accordance with co -operative principles.  
(3) The Registrar may cancel an order for the winding up of a co -operative society, at any time, in 
any case where, in his opinion, th e society should continue to exist.  
(4) A copy of such order shall be communicated by registered post to the society and to the financing 
institutions, if any, of which the society is a member.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section no co -operative bank shall be wound up except 
with the previous sanction in writing of the Reserve Bank.  
64. Winding up of co -operative banks at the direction of the Reserve Bank .—Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the Registrar shall  make an order for winding up of a       
co-operative bank, if so required by the Reserve Bank in the circumstances mentioned in section 13D of 
the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961).  
65. Reimbursement to the Deposit Insurance Corporation  by the liquidator .—Where a              
co-operative bank being an insured bank within the meaning of the Deposit Insurance Corporation       
Act, 1961 (47 of 1961), is wound up, or taken into liquidation, and the Deposit Insurance Corporation has 
become liable to the depositors of the insured bank under sub -section ( 1) of section 16 of that Act, the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation shall be reimbursed by the liquidator or such other person in the 
circumstances to the extent and in the manner provided in section 21 of the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1961.  
  24 
 66. Liquidator .—(1) Where the Registrar has made an order under section 63 for the winding up of a 
co-operative society, the Registrar may appoint a liquidator for the purpose and fix his remuner ation.  
(2) A liquidator shall, on appointment, take into his custody or under his control all the property, 
effects and actionable claims to which the society is or appears to be entitled and shall take such steps as 
he may deem necessary or expedient, to prevent loss or deterioration of, or damage to, such property, 
effects and claims. He may carry on the business of the society so far as may be necessary with the 
previous approval of the Registrar.  
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under section 76, an ord er of winding up of a co -operative society 
made under section 63 shall not operate thereafter until the order is confirmed in appeal:  
Provided that the liquidator shall continue to have custody or control of the property, effects and 
actionable claims ment ioned in sub -section ( 2) and have authority to take the steps referred to in that    
sub-section.  
(4) Where an order of winding up of a co -operative society is set aside in appeal, the property, effects 
and actionable claims of the society shall revest in the society.  
67. Powers of liquidator .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the whole of the assets of a 
co-operative society, in respect of which an order for winding up has been made, shall vest in the 
liquidator appointed under section 66 from the date on which the order takes effect and the liquidator 
shall have power to realise such assets by sale or otherwise.  
(2) Such liquidator shall also have power, subject to the control of the Registrar, — 
(a) to institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings on behalf of the co -operative society 
by the name of his office;  
(b) to determine from time to time the contribution (including debts due and costs of liquidation) 
to be made or remaining to be made b y the members or past members or by the estates or nominees, 
heirs or legal representatives of deceased members or by any officers or former officers, to the assets 
of the society;  
(c) to investigate all claims against the co -operative society and subject to the provisions of this 
Act, to decide questions of priority arising between claimants;  
(d) to pay claims against the co -operative society including interest up to the date of winding up 
according to their respective priorities, if any, in full or rateab ly, as the assets of the society may 
permit; the surplus, if any, remaining after payment of the claims being applied in payment of interest 
from the date of such order of winding up at a rate fixed by him but not exceeding the contract rate in 
any case;  
(e) to determine by what persons and in what proportions the costs of the liquidation are to be 
borne;  
(f) to determine whether any person is a member, past member or nominee of deceased member;  
(g) to give such directions in regard to the collection and di stribution of the assets of the society 
as may appear to him to be necessary for winding up the affairs of the society;  
(h) to carry on the business of the society so far as may be necessary for the beneficial winding up 
of the same;  
(i) to make any compro mise or arrangement with creditors or persons claiming to be creditors or 
having or alleging to have any claim, present or future, whereby the society may be rendered liable;  
(j) to make any compromise or arrangement with any person between whom and the so ciety there 
exists any dispute and to refer any such dispute to arbitration;  
(k) after consulting the members of the society, to dispose of the surplus, if any , remaining after 
paying the claims against the society, in such manner as may be prescribed; and  25 
 (l) to compromise all calls or liabilities to calls and debts and liabilities capable of resulting in 
debts, and all claims, present or future, certain or contingent, subsisting or supposed to subsist 
between the society and a contributory or alleged cont ributory or other debtor or person apprehending 
liability to the co -operative society and all questions in any way relating to or affecting the assets or 
the winding up of the society on such terms as may be agreed and take any security for the discharge 
of any such call, liability, debt or claim and give a complete discharge in respect thereof.  
(3) When the affairs of a co -operative society have been wound up, the liquidator shall make a report 
to the Registrar and deposit the records of the society in suc h place as the Registrar may direct.  
68. Priority of contributions assessed by liquidator .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 ( 5 of 1920), the contribution assessed by a liquidator shall rank next to 
debts due to the Government or to any local authority in order of priority in insolvency proceedings.  
69. Power of Registrar to cancel registration of a co -operative society .—(1) The R egistrar may 
after considering the report of the liquidator made to him under sub -section ( 3) of section 67 order the 
registration of the co -operative society to be cancelled.  
(2) An order passed under sub -section ( 1) shall be communicated by registered po st to the president 
of the society and to the financing institutions, if any, of which the society was a member.  
CHAPTER X  
EXECUTION OF AWARDS, DECREES, ORDERS AND DECISIONS  
70. Enforcement of charge .—Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter VIII or a ny other law 
for the time being in force, but without prejudice to any other mode of recovery provided in this Act, the 
Registrar or any person subordinate to him empowered by the Registrar in this behalf may, on the 
application of a co -operative society, make an order directing the payment of any debt or outstanding 
demand due to the society by any member or past or deceased member, by sale of the property or any 
interest therein, which is subject to a charge under section 36:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the member, past member or the 
nominee, heir or legal representative of the deceased member, has been served with a notice in the 
manner prescribed.  
71. Execution of orders, etc .—Every decision, award or order duly passed by the Registrar or 
arbitrator or Tribunal under section 29, section 30, section 59, section 61, section 70, section 76,      
section 78 or section 79 shall, if not carried out, — 
(a) where  the decision, award or order provides for the recovery of money, be executed according 
to the law for the time being in force relating to the recovery of land revenue:  
Provided that an application for the recovery of any sum in the manner aforesaid shall be made to 
the Collector and shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by the Registrar or by any person 
subordinate to him and empowered by the Registrar in this behalf; and  
(b) in any other case be executed by the Registrar or any person subordinate t o him and 
empowered by the Registrar in this behalf, in the same manner as is provided in the case of a civil 
court by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
72. Execution of orders of liquidator .—The orders of the liquidator under section 67 shall  be 
executed according to the Act and under the rules for the time being in force for the recovery of arrears of 
land revenue.  
73. Attachment before award .—Where the Registrar is satisfied that a party to any reference made 
to him under section 60 with int ent to defeat or delay the execution of any decision that may be passed 
thereon is about to — 
(a) dispose of the whole or any part of the property; or  
(b) remove  the whole or any part of the property from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the 
Registrar,  26 
 the Registrar may, unless adequate security is furnished, direct the conditional attachment of the said 
property or such part thereof as he thinks necessary.  Such attachment shall be executed by a civil court 
having jurisdiction in the same way as an attachment order passed by itself and shall have the same effect 
as such an order:  
Provided that the powers of the Registrar under this section shall not be deleg ated to any officer 
below such rank as may be prescribed.  
74. Registrar or person empowered by him to be civil court for certain purposes .—The Registrar 
or any person empowered by him in this behalf shall be deemed, when exercising any powers under this 
Act for the recovery of any amount by the attachment and sale or by sale without attachment of any 
property, or when passing any orders on any application made to him for such recovery or for taking a 
step-in-aid of such recovery, to be civil court for the  purposes of article 136 of the Schedule to the 
Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
75. Recovery of sums due to Government .—(1) All sums due from a co -operative society, or from 
an officer or member or past member of a co -operative society as such, to Government, including any 
costs awarded to Government under any provision of this Act, may on a certificate issued by the Registrar 
in this behalf, be recovered in the same manner as arrears of land revenue.  
(2) Sums due from a co -operative society to Government and recoverable under sub -section ( 1), may 
be recovered, firstly, from the property of the society, secondly, in the case of a s ociety the liability of the 
members of which is limited, from the members, past members or the estates of deceased members, 
subject to the limit of their liability, and, thirdly, in the case of other societies, from the members, past 
members or the estates  of the deceased members:  
Provided that the liability of past members and the estates of deceased members shall in all cases be 
subject to the provisions of section 27.  
CHAPTER XI  
APPEALS AND REVISION  
76. Appeals .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 77, an appeal shall lie under this section 
against — 
(a) an order of the Registrar made under sub -section ( 2) of section 9 refusing to register a society;  
(b) an order of the Registrar made under sub -section ( 4) of section 11 refusing to register an 
amendme nt of the bye -laws of a co -operative society;  
(c) an order of the Registrar made under sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
(d) a decision of a co -operative society refusing to admit any person as a member of the society 
who is otherwise duly qualified for membe rship under the bye -laws of the society;  
(e) a decision of a co -operative society expelling any of its members;  
(f) an order of the Registrar removing the committee of a co -operative society made under   
section 32;  
(g) an order made by the Registrar under  section 57 apportioning the costs of an enquiry held 
under section 55 or an inspection made under section 56;  
(h) any order of surcharge under section 59;  
(i) any decision or award made under section 61;  
(j) an order made by the Registrar under section 63  directing the winding up of a co -operative 
society;  
(k) any order made by the liquidator of a co -operative society in exercise of the powers conferred 
on him by section 67;  
(l) any order made under section 73.  27 
 (2) An appeal against any decision or order u nder sub -section ( 1) shall be made within sixty d ays 
from the date of the decision or order — 
(a) if the decision or order falls under clause ( g), (h), (i) or ( l) of sub -section ( 1), to the Tribunal;  
(b) if the decision or order falls under clause ( f), to the Lieutenant -Governor;  
(c) in any other case, to the Lieutenant -Governor or the Registrar according as the decision or 
order was made by the Registrar or any other person.  
(3) No appeal shall lie under this section from any decision or order made by the Registrar in appeal.  
77. No appeal o r revision in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where 
with the previous sanction in writing or on requisition of the Reserve Bank, — 
(i) a co -operative bank is being wound up; or  
(ii) in respect of which a scheme of amalgamation or reorganisation is given effect to; or  
(iii) in respect of which an order for the supersession of the committee and the appointment of an 
administrator therefor has been made,  
no appeal, revision or review there against shall lie or be permissible, and the sanction or requisition of the 
Reserve Bank shall not be liable to be called in question.  
78. Delhi Co -operative Tribunal .—(1) The Lieutenant -Governor shall constitute a Tribunal to be 
called the Delhi Co -operat ive Tribunal to exercise the functions conferred on the Tribunal by or under 
this Act.  
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of not more than three members possessing such qualifications as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) Any vacancy in the membership of the Tribunal shal l be filled by the Lieutenant -Governor.  
(4) Subject to the previous approval of the Lieutenant -Governor, the Tribunal shall frame regulations 
consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, for regulating its procedure and 
the disposal of its business.  
(5) The regulations made under sub -section ( 4) shall be published by the Lieutenant -Governor in the 
Delhi Gazette.  
(6) The Tribunal may call for and examine the record of any proceeding, in which an appeal lies to it, 
for the purp ose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any decision or order passed and if in 
any case it shall appear to the Tribunal that any such decision or order should be modified, annulled or 
reversed, the Tribunal may pass such order thereon a s it may deem fit.  
(7) An order passed in appeal under section 76 or in revision under sub -section ( 6) of this section or 
in review under section 79 by the Tribunal shall be final and conclusive, and shall not be called in 
question in any civil or revenue court.  
Explanation. —The Tribunal hearing an appeal under this Act shall exercise all the powers conferred 
upon an appellate court by section 97 of, and Order XLI of the First Schedule to, the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
79. Review of orders of Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal may either on the application of the Registrar, 
or on the application of any party interested, review its own order in any case, and pass in reference 
thereto such order as it thinks just:  
Provided that no such application mad e by the party shall be entertained unless the Tribunal is 
satisfied that there has been the discovery of new and important matter of evidence, which after the 
exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the applicant or could not be produced  by him 
at the time when its order was made or that there has been some mistake or error apparent on the face of 
the record, or for any other sufficient reason:  28 
 Provided further that no such order shall be varied or revised unless notice has been given to the 
parties interested to appear and be heard in support of such order.  
(2) An application for review under sub -section ( 1) by any party shall be made within ninety days 
from the date of communication of the order of the Tribunal.  
80. Revision .—Subject to the provisions of section 77, the Lieutenant -Governor may, suo motu  or on 
the application of a party to a reference, call for and examine the record of any proceedings in which no 
appeal lies to the Lieutenant -Governor under section 76 (not being any proce edings in which an appeal 
lies to the Tribunal) for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality and propriety of any decision 
or order passed and if in any case it shall appear to him that any such decision or order should be 
modified, annulled or  revised, he may pass such order thereon as he may deem fit.  
81. Interlocutory orders .—Where an appeal is made under section 76 or where the Tribunal or   
Lieutenant -Governor calls for the record of a case under section 78 or section 80, the appellate auth ority 
or the Tribunal or Lieutenant -Governor, as the case may be, may, in order to prevent the ends of justice 
being defeated, make such interlocutory order, including an order of stay, pending the decision of the 
appeal or revision as such authority or th e Tribunal or Lieutenant -Governor may deem fit.  
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
82. Offences .—(1) Any person other than a co -operative society carrying on business under any 
name or title of which the word “co-operative ”, or its equivalent in any Indian  language is part, without 
the sanction of the Lieutenant -Governor shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees and in the case of a continuing breach with a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
for every day during which the breach is continued after conviction for the first such breach.  
(2) Any member or past member or the nominee, heir or legal representative of a deceased member of 
a co-operative society who contravenes the provisions of sections 36 and 37 by disp osing of any property 
in respect of which the society is entitled to have a first charge under that section or do any other act to 
the prejudice of such claim, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(3) A co -operative societ y or an officer or member thereof wilfully making a false return or 
furnishing false information, or any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeying any 
summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under the provisions of this Act or  wilfully not 
furnishing any information required from him by a person authorised in this behalf under the provisions 
of this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.  
(4) Any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails t o pay to a co -operative society the amount 
deducted by him under section 44 within a period of fourteen days from the date on which such deduction 
is made shall, without prejudice to any action that may be taken against him under any law for the time 
being  in force be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(5) Any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to hand over custody of books, records, cash, security 
and other property belonging to a co -operative society of which he is an offic er or custodian, to a person 
entitled under section 33, 53, 54, 55 or 66 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees and in the case of a continuing breach with a further fine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
for every day d uring which the breach is continued after conviction for the first such breach.  
(6) Any person who fraudulently acquires or abets in the acquisition of any such property which is 
subject to a charge under sections 36 and 37 shall be punishable with fine wh ich may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
83. Cognizance of offence .—(1) No court inferior to that of a magistrate of the first class shall try 
any offence under this Act.  
(2) No prosecution shall be instituted under this Act without the previous sanction of the Registrar 
and such sanction shall not be given without giving to the person concerned a reasonable opportunity to 
represent his case.  29 
 84. Address of societies .—Every co -operative society shall have an address registered in the manner 
prescribed to whic h all notices and communications may be sent, and shall send to the Registrar notice of 
every change thereof within thirty days of such change.  
85. Copy of Act, rules and bye -laws, etc., to be open to inspection .—Every co -operative society 
shall keep a cop y of this Act, the rules and its bye -laws and also a list of its members, open to inspection 
free of charge at all reasonable times at the registered address of the society.  
86. Prohibition against the use of the word “co-operative ”.—No person other than a  co-operative 
society shall trade or carry on business under any name or title of which the word “co-operative ” or its 
equivalent in any Indian language is part:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the use by any person or his successor -in-interest 
of any name or title under which he carried on business at the date on which the Co -operative Societies 
Act, 1912 (2 of 1912) , came into operation.  
87. Power to exempt societies from conditions as to registration .—Notwithstanding  anything 
contained in this Act, the Lieutenant -Governor may, by general or special order and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as he may impose, exempt any society or class of societies from any of the 
requirements of this Act as to registration.  
88. Power to exempt co -operative societies from provisions of the Act .—The Lieutenant -Governor 
may, by general or special order, to be published in the Delhi Gazette, exempt any co -operative society or 
any class of co -operative societies from any of the provisio ns of this Act, or may direct that such 
provisions shall apply to such societies or class of societies with such modifications as may be specified 
in the order.  
89. Liquidator to be public servant .—Any person appointed as liquidator under the provisions of  
this Act or the rules shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
90. Notice necessary in suits .—No suit shall be instituted against a co -operative society or any of its 
officers in respec t of any act touching the business of the society until the expiration of three months next 
after notice in writing has been delivered to the Registrar or left at his office, stating the cause of action, 
the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims, and the plaint 
shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left.  
91. Companies Act not to apply .—The provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , shall not 
apply to co -operative societ ies. 
92. Saving of existing societies .—(1) Every society now existing which has been registered under the 
Co-operative Credit Societies Act, 1904 (10 of 1904) or under the Co -operative Societies                       
Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or under the Bombay Co -operative Societies Act, 1925 ( Bom. 7 of 1925) as in 
force in the Union territory of Delhi, shall be deemed to be registered under the corresponding provisions 
of this Act, and its bye -laws shall, so far as the same are not inconsistent with the express provisions of 
this Act, continue in force until altered or rescinded.  
(2) All appointments, rules and orders made, notifications and notices issued and suits and other 
proceedings instituted under the said Acts shall, so far as they are consistent with the provisions of this 
Act, be deemed to have been respectively made, issued and instituted under this Act, save that an order 
made cancelling the registration of a society shall be deemed, unless the society has already been finally 
liquidated, as an  order issued under section 63 for its being wound up.  
93. Bar of jurisdiction of courts .—(1) Save as provided in this Act, no civil or revenue court shall 
have any jurisdiction in respect of — 
(a) the registration of a co -operative society or its bye -laws or of an amendment of a bye -law; 
(b) the removal of a committee;  
(c) any dispute required under section 60 to be referred to the Registrar; and  
(d) any matter concerning the winding up and the dissolu tion of a co -operative society.  30 
 (2) While a co -operative society is being wound up, no suit or other legal proceedings relating to the 
business of such society shall be proceeded with or instituted against, the liquidator as such or against the 
society or any member thereof, except by leave of the Registrar and subject to such terms as he may 
impose.  
(3) Save as provided in this Act, no order, decision or award made under this Act shall be questioned 
in any court on any ground whatsoever.  
94. Powers of civi l court .—(1) In exercising the functions conferred on him by or under this Act, the 
Registrar, the arbitrator or any other person deciding a dispute under section 61 and the liquidator of a    
co-operative society or person entitled to audit, inspect or ho ld an inquiry and the Tribunal, shall have all 
the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ( 5 of 1908), in 
respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning  and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) proof of facts by affidavits; and  
(d) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses.  
(2) In the case of an affidavit, any officer appointed by the Registrar, the arbitrator or any other 
person deciding a dispute and the liquidator or the Tribunal, as the case may be, may administer the oath 
to the deponent.  
95. Indemnity .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings sh all lie against the Registrar or any 
person subordinate to him or acting on his authority in respect of anything in good faith done or 
purporting to have been done under this Act.  
96. Qualifications, remuneration and other conditions of service of employee s of co -operative 
societies .—(1) The Lieutenant -Governor shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, 
constitute a common service comprising of officers and other employees of different classes of              
co-operative societies and sha ll determine the number and designation of such officers and other 
employees.  
(2) The Lieutenant -Governor shall make rules regulating the qualifications, remuneration, 
allowances, recruitment and other conditions of service of such officers and other employees of the       
co-operative societies.  
97. Rules .—(1) The Lieutenant -Governor  may, for any co -operative society or class of co -operative 
societies, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the followi ng matters, namely :— 
(i) the maximum number of shares or portion of the capital of a co -operative society which may, 
subject to the provisions of section 6, be held by a member;  
(ii) the form to be used and the conditions to be complied with in the making of applications for 
the registration of a society and the procedure in the matter of such applications;  
(iii) the procedure and conditions for change in the form and extent of the liabil ity of a               
co-operative society;  
(iv) the matters in respect of which the society may or shall make bye -laws and for the procedure 
to be followed in making, altering and abrogating bye -laws and the conditions to be satisfied prior to 
such makin g, alteration or abrogation;  
(v) the conditions to be complied with by persons applying for admission or admitted as 
members, for the election and admission of members, and for the payment to be made and the interest 
to be acquired before the exercise of t he right of membership;  
(vi) the manner in which funds may be raised by means of shares and debentures or otherwise;  31 
 (vii) for general meeting of the members and for the procedure at such meetings and the powers 
to be exercised by such meetings;  
(viii) the  prohibitions and restrictions subject to which societies may transact business with 
persons who are not members;  
(ix) the proportion of individuals and societies in the constitution of the committee of 
management and the general body of a co -operative soc iety of which another co -operative society is a 
member;  
(x) the determination of co -operative societies or class of co -operative societies for the purpose of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 31, and subject to the provisions of the said section, the election and  
nomination of members of committees, the appointment or election of officers and the suspension and 
removal of the members and other officers, and for the powers to be exercised and the duties to be 
performed by the committees and other officers;  
(xi) the  area of agricultural land, the conditions required to be fulfilled for the purpose of          
sub-section ( 6) of section 31;  
(xii) the appointment and regulation of work entrusted to person or persons replacing the 
committee in pursuance of section 32;  
(xiii) prohibiting a co -operative society from electing a defaulting member on its committee or to 
be its representative;  
(xiv) the accounts and books to be kept by a co -operative society and the audit of such accounts 
and the charges, if any, to be made for such audit, and for the periodical publication of a            
balance -sheet showing the assets and liabil ities of a co -operative society;  
(xv) the returns to be submitted by a co -operative society to the Registrar, the persons by whom 
and the form in which such returns shall be submitted and in case of failure to submit any such 
returns for the levy of expenses of preparing i t; 
(xvi) the persons by whom and the form in which copies of the entries in books of societies may 
be certified and for the charges to be levied for the supply of such copies;  
(xvii) the formation and maintenance of a register of members and where the liab ility of the 
member s is limited by shares , of a register of shares;  
(xviii) the appointment of an arbitrator to decide disputes;  
(xix) the procedure to be followed in proceedings before the Registrar, arbitrator or other persons 
deciding disputes including  the appointment of a guardian for a party to the dispute who is a minor or 
who, by reason of unsoundness of mind or mental infirmity, is incapable of protecting his interests, 
and the levy of the expenses relating to such proceeding;  
(xx) the withdrawal a nd expulsion of members and for the payments, if any, to be made to 
members who withdraw or are expelled and for the liability of past members and of the estates of 
deceased members;  
(xxi) the mode in which the value of a deceased member ’s share or interes t shall be ascertained 
and for the nomination of a person to whom such share or interest may be paid or transferred;  
(xxii) the payments to be made and conditions to be complied with by members applying for 
loans, the period for which any loans may be made  and the maximum amount may be lent, to any 
member;  
(xxiii) the formation and maintenance of reserve funds and other funds and the objects to which 
such funds may be applied , and for the investment of any funds under the control of a co -operative 
society;  
(xxiv) the extent to which a co -operative society may limit the number of its members;  32 
 (xxv) the conditions under which profits may be distributed to the members of a co -operative 
society with unlimited liability , and the maximum rate of dividend which may be paid by co -
operative societies;  
(xxvi) the calculation and writing off of bad debts by co -operative societies;  
(xxvii) the procedure to be followed by a liquidator appointed under section 66 in respect of 
provisions of section 67;  
(xxviii) the procedure to be followed in presenting and disposing of appeals under this Act;  
(xxix) the form of orders referred to in sections 71 and 72;  
(xxx) qualifications of the members of the Tribunal;  
(xxxi) the issue and servic e of processes and for proof of service thereof;  
(xxxii ) the manner of effecting attachment;  
(xxxiii ) the custody, preservation and sale of property under attachment;  
(xxxiv ) the  investigation of claims by persons other than the defaulter to any right or interest in 
the attached property, and for the postponement of the sale pending such investigation;  
(xxxv) the immediate sale of perishable articles;  
(xxxvi ) the inspection of doc uments in the office of the Registrar or of any other officer or 
authority and the levy of fees for granting certified copies of the same;  
(xxxvii ) the terms and conditions on which the Central Government may make share -capital 
contribution or give assista nce, financial or other, to societies and the terms and conditions on which 
the Central Government may guarantee the payment of the principal or interest on debentures issued 
by societies or loans raised by them;  
(xxxviii ) the manner in which funds may be raised by a society or a class of societies by means of 
shares or debentures of otherwise and the quantum of funds so raised;  
(xxxix ) for giving reasonable notice of the charge under sections 36 and 37;  
(xl) qualifications, remuneration, allowances and recruitment and the conditions of service of 
officers and other employees of a society or class of societies;  
(xli) the method of communicating or publishing any order, decision or award required to be 
communicated or published under this Act or the rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
to the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter ha ve effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
98. Repeal and savings .—On the day on which the Delhi Co -operative Societies Act, 1972 comes 
into force, the Bombay Co -operative Societies Act, 1925 (Bom . 7 of 1925) as in force in the Union 
territory of Delhi shall stand repealed:  
Provided that the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act so 
repealed; or  
  33 
 (c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the 
Act so repealed; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture of punishment as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation , legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if that Act has not been repealed.  
 
--------------------------The Delhi Lands (Restrictions on Transfer) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI LANDS (RESTRICTIONS ON TRANSFER) ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1972  
[14th June, 1972 .] 
An Act to impose certain restrictions on transfer of lands which have been acquired by the 
Central Government or in respect of which acquisition proceedings have been initiated by 
that Government, with a view to preventing large -scale transactions of purported transfers or, 
as the case may be, transfers of such lands to unwary public.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Lands 
(Restrictions on Transfer) Act, 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force at once.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator of the Union territory of Delhi  appointed by the 
President under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “competent authority ” means any person or authority authorised by the Administrator,  by 
notification in the Official Gazette, to perform the functions of the competent authority under this Act 
for such areas as may be specified in the  notification;  
(c) “Development Act ” means the Delhi Development Act, 1957  (61 of 1957) ; 
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “Scheme” means the scheme of acquisition of land for the planned development of Delhi and 
includes any scheme, project or work to be implemented in pursuance of the provisio ns of the Delhi 
Master Plan as approved by the Central Government under sub -section  (2) of section 9 of the 
Development Act.  
3. Prohibition on transfer of lands acquired by Central Government .—No person shall purport to 
transfer by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise any land or part thereof situated in the Union     
territory of Delhi, which has been acquired by the Central Government under the Land Acquisition                     
Act, 198 4 (1 of 1984) , or under any other law providing for acquisition of land for a public purpose.  
4. Regulation on transfer of lands in relation to which acquisition proceedings have been 
initiated .—No person shall, except with the previous permission in writi ng of the competent authority, 
transfer or purport to transfer by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise any land or part thereof situated 
in the Union territory of Delhi,  which is proposed to be acquired in connection with the Scheme and in 
relation to which a declaration to the effect that such land or part thereof is needed for a public       
purpose having been made by the Central Government under section 6  of the Land Acquisition                          
Act, 1894  (1 of 1 894), the Central Government has not withdrawn from the acquisition under section 48 
of that Act.  
5. Application for grant of permission for transfer under section 4 .—(1) Any person desiring to 
transfer any land referred to in section 4 by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise may make an 
application in writing to the competent authority containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the competent authority shall, after making 
such inquiries as it deems fit, may, by order in  writing, grant or refuse to grant the permission applied for.  
  2 
 (3) The competent authority shall not refuse to grant the permission applied for under this section 
except on one or more of the following grounds, namely: — 
(i) that  the land is needed or is likely to be needed for the effective implementation of the 
Scheme;  
(ii) that the land is needed or is likely to be needed for securing the objects of the Delhi 
Development Authority referred to in section 6 of the Development Act ; 
(iii) that the land is needed or is likely to be needed for any development within the meaning of 
clause ( d) of section 2 of the Development Act or for such things as public building s and other public 
works and utilities, roads, housing, recreation, indu stry, business, markets, schools and other 
educational institutions, hospitals and public open spaces and other categories of public uses.  
(4) Where the competent authority refuses to grant the permission applied for, it shall record in 
writing the reasons  for doing so and a copy of the same shall be communicated to the applicant.  
(5) Where within a period of thirty days of the date of receipt of an application under this section the 
competent authority does not refuse to grant the permission applied for or  does not communicate the 
refusal to the applicant, the competent authority shall be deemed to have granted the permission applied 
for. 
6. Appeals against orders of competent authority .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
competent authority under section 5 may, within thirty days of the date of receipt of the order by him, file 
an appeal to the prescribed authority in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the prescribed au thority shall, after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard in the matter, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possibl e. 
(3) Every order made by the prescribed authority in appeal under this section shall be final.  
7. Period of operation of orders of refusal to grant permission to transfer land .—Where the 
competent authority has made any order under section 5 refusing to grant permission to transfer any land 
or where, an appeal having been filed against such order, the  prescribed authority has made an order 
under section 6 confirming such order, then, the order refusing to grant permission to transfer such land 
shall be in operation only for a period of three years from the date of the order made by the competent 
author ity or the prescribed authority, as the case may be, and thereafter, but subject to the provisions of 
section 3, it shall be lawful for the person who has applied for permission, or his successor -in-interest, to 
transfer such land by sale, mortgage , gift, lease or otherwise.  
Explanation. —In computing the period of three years, under this section, in relation to any land, the 
period during which the acquisition proceedings in relation to such land have been stayed by any court 
shall be excluded.  
8. Restricti ons on registration of transfers of land .—Notwithstanding any thing contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, where any document required to be registered under the provisions 
of clause ( a) to clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17 of the  Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908) , 
purports to transfer by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise any land or part thereof referred to in 
section 4, no registering officer appointed under that Act shall register any such document unless the 
transferor  produces before such registering officer a permission in writing of the competent authority for 
such transfer.  
9. Penalty .—If any person contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may ex tend to three years or with fine or with both.  
10. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
every person, who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company f or the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  3 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such  person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), when an offence  under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such  director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of     
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
11. Power to make rules .—(1) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision , such rules may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the particulars which an application to be made under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 shall 
contain;  
(b) the authority to which an appeal may be filed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, the form in 
which such appeal may be filed and the particulars which such appeal shall contain ; 
(c) any  other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree t hat the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously  done under that rule.  
--------------------------The Departmental Inquiries (Enforcement of Attendance of Witnesses and Production of Documents) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE DEPARTMENTAL INQUIRIES (ENFORCEMENT OF ATTENDANCE OF 
WITNESSES AND  PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS) ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 18 OF 1972  
[31st May, 1972.]  
An Act to provide for the enforcement of attendance of witnesses and production of documents 
in certain departmental inquiries and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Departmental Inquiries (Enforcement of 
Attendance of Witnesses and Production of Documents) Act, 1972 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Departmental inquiries to which the Act shall apply. —The provisions of this Act shall apply to 
every departmen tal inquiry made in relation to — 
(a) persons appointed to public services or posts in connection with the affairs of the Union;  
(b) persons who, having been appointed to any public service or post in connection with the 
affairs of the Union, a re in s ervice or pay of, — 
(i) any local authority in any Union territory,  
(ii) any corporation established by or under a Central Act and owned or controlled by the 
Central Government,  
(iii) any Government company within the meaning of section 617 of the Co mpanies          
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), in which not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid -up share capital is 
held by the Central Government or any company which is a subsidiary of such Government 
company,  
(iv) any society registered under the Societi es Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) , which is 
subject to the con trol of the Central Government.  
3. Definitions. —For the purposes of this Act, — 
(a) “departmental inquiry ” means an inquiry he ld under and in accordance with — 
(i) any  law made by Parliament or any rule made thereunder, or  
(ii) any rule made under the proviso to article 309, or continued under article 313, of the 
Constitution of India,  
into any allegation of lack of integrity against any person to whom this Act applies;  
(b) “inquiring authority ” means an officer or authority appointed by the Central Government or 
by any officer or authority subordinate to that Government to hold a departmental inquiry and 
includes any officer or authority who is empowered by or under any  law or rule for the time being in 
force to hold such inquiry;  
(c) “lack of integrity ” includes bribery or corruption.  
4. Power of Central Government to authorise the exercise of powers specified in                 
section 5. —(1) Where the Central Government is of opinion that for the purposes of any departmental 
inquiry it is necessary to summon as witnesses, or call for any document from, any class or category of 
persons , it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise the inquiring aut hority to exercise the 
power specified in section 5 in relation to any person within such class or category and thereupon the 
inquiring authority may exercise such power at any stage of the departmental inquiry.  
  2 
 (2) The power conferred on the Central Gov ernment by sub -section ( 1) may also be exercised by such 
authority, not being an authority inferior to the appointing authority in relation to the person against 
whom the departmental inquiry is being held, as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.  
5. Power of authorised inquiring authority to enforce attendance of witnesses and production of 
documents. —(1) Every inquiring authority authorised under section 4 (hereafter referred to as the 
“authorised inq uiring authority ”) shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of the follo wing matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witne ss and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material which is producible 
as evidence;  
(c) the requisitioning of any public r ecord from any court or office.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the authorised inquiring authority shall not 
compel the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India, any subsidiary bank as defined in clause ( k) of 
section  2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959), or any corresponding new 
bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) ,— 
(a) to produce any books of account or other documents which the Reserve Bank of India, the 
State Bank of India, the subsidiary bank or the corresponding new bank claims to be of a confidential 
nature, or  
(b) to make any such books or documents a part of the  record of the proceedings of the 
departmental inquiry, or  
(c) to give inspection of any such books or documents, if produced, to any party before it or to 
any other person.  
(3) Every process issued by an authorised inquiring authority for the attendance o f any witness or for 
the production of any document shall be served and executed through the District Judge within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction the witness or other person, on whom the process is to be served or executed, 
voluntarily resides or c arries on business or personally works for gain, and, for the purpose of taking any 
action for the disobedience of any such process, every such process shall be deemed to be a process 
issued by the District Judge.  
(4) Every authorised inquiring authority m aking any departmental inquiry under this Act shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal        
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) . 
6. Territorial limits in which powers specified in section 5  may be exercised. —For the purpose of 
exercising the powers specified in section 5, the territorial jurisdiction of every authorised inquiring 
authority shall extend to the limits of the territory to which this Act extends.  
7. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, b y notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successi ve sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, tha t 
the modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
--------------------------The Diplomatic Relations (Vienna Convention) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS (VIENNA CONVENTION) ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1972  
[29th August, 1972.]  
An Act to give effect to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1961 and to provide for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Diplomatic Relations (Vienna 
Convention) Act, 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Application of Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. —(1) Notwithstanding anything to 
the contrary contained in any other law, the provisions set out in the Schedule to this Act of the Vienna 
Convention on Diplomatic Relations, adopted by the United Nations Conferenc e on Diplomatic 
Intercourse and Immunities on the 14th day of April, 1961, shall have the force of law in India.  
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Schedule in conformity with any amendment s, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the said 
Convention set out therein.  
3. Application of certain privileges and immunities to diplomatic missions and their members 
pursuant to international agreement. —Where in pursuance of any agreement, conve ntion or other 
instrument it is necessary to accord to any diplomatic mission and its members, the sending State of 
which is not a party to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic  Relations, 1961 , or to any other special 
mission and its members, privileges and  immunities in India similar to those contained in the provisions 
set out in the Schedule, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that 
the provisions set out in the Schedule shall, subject to such modifications, if any , as it may consider 
necessary or expedient for giving effect to the said agreement, convention or other instrument, apply 
mutatis mutandis  to the diplomatic mission and its members, or to the other special mission and its 
members, as the case may be, and thereupon the said provisions shall apply accordingly, and 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, shall in such application have the 
force of law in India.  
4. Restrictions on privileges and immunities. —If it appears to the Cen tral Government that a State 
which is a party to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1961 is in breach of its obligations 
arising thereunder or, that the privileges and immunities  accorded to an Indian Mission or members 
thereof in the territory  of any State which is a party to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 
1961, are less than those conferred by this Act on the Diplomatic mission of that State or members 
thereof, the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in t his Act, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, withdraw such of the privileges and immunities so conferred from the diplomatic 
mission of that State or from members thereof as may appear to the Central Government to be proper.  
5. Waiver. —For the purpose  of article 32 of the Convention set out in the Schedule, a waiver by the 
head of the mission of any State or any person for the time being performing his functions shall be 
deemed to be a waiver by that State.  
6. Restrictions on certain exemptions from cu stoms duty, etc. —Nothing contained in article 36 of 
the Convention set out in the Schedule shall be construed to entitle a diplomatic mission or member 
thereof to import into India goods free of any duty of customs without any restrictions on their subsequ ent 
sale therein.  
7. Privileges and immunities of citizens of India. —For the purpose of article 38 of the Convention 
set out in the Schedule, a citizen of India shall be entitled only to such additional privileges and 
immunities, other than those set out in that article, as are granted to him by the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette.  2 
 8. Restrictions on entry into diplomatic premises. —No public servant or agent of the Central 
Government, a State Government or any public authority sh all enter the premises of a diplomatic mission 
for the purpose of serving legal process, except with the consent of the head of the mission. Such consent 
may be obtained through the Ministry of External Affairs of the Government of India.  
9. Evidence. —If in any proceedings any question arises whether or not any person is entitled to any 
privilege or immunity under this Act, a certificate issued by or under the authority of the Secretary to the 
Government of India in the Ministry of External Affairs stating any fact relating to that question shall be 
conclusive evidence of that fact.  
10. Power to make rules. —The Central Government may 1[by notification in the Official Gazette,] 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
11. Notifications issued and  rules made under this Act to be laid before Parliament. —Every 
notification issued and every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is issued or 
made before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the no tification or, as the case may be, in the rule, or both Houses agree that the 
notification or rule should not be issued or made, the notification or rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, ho wever, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or 
rule. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
PROVISIONS OF THE VIENNA CONVENTION ON DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS, 1961 — 
WHICH SHALL HAVE FORCE OF LAW 
Article 1 
For the purpose of the present Convention, the following expressions shall have the mea ning 
hereunder assigned to them : 
(a)  the “head of the mission ” is the person charged by the sending State with the duty of actin g in 
that capacity;  
(b)  the “members of the mission ” are the head of the mission and the members of the staff of the 
mission;  
(c)  the “members of the staff of the mission ” are the members of the diplomatic staff, o f the 
administrative and technical staff and of the service staff of the mission;  
(d)  the “members of the diplomatic staff ” are the members of the staff of the mission having 
diplomatic rank;  
(e)  a “diplomatic agent ” is the head of the mission or a member  of the diplomatic staff of the 
mission;  
(f)  the “members of the administrative and technical staff ” are the members of the staff of the 
mission employed in the administrative and technical service of the mission;  
(g)  the “members of the service staff ” are the member s of the staff of the mission in the domestic 
service of the mission;  
(h)  a “private servant ” is a person who is in the domestic service of a member of the mission and 
who is not an employee of the sending State;  
(i)  the “premises of the mission” are the buildings or parts of buildings and the land ancillary 
thereto, irrespective of ownership, used for the purpose of the mission including the residence of the 
head of the mission.  
Article 22 
1. The premises of the mission shall be inviolable, the agents of the receiving State may not enter 
them except with the consent of the head of the mission.  
2. The receiving State is under a special duty to take all appropriate steps to protect the premises of 
the mission against any intrusion o r damage and to prevent any disturbance of the peace of the mission or 
impairment of its dignity . 
3. The premises of the mission, their furnishings and other property thereon and the means of 
transport of the mission shall be immune from search, requisitio n, attachment or execution.  
Article 23 
1. The sending State and the head of the mission shall be exempt from all national, regional or 
municipal dues and taxes in respect of the premises of the mission, whether owned or leased, other than 
such as represent  payment for specific services rendered.  
2. The exemption from taxation referred to in this article shall not apply to such dues and taxes 
payable under the law of the receiving State by persons contracting with the sending State or the head of 
the mission . 
Article 24 
The archives and documents of the mission shall be inviolable at any time and wherever they may be.  
  4 
 Article 27 
1. The receiving State shall permit and protect free communication on the part of the mission for all 
official purposes.  In commun icating with the Government and the other missions and consulates of the 
sending State, wherever situated, the mission may employ all appropriate   means, including diplomatic 
couriers and messages in code or cipher.  However, the mission may install and use  a wireless transmitter 
only with the consent of the receiving State.  
2. The official correspondence of the mission shall be inviolable. Official correspondence means all 
correspondence relating to the mission and its functions.  
3. The diplomatic bag shall  not be opened or detained.  
4. The packages constituting the diplomatic bag must bear visible external marks of their character 
and may contain only diplomatic documents or articles intended for official use.  
5. The diplomatic courier, who shall be provide d with an official document indicating his status and 
the number of packages constituting the diplomatic bag, shall be protected by the receiving State in the 
performance of his functions. He shall enjoy personal inviolability and shall not be liable to an y form of 
arrest or detention.  
6. The sending State or the mission may designate diplomatic couriers ad hoc.  In such cases the 
provisions of paragraph 5 of this article shall also apply, except that the immunities therein mentioned 
shall cease to apply when such a courier has delivered to the consignee the diplomatic bag in his charge.  
7. A diplomatic bag may be entrusted to the captain of a commercial aircraft scheduled to land at an 
authori zed port of entry.  He shall be provided with an official docume nt indicating the number of 
packages constituting the bag but he shall not be considered to be a diplomatic courier.  The mission may 
send one of its members to take possession of the diplomatic bag directly and freely from the captain of 
the aircraft.  
Article 28 
The fees and charges levied by the mission in the course of its official duties shall be exempt from all 
dues and taxes.  
Article 29 
The person of a diplomatic agent shall be inviolable.  He shall not be liable to any form of arrest or 
detention.  The receiving State shall treat him with due respect and shall take all appropriate steps to 
prevent any attack on his person, freedom or dignity.  
Article 30 
1. The private residence of a diplomatic agent shall enjoy the same inviolability and protection a s the 
premises of the mission.  
2. His papers, correspondence and, except as provided in paragraph 3 of article 31, his property, shall 
likewise enjoy inviolability.  
Article 31 
1. A diplomatic agent shall enjoy immunity from the criminal Jurisdiction of the  receiving State. He 
shall also enjoy immunity from its civil and administrative juri sdiction, except in the case of : 
(a)  a real action relating to private immovable property situated in the territory of the receiving 
State, unless he holds it on behalf o f the sending State for the purposes of the mission;  
(b)  an action relating to succession in which the diplomatic agent is involved as executor, 
administrator,   heir or legatee as a private person and not on behalf of the sending State;  
(c)  an action rel ating to any professional or commercial activity exercised by the diplomatic 
agent in the receiving State outside his official functions.  
  5 
 2.  A diplomatic agent is not obliged to give evidence as a witness.  
3. No measures of execution may be taken in res pect of a diplomatic agent except in the cases coming 
under sub -paragraphs ( a), (b) and ( c) of paragraph  1 of this article, and provided that the measures 
concerned can be taken without infringing the inviolability of his person or of his residence.  
4. The  immunity of a diplomatic agent from the jurisdiction of the receiving State does not exempt 
him from the jurisdiction of the sending State.  
Article 32 
1. The immunity from jurisdiction of diplomatic agents and of persons enjoying immunity under 
article 37  may be waived by the sending State.  
2. Waiver must always be express.  
3. The initiation of proceedings by a diplomatic agent or by a person enjoying immunity from 
jurisdiction under article 37 shall preclude him from invoking immunity from jurisdiction in  respect of 
any counter -claim directly concerned with the principal claim.  
4. Waiver of immunity from jurisdiction in respect of civil or administrative proceedings shall not be 
held to imply waiver of immunity in respect of the execution of the judgment, for which a separate waiver 
shall be necessary.  
Article 33 
1. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 of this article, a diplomatic agent shall with respect to 
services rendered for the sending State be exempt from social security provisions which may be in force 
in the receiving State.  
2. The exemption provided for in paragraph 1 of this article shall also apply to private servants who 
are in the sole employ of  diplomatic agent, on condition : 
(a)  that they are not nationals of or permanently resident in the receiving State; and  
(b)  that they are covered by the social security provisions which may be in force in the sending 
State or a third State.  
3. A diplomatic agent who employs persons to whom the exemption provided for in paragraph 2 of 
this article d oes not apply shall observe the obligations which the social security provisions of the 
receiving State impose upon employe rs. 
4. The exemption provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article shall not preclude voluntary 
participation in the social secu rity system of the receiving State provided that such participation is 
permitted by that State.  
5. The provisions of this article shall not affect bilateral or multilateral agreements concerning social 
security concluded previously and shall not prevent th e conclusion of such agreements in the future.  
Article 34 
A diplomatic agent shall be exempt from all dues and taxes, personal or real, national , regional o r 
municipal, except : 
(a)  indirect  taxes of a kind which are normally incorporated in the price of goods or services;  
(b)  dues and taxes on private immovable property situated in the territory of the receiving State, 
unless he holds it on behalf of the sending State for the purposes of th e mission;  
(c)  estate, succession or inheritance duties levied by the receiving State, subject to the provisions 
of paragraph 4 of article 39;  
(d)  dues and taxes on private income having its source in the receiving State and capital taxes on 
investments made in commercial undertakings in the receiving State;  
(e)  charges levied for specific services rendered;  6 
 (f)  registration, court or record fees, mortgage dues and stamp duty, with respect to immovable 
property, subject to the provisions of article 23.  
Article 35 
The receiving State shall exempt diplomatic agents from all personal services, from all public service 
of any kind whatsoever, and from military obligations such as those connected with requisitioning, 
military contributions and billeting.  
Artic le 36 
1. The receiving State shall, in accordance with such laws and regulations as it may adopt, permit, 
entry of and grant exemption from all customs duties, taxes, and related charges other than charges for 
storage, c artage and similar services, on : 
(a)  articles for the official use of the mission;  
(b) articles for the personal use of a diplomatic agent or members of his family forming part of 
his household, including articles intended for his establishment.  
2. The personal baggage of a diplomatic agent  shall be exempt from inspection, unless there are 
serious grounds for presuming that it contains articles not covered by the exemptions mentioned in 
paragraph 1 of this article, or articles the import or export of which is prohibited by the law or control led 
by the quarantine regulations of the receiving State.  Such inspection shall be conducted only in the 
presence of the diplomatic agent or of his authorized representative.  
Article 37 
1. The members of the family of a diplomatic agent forming part of his  household shall, if they are 
not nation als of the receiving State, enjoy the privileges and immunities specified in article s 29 to 36.  
2. Members of the administrative and technical staff of the mission, together with members of their 
families forming par t of their respective households, shall, if they are not nationals of or permanently 
resident in the receiving State, enjoy the privileges and immunities specified in articles 29 to 35, except 
that the immunity from civil and administrative jurisdiction of  the receiving State specified in paragraph 1 
of article 31 shall not extend to acts performed outside the course of their duties.  They shall also enjoy the 
privileges specified in article 36, paragraph 1, in respect of articles imported at the time of first 
installation.  
3. Members of the service staff of the mission who are not nationals of or permanently resident in the 
receiving State shall enjoy immunity in respect of acts performed in the course of their duties, exemption 
from dues and taxes on the  emoluments they receive by reason of their employment and the exemption 
contained in article 33.  
4. Private servants of members of the mission shall, if they are not nationals of or permanently 
resident in the receiving State, be exempt from dues and taxe s on the emoluments they receive by reason 
of their employment. In other respects, they may enjoy privileges and immunities only to the extent 
admitted by the receiving State. However, the receiving State must exercise its jurisdiction over those 
persons i n such a manner as not to interfere unduly with the performance of the functions of the mission.  
Article  38 
1. Except in so far as additional privileges and immunities may be granted by the receiving State, a 
diplomatic agent who is a national of or perman ently resident in that State shall enjoy only immunity 
from jurisdiction, and inviolability, in respect of official acts performed in the exercise of his functions.  
2. Other members of the staff of the mission and private servants who are nationals of or p ermanently 
resident in the receiving State shall enjoy privileges and immunities only to the extent admitted by the 
receiving State. However, the receiving State must exercise its jurisdiction over those persons in such a 
manner as not to interfere unduly with the performance of the functions of the missions.  
  7 
 Article 39 
1. Every person entitled to privileges and immunities shall enjoy them from the moment he enters the 
territory of the receiving State on proceeding to take up his post or, if already in it s territory, from the 
moment when his appointment is notified to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs or such other Ministry as 
may be agreed.  
2. When the functions of a person enjoying privileges and immunities have come to an end, such 
privileges and immunit ies shall normally cease at the moment when he leaves the country, or on expiry of 
a reasonable period in which to do so, but shall subsist until that time, even in case of armed conflict. 
However, with respect to acts performed by such a person in the exe rcise of his functions as a member of 
the mission, immunity shall continue to subsist.  
3. In case of the death of a member of the mission, the members of his family shall continue to enjoy 
the privileges and immunities to which they are entitled until the expiry of a reasonable period in which to 
leave the country.  
4. In the event of the death of a member of the mission not a national of or permanently resident in 
the receiving State or a member of his family forming part of his household, the receiving Sta te shall 
permit the withdrawal of the movable property of the deceased, with the exception of any property 
acquired in the country the export of which was prohibited at the time of his death. Estate, succession and 
inheritance duties shall not be levied on  movable property the presence of which in the receiving State 
was due solely to the presence there of the deceased as a member of the mission or as a member of the 
family of a member of the mission.  
Article 40 
1. If a diplomatic agent passes through or is  in the territory of a third State, which has granted him a 
passport/visa if such visa was necessary, while proceeding to take up or to return to his po st, or when 
returning to his own country, the third State shall accord him inviolability and such other immunities as 
may be required to ensure his transit or return.  The same shall apply in the case of any members of his 
family enjoying privileges or immunities who are accompanying the diplomatic agent, or travelling 
separately to join him or to return to t heir country.  
2. In circumstances similar to those specified in paragraph 1 of this article, third States shall not 
hinder the passage of members of the administrative and technical or service staff of a mission, and of 
members of their families, through t heir territories.  
3. Third States shall accord to official correspondence and other official communications in transit, 
including messages in code or cipher, the same freedom and protection as is accorded by the receiving 
State.  They shall accord to diplom atic couriers, who have been granted a passport/visa if such visa was 
necessary, and diplomatic bags in transit the same inviolability and protection as the receiving State is 
bound to accord.  
4. The obligations of third States under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this article shall also apply to the 
persons mentioned respectively in those paragraphs, and to official communications and diplomatic bags, 
whose presence in the territory of the third State is due to force majeuro.  
 
--------------------------The Former Secretary of State Service Officers (Conditions of Service) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE SERVICE OFFICERS  
(CONDITIONS OF SERVICE)  ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1972  
[21st September, 1972.]  
An Act to provide for the variation or revocation of the conditions of service of former Secretary 
of State Service officers in respect of certain matters and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Former Secretary of State 
Service Officers (Conditions of Service) Act, 1972.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise req uires,— 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “former Secretary of State Service officer ” means a person referred to in sub -clause ( a) or   
sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 1) of a rticle 312A of the Constitution ; 
(c) “I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service ” means a person who was appointed to 
the Civil Service of the Crown in India known as the Indian Civil Service and who on the appointed 
day is a member of the Indian Administrative Service;  
(d) “I.P. member of th e Indian Police Service ” means a person who was appointed to the Police 
Service of the Crown in India known as the Indian Police and who on the appointed day is a member 
of the Indian Police Service;  
(e) “pension” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 17) of article 366 of the Constitution.  
3. Conditions of service of I.C.S. members of the Indian Administrative Service. —Subject to the 
other provisions of this Act, on and from the appointed day, — 
(a) the conditions of service as respects, — 
(i) remuneration,  
(ii) leave, and  
(iii) pension;  
(b) the rights as respects disciplinary matters; and  
(c) the conditions of service and the rights as respects all other matters,  
of the I.C .S. members of the Indian Administrative Service shall be the same as those of the other 
members of that Service and accordingly and subject as aforesaid, the provisions of the All -India Services 
Act, 1951 (61 of 1951) and the rules and regulations made or deemed to have been made thereunder, as in 
force from time to time, s hall apply to and in relation to the I.C.S. members of the Indian Administrative 
Service as they apply to and in relation to the other members of that Service.  
4. Conditions of se rvice of I. P. members of the Indian Police Service. —Subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, on and from the appointed day, — 
(a) the conditions of service as respects, — 
(i) remuneration,  
                                                           
1. 1st October , 197 2, vide notification No. G.S.R. 4 20(E), dated 28th September , 197 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,    Part 
II, sec. 3( i). 2 
 (ii) leave, and  
(iii) pension;  
(b) the rights as respects disciplinary matters; and  
(c) the conditions of service and the rights as respects all other matters,  
of the I.P. members of the Indian Police Service shall be the same as those of the other members of       
that Service and accordingly and subject as aforesaid, the provisions of the All -India Services                      
Act, 1951 (61 of 1951) and the rules and regulations made or deemed to have been made thereunder, as in 
force from time to time, shall apply to and in relation to the I.P. members of the Indian Police Service as 
they app ly to and in relation to the other members of that Service.  
5. Pay of I.C.S. members of Indian Administrative Service and I.P. members of Indian Police 
Service.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 or section 4, an I.C.S. member of the Indian 
Administrative Service or an I.P. member of the Indian Police Service, as the case may be, holding a post 
specified in the Schedule or a post declared by the Central Government to be equivalent to such post 
shall, for so long as he holds that post, be entitl ed to draw pay as indicated against the post in the 
Schedule.  
6. Retirement of I.C.S. members of Indian Administrative Service and I.P. members of Indian 
Police Service. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 or section 4, — 
(a) an I.C.S. member of  the Indian Administrative Service, unless his service has been extended 
before the appointed day in  accordance with the rules and regulations then applicable or is extended 
on or after that day in accordance with the rules and regulations applicable to the other members of 
the Indian Administrative Service, shall retire  compulsorily, — 
(i) where he attains the age of fifty -eight years before the expiry of six months from the 
appointed day, on the date of expiry of the said period of six months or on the d ate on which he 
shall retire compulsorily in accordance with the rules applicable to him immediately before the 
appointed day, whichever date is earlier;  
(ii) in any other case, on his attaining the age of fifty -eight years;  
(b) the Central Government shal l have and shall be deemed always to have had the power to 
require an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service or an I.P. member of the Indian Police 
Service, in consultation with the Government of the State on whose cadre he is borne and after g iving 
to such member at least three months ’ previous notice in writing, to retire in public interest from 
service on the date on which such member completes thirty years of qualifying service or attains fifty 
years of age or on any date thereafter to be sp ecified in the notice;  
(c) an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service or an I.P. member of the Indian Police 
Service may, after giving at least three months ’ previous notice in writing to the Government of the 
State on whose cadre he is borne, r etire from service on the date on which such member completes 
thirty years of qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or on any date thereafter to be specified 
in the notice:  
Provided that no member under suspension shall retire from service excep t with the specific 
approval of the Government of the State on whose cadre he is borne.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( b) and clause ( c), “qualifying service ” means service 
qualifying for purposes of pension.  
7. Pension of I.C.S. members of Indian Administrative Service. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 3, — 
(a) an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service shall, subject to the provisions of 
section 8 and subject to the same provisions in regard to the right of the Centra l Government to 
withdraw the whole or any part of pension or to order recovery of pension and the same conditions 
for grant of retirement benefits, as are applicable for the time being in the case of other members of 
the Indian Administrative Service, be e ntitled on his retirement from service in accordance with the 3 
 provisions of section 6, to receive by way of annuity rupees thirteen thousand three hundred and 
thirty -three and one -third;  
(b) no death -cum-retirement gratuity benefits shall be available to o r in respect of an I.C.S. 
member of the Indian Administrative Service unless such member has exercised his option for such 
benefits before the appointed day in accordance with the orders of the Central Government in that 
behalf and the benefits admissible to or in relation to an I.C.S. member of the Service who so 
exercised his option shall be subject to the conditions specified in the said orders and to the same 
conditions for grant of retirement benefits as are applicable for the time being in the case of  other 
members of the Indian Administrative Service;  
(c) no family pension benefits shall be admissible in relation to an I.C.S. member of the Indian 
Administrative Service unless such member exercised his option in respect of such benefits before the 
appo inted day in accordance with the orders of the Central Government in that behalf and the benefits 
admissible in relation to an I.C.S. member of the service who so exercised his option shall be subject 
to the conditions specified in the said orders;  
(d) the Provident Fund account of an I.C.S. member of the Indian Administrative Service shall be 
credited, on his retirement or previous death, with the same amount, if any, as would have been 
credited by way of contribution in accordance with the rules in force immediately before the 
appointed day.  
8. Pension payable to former Secretary of State Service officers in Indian currency             
only.—(1) No former Secretary of State Service officer shall be entitled, or be deemed ever to have been 
entitled, to claim,— 
(a) pension in sterling; or  
(b) that his pension shall be paid outside India; or  
(c) where his pension was expressed in sterling or a fixed sterling minimum was applicable in 
respect of the pension payable to him, that his pension shall be computed  in the rupee equivalent of 
the amount fixed in sterling at a rate of exchange exceeding the rate of rupees thirteen and one -third 
to the pound sterling:  
1[Provided that in relation to every former Secretary of State Service officer who, having been in 
service on the 1st day of February, 1921, and domiciled in India on that date, is entitled immediately 
before the appointed day to claim his pension computed in the rupee equivalent of the amount fixed in 
sterling at a rate of exchange of rupees fifteen to a pound sterling, clause ( c) shall have effect as if for 
the words “thirteen and one -third”, the word “fifteen” were substituted : 
Provided further that every former Secretary of State Service officer whose pension was 
expressed in sterling or in respect of w hose pension a fixed sterling minimum was applicable, and 
who, immediately before the appointed day, is a foreigner having taken up permanent residence 
outside India, shall, so long as he continues to be a foreigner permanently residing outside India, be 
allowed to convert the annuity of rupees thirteen thousand three hundred and thirty -three and          
one-third or the annuity actually payable to him in rupees, whichever is less, into pound sterling at the 
rate of rupees thirteen and one -third to a pound  sterling, and the annuity so converted into pound 
sterling shall be paid outside India . 
Explanation 1.—Nothing contained in the foregoing proviso shall be deemed to entitle any former 
Secretary of State Service officer to claim conversion of amounts representing the annuity or the 
commuted value thereof, already drawn in rupees before the commencement of the Former Secretary 
of State Service Officers (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1975  (24 of 1975) , into pound 
sterling.  
Explanation 2.—In this sub-section, the expression “foreigner” means a person who is not a 
citizen of India.]  
                                                           
1. The p roviso s and Explanation s ins. by Act 24 of 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -5-1975).  4 
 (2) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, every former Secretary of State 
Service officer 1[[not being an officer to whom the first proviso or the second proviso to                  
sub-section ( 1) applies ]] who has been paid the rupee equivalent or, as the case may be, the pound 
sterling equivalent of his pension by calculating such pension with reference to a rate of exchange 
exceeding the rate of exchange of rupees thirteen and one -third to the pound sterling, shall refund to 
the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government, the sum by which the amount 
paid to him exceeds the amount which would have been payable to him if the cal culation had been 
made at the rate of exchange of rupees thirteen and one -third to the pound sterling and the Central 
Government or the State Government may set off, in such manner as it may deem fit, the amount 
required to be so refunded to it by any such  officer against any sum (including pension) which is or 
which may become due from that Government to such officer.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) 
shall apply to a former Secretary of State Service officer who is holding or has held the office of the 
Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court, the Comptroller and           
Auditor -General of India, the Chairman or other membe r of the Union or a State Public Service 
Commission or the Chief Election Commissioner as they apply to other former Secretary of State 
Service officers.  
9. Power of Central Government to adapt certain rules, regulations and orders. —(1) For the 
purpose of bringing the provisions of any rules and regulations made or deemed to have been made under 
the All -India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951) or any rules, regulations or orders (including any other 
instrument having the force of law) applicable immediately be fore the appointed day to or in relation to 
former Secretary of State Service officers into accord with the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, before the expiry of two years from the appointed day, by order published in the 
Official Gazett e, make such adaptations and modifications of such rules, regulations or orders, whether by 
way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any power under 
any other law to amend or repeal the rules, regulations and orders referred to in that sub -section.  
10. Power to construe rules, regulations and orders. —Notwithstanding that no provision or 
insufficient provision has been made under section 9 for the adaptation of a ny rule, regulation or order 
referred to in that section, any court, tribunal or authority, required or empowered to enforce such rule, 
regulation or order may construe it with such modifications as may be necessary to bring it into accord 
with the provisi ons of  this Act.  
2[10A.  Power of Central Government to make orders in certain cases to ensure parity. —(1) If 
the Central Government is satisfied that the conditions of service as respects any matter applicable to, or 
in relation to, any class or category of former Secretary of State Service officers under section 6, 7 or 8 or 
as respects any benefits by way of compensation for the increase in cost of living or any other reason, 
have become less favourable than those applicable to or in relation to any corresponding class or category 
of other officers of the Indian Administrative Service or the Indian Police S ervice or, as the case may be, 
any comparable service, it may, notwithstanding anything contained in those sections, by general or 
special order and subject to such conditions and restrictions (including conditions as to refund adjustment 
or recovery), as may be specified therein, make such provisions as it may deem fit for securing, so far as 
may be, parity in such cases.  
(2) Any order under sub -section ( 1) may be made so as to have retrospective effect.  
(3) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised  
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedi ately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -5-1975) . 
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f.  9-5-1975).  5 
 only in such modified form or be of n o effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.]  
11. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, for 
the purpose of removing the difficulty, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act as appear to it to be n ecessary or expedient:  
Provided that no such  order shall be made under this sub-section after the expiry of three years from 
the appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
12. Act to have overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act or of any order made thereunder shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law other than this Act or in 
any rule, regulation or order or other instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
13. Saving of orders in respect of disciplinary matters. —Any order in respect of disciplinary 
matters in relation to any I.C.S.  member of the Indian Administrative Service or any I.P.  member of the 
Indian Police Service in force immediately before the appointed day shall continue in force as from the 
appointed day:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall derogate from the powers of the competent authority to 
vary or rescind such or der. 
  6 
  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
PART I 
I.C.S. Members of the Indian Administrative Service  
 
Serial No . Post Pay or Scale of Pay 
1. Secretary to the Government of India     .         .     .       .        Rs. 4,000 . 
2. Additional Secretary to the Government of India     .       .        Rs. 3,500 . 
3. Joint Secretary to the Government of India     .       .       .        Rs. 3,000 . 
4. First Member, Board of Revenue, Tamil Nadu       .        .       Rs. 3,750 . 
 
PART II 
I. P. Members of the Indian Police S ervice  
 
Serial No . Post Pay or Scale of Pay 
1. Director, Intelligence Bureau      .          .          .         .    Rs. 3,500 . 
2. Director General, Central Reserve Police Force     .     . Rs. 3,250 . 
3. Deputy Director, Intelligence Bureau    .       .       .     .  Rs. 1,950—50—2,150 plus     
Rs. 100 Special Pay.  
4. Inspector -General of Police      .           .       .       .      .  Rs. 2,500—125—3,000.  
5. Commissioner of Police, Calcutta         .       .       .      .  Rs. 2,300—50—2,500.  
6. Deputy Inspector -General of Police       .      .       .      .  Rs. 1,950—50—2,150.  
 
--------------------------The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1972  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Declaration as to the policy of the State.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
TRANSFER TO PUBLIC OWNERSHIP OF GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS  
4. Transfer of shares of Indian insurance companies.  
5. Transfer of undertakings of other existing insurers.  
6.  Effect of transfer of undertakings.  
7.  Transfer of service of existing employees in certain cases.  
8. Provident, superannuation, welfare and other funds.  
CHAPTER III  
GENERAL  INSURANCE  CORPORATION OF  INDIA  
9. Formation of General Insurance Corporation of India.  
10. Transfer to Corporation of shares vested in Central Government.  
10A. Transfer to Central Government of shares vested in Corporation . 
10B. Enhancement of equity capital of General Insurance companies.   
CHAPTER IV  
AMOUNTS TO BE PAID FOR ACQUISITIONS  
11.  Amounts to be paid for transfer and vesting of shares or undertakings.  
12. Disbursement of amounts by Corporation . 
13.  Mode of payment.  
14.  Amount payable to shareholders may be paid to n amed persons instead in certain   cases . 
15. Payment into court in case of rival claims.  
CHAPTER V  
SCHEME FOR REORGANISATION OF GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS  
16. Schemes for mergers of companies, etc.  
17. Laying of schemes a nd notifications before Parliament.  
CHAPTER VA  
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF OFFICERS AND OTHER EMPLOYEES  
17A. Power of Central Government to regulate the terms and conditions of service of officers and 
other employees.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
FUNCTIONS OF CORPO RATION AND ACQUIRING COMPANIES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT  
SECTIONS  
18. Functions of Corporation.  
19. Functions of acquiring companies.  
20. Balance of profit how to be utilised.  
21. Interim provisions for management of Indian insurance companies.  
22. Power of Central Government to transfer employees.  
23. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Acquiring companies to have the exclusive privilege of carrying on general insurance business.  
24A. Exclusive privilege of Corporation and acquiring companies to  cease.  
25. [Omitted .] 
26. Acquiring companies and income -tax. 
27. Power to reduce amounts of insurance in certain eases  
28. Right of acquiring company to seek relief in respect of certain transactions.  
29. Duty to deliver possession of property and documents relating thereto.  
30. Penalty for withholding property, etc.  
31. Officers and employees of Corporation or of acquiring companies  to be public  servants . 
32. Indemnity.  
33. Dissolution of Corporation and acquiring companies.  
34. Reference to existing insurer in other laws.  
35. Application of Insurance Act.  
35A.  [Omitted .] 
36. Exemptions.  
37. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings . 
38. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
39. Power to make rules . 
40. [Repealed .] 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 57 OF 1972  
[20th September , 1972.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of shares of Indian insurance companies and 
undertakings of other existing insurers in order to serve better the needs of the economy by 
securing the development of general insurance business in the best interests of the 
community and to ensure that the operation of the economic system does not result in the 
concentration of wealth to the common detriment, for the regulation and control of such 
business and for matters connec ted therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972.  
2. Declaration as to the policy of the State. —It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to 
the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (c) of article 39 of the 
Constitution.  
Explanation .—In this section, “State” has the same meaning as in article 12 of the Constitution.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “acquiring company ” means any Indian insurance company and, where a scheme has been 
framed involving the merger of one Indian insurance company in another or the amalgamation of two 
or more such companies, means the Indian insurance company in which any other company has bee n 
merged or the company which has been formed a s a result of the amalgamation;  
(b) “appointed day ” means such day  not being a day later than the 2nd day of January, 1973, as 
the Central Government  may, by notification, appoint;  
(c) “Companies Act ” means th e Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(d) “Corporation ” means the General Insurance Corporation o f India formed under section 9;  
(e) “existing insurer ” means every insurer the management of whose undertaking has vested in 
the Central Government under section 3 of the General Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 
(17 of 1971), and includes the undertaking of the Life Insurance Corporation in so far as it relates to 
the general insur ance business carried on by it;  
(f) “foreign insurer ” means an existing ins urer incorporated under the la w of any country outside 
India;  
(g) “general insurance business ” means fire, marine or miscellaneous insurance business, whether 
carried on singly or in combination with one or more of them, but does not include capital redemp tion 
busines s and annuity certain business;  
(h) “Government company ” means a Government company as defined in se ction 617 of the 
Companies Act;  
(i) “Indian insurance company ” means an existing insurer having a share capital who is a 
company within th e meaning of the Companies Act;  
(j) “Insurance Act ” means the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938);  
(k) “Life Insurance Corporation ” means the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under 
the Life Insurance Corp oration Act, 1956 (31 of 1956);  
(l) “notifi cation ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
  4 
 (m) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(n) “Schedule ” means the Schedule to this Act;  
(o) “scheme ” means the scheme framed under section 16  1[and also includes a sc heme framed 
under section 17A];  
(p) words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein and defined in the Insurance 
Act, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act;  
(q) words  and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein or in the Insurance Act and 
defined in the Companies Act, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the 
Companies Act.  
CHAPTER II  
TRANSFER TO PUBLIC OWNERSHIP OF GENERAL INSURANCE BUSI NESS  
4. Transfer of shares of Indian insurance companies. —(1) On the appointed day , all the shares in 
the capital of every Indian insurance company shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to and vested 
in the Central Government free of all trusts, liabilities a nd encumbrances affecting them.  
(2) Out of the shares so transferred and vested, the Central Government shall, immediately thereafter, 
by notification, provide for the transfer of not less than ten shares of every such company to such persons 
as may be specified in the notification to enable the Indian insurance company to fu nction as a 
Government company.  
(3) Every notification made under sub -section ( 2) shall specify the names and description of the 
persons to whom the shares are transferred and the particulars of the shares which are t ransferred to each 
such person.  
(4) A copy of every notification made under sub -section ( 2) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, 
be sent by the Central Government to the concerned Indian insurance company,  who shall, on receipt of 
such copy, and notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act or in its articles of association, 
forthwith rectify its register of members by including therein the persons mentioned in the notification as 
the holders o f the shares specified therein.  
(5) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that the transfer and vesting of shares effected 
under sub -section ( 1) shall not be deemed to affect any right of the Indian insurance company subsisting 
immediately before th e appointed day against any shareholder to recover from him any sum of money on 
the ground that that shareholder has not paid or credited to the insurer the whole or any part of the value 
of the shares held by him or on  any other ground whatsoever.  
5. Tran sfer of undertakings of other existing insurers. —(1) On the appointed day, the undertaking 
of every existing insurer who is not an Indian insurance company shall stand transferred to and vested in 
the Central Government and the Central Government shall imm ediately thereafter provide, by 
notification, for the transfer to and vesting in such Indian insurance company, as it may specify in the 
notificati on, of that undertaking.  
(2) Any notification made under sub -section ( 1) may provide that any of the undertak ings aforesaid 
may be transferred to and vested in more than one Indian insurance company in such manner and subject 
to such conditions as may be specified in the notification.  
6. Effe ct of transfer of undertakings. —(1) The undertaking of every such existi ng insurer as is 
referred to in section 5 shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and 
all property, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and 
interests in, or arising  out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the 
ownership, possession, power or control of such existing insurer in relation to the undertaking, whether 
within or without India, and all books of accounts, registers, records and a ll other documents of whatever 
nature relating thereto, and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of 
whatever kind then subsisting of the existing insurer in relation to the undertaking.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f.17 -9-1984).  5 
 (2) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of 
attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having 
effect immediately before the appointed day and to which any s uch insurer as is referred to in section 5 is 
a party or which are in favour of such existing insurer shall be of as full force and effect against or in 
favour of the Indian insurance company in which the undertaking or the part to which the instrument 
relates has vested and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if, in the place of the 
existing insurer referred to in section 5, the Indian insurance company in which the undertaking or any 
part thereof has vested had been a party thereto, or as if they  had been issued in its favour.  
(3) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
business of the undertaking which has been transferred under section 5 is pending by or against any such 
existing insurer as is referred to in that section, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertaking or of anything contained in this Act, but 
the suit, appeal or other proceeding  may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Indian 
insurance company in which the undertaking or the part to which the  proceeding relates has vested.  
(4) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in the case of a foreign insurer  or, as the case 
may be, the Life Insurance Corporation, the provisions of sect ion 5 and of the preceding sub -sections 
shall only apply to the extent to which any property appertains, in the former case, to the general 
insurance business carried on in Indi a and, in the latter case, to the general insurance business carried on, 
whether within or without India, and to rights and powers acquired, and to debts, liabilities and 
obligations incurred and to contracts, agreements and other instruments made by the f oreign insurer or the 
Life Insurance Corporation, as the case may be, for the purpose of such general insurance business and to 
legal proceedings relating to those purposes, and the said provisions shall be construed accordingly.  
(5) If any question arises  as to whether any property appertains to any such general insurance 
business as is referred to in this section or whether any rights, powers, liabilities or obligations were 
acquired or incurred or any contract, agreement or other instrument was made by t he foreign insurer or 
the Life Insurance Corporation, as the case may be, for the purposes of any such business or whether any 
documents relate to those purposes, the question shall be referred to the Central Government which shall, 
after giving an opportu nity of being heard to the persons interested in the matter, decide it in such manner 
as it thinks fit.  
7. Transfer of service of existing employees in certain cases .—(1) Every whole -time officer or 
other employee of an existing insurer other than an India n insurance company who was employed by that 
insurer wholly or mainly in connection with his general insurance business immediately before the 
appointed day shall, on the appointed day, become an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of 
the Indian  insurance company in which the undertaking of that insurer or that part of the undertaking to 
which the service of the officer or other employee relates has vested, and shall hold his office or service 
under the Indian insurance company on the same terms and conditions and with the same rights to 
pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such 
vesting, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Indian insurance company in 
which the undertaking or part has vested is terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions are 
duly altered by  that Indian insurance company:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any such officer or other employee who has 
given, in wr iting, notice to the Central Government or to any person nominated in this behalf by that 
Government before the appointed day intimating his intention of not becoming an officer or employee of 
the Indian insurance company in whom the undertaking or part th ereof to which his service relates has 
vested.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any person was a whole -time officer or employee, or as to 
whether any officer or employee, was employed wholly or mainly in connection with the general 
insurance business of the existing insurer referred to in sub -section ( 1) immediately before the appointed 
day, the question shall be referred within a period of two years from the a ppointed day and not thereafter  
to the Central Government which shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the person 
concerned in the matter, decide it in such manner as it thinks fit an d such decision shall be final.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law fo r the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee under 6 
 sub-section ( 1) shall not entitle any such officer or other employee to any compensation under that Act or 
such other law, and no such claim shall be entertained  by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
8. Provident, superannuation, welfare and other funds. —(1) Where an existing insurer has 
established a provident, superannuation, welfare or any other fund for the benefit of his employees and 
constituted a trust  in respect thereof (hereafter in this section referred to as an existing trust), the moneys 
standing to the credit of such fund on the appointed day, together with any other assets belonging to such 
fund, shall stand transferred to and vested in the India n insurance company on the appointe d day free 
from any such trust.  
(2) Where all the employees of the Life Insurance Corporation or any other existing insurer do not 
become employees of an Indian insurance company, the monies and other assets belonging to any such 
fund as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be apportioned between the trustees of the fund and the 
Indian insurance company in the prescribed manner; and in case of any dispute about such apportionment 
the decision of the Central Gov ernment thereon shall be final.  
(3) Where the undertaking of an existing insurer has vested in more than one Indian insurance 
company, the Central Government may, by order, provide for the apportionment among such Indian 
insurance companies of monies and other ass ets belonging to any existing trust relating to that 
undertaking in such manner as in its opinion may be appropriate.  
(4) The Indian insurance company shall as soon as may be after the appointed day constitute in 
respect of the moneys and other assets whic h are transferred to and vested in it under this section one or 
more trusts having objects as similar to the objects of the existing trusts as in the circumstances  may be 
practicable.  
(5) Where all the moneys and other assets belonging to an existing trust  are transferred to and vested 
in an Indian insurance company under this section, the trustees of such trust shall, as from the appointed 
day, stand discharged from the trust, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the 
appointed day.  
CHAPTER III  
GENERAL  INSURANCE  CORPORATION OF  INDIA  
9. Formation of General Insurance Corporation of India .—(1) As soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall form a Government company in accordance 
with the provisions of the Companies Act, to be known as the General Insurance Corporation of India for 
the purpose of superintending, controlling and carrying on the business of gener al insurance:  
1[Provided that on and from the commencement of the General Insurance Business ( Nationalisation) 
Amendment Act, 2002, the provisions of this sub -section shall have effect as if for the words 
“superintending, controlling and carrying on the busi ness of general insurance ”, the words “carrying on 
re-insurance business”  had been substitu ted.] 
(2) The authorised capital of the Corporation shall be 2[rupees two hundred and fifty crores, divided 
into two hundred and fifty lakhs fully paid -up shares] of one hundred rupees each, out of which rupees 
five crores shall be the initial subscri bed c apital of the Corporation:  
1[Provided that the Central Government may, by notifica tion, increase or reduce the authorised capital 
or subscribed capital, as the case may be, as it deems fit .] 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), it shall not be 
necessary to add the word “Limited ” as the last word of the name of the Corporation.  
10. Transfer to Corporation of shares vested in Central Government. —All the s hares in the 
capital of every Indian insurance company which stand transferred to and vested in the Central 
Government by virtue of section 4 [with the exception of the shares transferred to any person under            
sub-section ( 2) of that section] shal l immediately after such vesting, stand transferred to and vested in the 
                                                           
1. The proviso inserted  by Act 40 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -3-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1989, s. 2, for “rupees seventy -five crores , divided into seventy -five lakhs fully paid -up shares ”                
(w.e.f. 22 -10-1989).  7 
 Corporation and every Indian insurance company shall forthwith give effect to such transfer of shares and 
rectify its register of members by including therein the Corporatio n as the h older of such shares.  
 1[10A. Transfer to Central Government of shares vested in Corporation .—All the shares in the 
capital of the acquiring companies, being — 
(a) the National Insurance Company Limited;  
(b) the New India Assurance Company Limited;  
(c) the Oriental Insurance Company Limited;  
(d) the United India Insurance Company Limited,  
and vested in the Corporation before the commencement of the General Insurance Business 
(Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 2002 shall, on such commencement, stand transfe rred to the Central 
Government. ] 
2[10B. Enhancement of equity capital of Gen eral Insurance companies. —The General Insurance 
Corporation and the insurance companies specified in section 10A may, raise their capital for increasing 
their business in rural and social sectors, to meet solvency margin and such other purposes, as the Central 
Government may empower in this behalf:  
Provided that the shareholding of the Central Government shall not be less than fifty one per cent. at 
any time.]  
CHAPTER IV  
AMOUNTS TO B E PAID FOR ACQUISITIONS  
11. Amounts to be paid for transfer and vesting of  shares or undertakings. —(1) For the transfer 
of the shares of each Indian insurance company to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under         
section 4, there shall be paid by the Central Government to the Corporation, for distribution to the 
shareholders of each such company, the amount specified against such company in the corresponding 
entry under column  (3) of Part A of the Schedule.  
(2) For the transfer to, and vesting i n the Central Government, under section 5, of the undertaking of 
each existing insurer, who is not an Indian insurance company there shall be paid by the Central 
Government to the Corporation, for payment to each such existing insurer, the amount specified  against 
such insurer in the corresponding entry under column ( 3) of Part B of the Schedule.  
12. Disbursement of amounts by Corporation. —(1) The total amount paid by the Central 
Government under section 11 shall be treated as additional contribution to the  subscribed capital of the 
Corporation and such additional subscribed capital shall stand allotted to, and ves ted in, the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Corporation shall distribute the amount paid to it under section 11, to the shareholders of each 
Indian in surance company and to each existing insurer, who is not an Indian insurance company, in 
accordance with their rights and interests, and, if there is any doubt or dispute as to the right, or extent of 
the right, of any person to receive the whole or any pa rt of such amount, refer such doubt or dispute to the 
Central Government for determination and thereafter , act in accordance with the determi nation made by 
that Government.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), the amount referred to in section 11 shall be given 
in accordance with the provisions of section 13, section 14 or section 15, as the case may be.  
13. Mode of payment. —(1) Where the amount referred to  in section 11 is to be given — 
(a) to the members of an Indian insurance company, the amount due to each such member shall 
be paid in full, where it does not exceed twenty -five thousand rupees, and where it exceeds              
twenty -five thousand rupees, each such member shall be paid t wenty -five thousand rupees and the 
balance of the amount due to such member shall be paid to him in three equal annual instalments, the 
first of which shall  fall due on the appointed day;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 40 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -3-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2015, s. 103 (w.e.f. 26 -12-2014).  8 
 (b) to a foreign insurer, it shall be given to him in cash within th ree months from the appointed 
day; 
(c) to the Life Insurance Corporation, it shall be given to it in three equal annual instalments, the 
first of which shall  fall due on the appointed day;  
(d) to an existing insurer who is a co -operative society, it shall be distributed as soon as may be 
after the appointed day in accordance with the rules of the society which will apply in case of 
dissolution o f the society;  
(e) to an existing insurer not falling within any of the foregoing provisions, it shall be apportio ned 
by the acquiring company among the individual policy -holders of the insurer whose policies with that 
insurer were in force on the appointed day and were comprised in the undertaking of such insurer in 
proportion to the premiums paid by the policy -holde rs under such policies and every such  payment 
shall be made either — 
(i) in cash, to be  sent by postal money order, or  
(ii) at the option of the policy -holder, as a deduction in the premium due at the time of the 
renewal of the policy and such option shall be exercised by the policy -holder before the expiry of 
three months from the appointed day (or within such further time not exceeding three months as 
the Central Government may, on the application of the policy -holder, allow); and the option so 
exercised s hall be final and shall not be altered or rescind ed after it has been exercised:  
Provided that if any policy -holder fails to exercise his option within the time allowed, he shall be 
deemed  to have exercised his option in favour of payment  in cash by postal  money order.  
(2) Where any amount is payable whether in instalments or otherwise under the provisions of this 
section, the unpaid amount, w here its payment has become due  shall carry interest at the rate of four         
per cent. per annum from the appoin ted day.  
14. Amount payable to shareholders may be paid to named persons instead in certain            
cases.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if a majority in number of the 
persons, who, immediately before the appointed day, w ere registered in the books of an Indian insurance 
company as the members thereof, and representing two -thirds in value of the amount payable to the 
Indian insurance company, agree either in person or by proxy at a meeting specially convened for the 
purpos e that the amount so payable instead of bein g distributed among the members  shall be given to any 
such person or body of persons as the members may nominate either at that meeting or subsequently for 
the purpose of carrying on any business, and the Central  Government is satisfied that due provision has 
been or will be made for the payment of the value of their respective shares to persons who have 
dissented from the reasolution, the amount may be given to the person or body of persons so nominated in 
such m anner and subject to such conditions as the Ce ntral Government may think fit.  
(2) No resolution passed at any such meeting as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) held after the 
appointed day shall have any effect unless the meeting has been convened after o btained  the approval of 
the Central Government.  
15. Payment into court in case of rival claims. —Where a claim to the amount payable under 
section 11 is made by two or more persons adversely to one another, the corporation may cause the 
amount to be deposite d in any civil court having jurisdiction in that behalf and the court shall decide as to 
whom the payment shall be made.  
CHAPTER V  
SCHEME FOR REORGANISATION OF GENERAL INSURANCE BUSINESS  
16. Schemes for mergers of companies, etc .—(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that for 
the more efficient carrying on of general insurance business it is necessary so to do, it may, by 
notification, frame one or more schemes providing for all or  any of the following matters: — 
(a) the  merger in one Indian insurance company of any other Indian insurance company, or the 
formation of a new company by the amalgamation of two or m ore Indian insurance companies;  
(b) the transfer to and vesting in the acquiring company of the undertaking (inc luding all its 
business, properties, assets and liabilities) of any Indian insurance company which ceases to  exist by 
reason of the scheme;  9 
 (c) the constitution, name and registered office and the capital structure of the acquiring company 
and the  issue an d allotment of shares;  
(d) the constitution of a board of management by whatever name called for the manag ement of 
the acquiring company;  
(e) the alteration of the memorandum and articles of association of the acquiring company for 
such purposes as may be necessar y to give effect to the scheme;  
(f) the continuance in the acquiring company of the services of all officers and other employees of 
the Indian insurance company which has ceased to exist by reason of the scheme, on the same terms 
and conditions whi ch they were getting or, as the case may be, by which they were governed 
immediately before the commencement of the scheme;  
(g) the rationalisation or revision of pay scales and other terms and conditions of service of 
officers and othe r employees wherever  necessary;  
(h) the transfer to the acquiring company of the provident, superannuation, welfare and other 
funds relating to the officers and other employees of the Indian insurance company which has ceased 
to exist by reason of the scheme;  
(i) the continuance by or against the acquiring company of legal proceedings pending by or 
against any Indian insurance company which has ceased to exist by reason of the scheme, and the 
initiation of such legal proceedings, civil or criminal, as the Indian insura nce company might have 
initiated  if it had not ceased to exist;  
(j) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as are necessary to give full effect to 
the scheme.  
(2) In framing schemes under sub -section ( 1), the object of the Central Governme nt shall be to ensure 
that ultimately there are only four companies (excludi ng the Corporation) in existing  and that they are so 
situate as to render their combined services effective in all parts of India.  
(3) Where a scheme under sub -section ( 1) provide s for the transfer of any property or liabilities, then, 
by virtue of the scheme, the property shall stand transferred to and vested in, and those liabilities shall be 
transferred to and become the liabili ties of, the acquiring company.  
(4) If the rational isation or revision of any pay scale or other terms and conditions of service under 
any scheme is not acceptable to any officer or other employee, the acquiring company may terminate his 
employment by giving him compensation equivalent to three months ’ remuneration, unless the contract of 
service with such employee provides for a shorter notice of termination.  
Explanation. —The compensation payable to an officer or other employee under this sub -section shall 
be in addition to, and shall not affect, any pensi on, gratuity, provident fund or other benefit to which the 
employee may be entitled  under his contract of service.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the  transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of an 
Indian insurance company to the acquiring company shall not entitled any such officer or other employee 
to any compensation under that Act or other law, and no such claim shall be entertained  by any cour t, 
tribunal or other authority.  
(6) The Central Government may, by notification, add to, amend or vary any sc heme framed under 
this section.  
(7) The provisions of this section and of any scheme framed under it shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any other law or any agreement, award or other instrument for the 
time being in force.  
  10 
 1[(8) The power to frame a scheme under sub -section ( 1), and the power conferred by sub -section ( 6) 
to add to, amend or vary any scheme framed under this section, shall include the power to frame such 
scheme with retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the appointed day.]  
2[17. Laying of schemes and n otifications before Parliament. —Every sch eme framed under       
sub-section ( 1) of section 16 and every notification issued under sub -section ( 3) of that section shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is framed or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total per iod of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in  the scheme or notification or both 
Houses agree that the scheme or notification should not be framed or issued, the scheme or notification 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that an y such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that scheme or notification.]  
 3[CHAPTER VA  
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF OFFICERS AND OTHER EMPLOYEES  
17A. Power of Central Government to regulate the terms and conditions of service o f officers 
and other employees. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame 
one or more schemes for regulating the pay scales and other terms and conditions of service of offi cers 
and other employees of the Corporati on or of any acquiring company.  
(2) A scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) may add to, amend or vary any scheme framed under 
section 16 [including any addition, amendment or variation made therein by notification und er                    
sub-section ( 6) of section 16] with respect to rationalisation or revision of pay scales and other terms and 
conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Corporation or of any acquiring company, to 
provide for further rationalisation or revision of such pay scales and other terms and conditions of service 
notwithstanding that such further rationalisation or revision is unrelated to, or unconnected with, the 
amalgamation of insurance companies or merger consequent on nat ionalisation  of general insurance 
business.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, add to, amend or vary any sch eme framed under 
this section.  
(4) The power to frame a scheme under sub -section ( 1), and the power conferred by sub -section ( 3) to 
add to, amend or vary any scheme framed under this section, shall include the power to frame such 
scheme, or, as the case may be, to make such addition, amendment or variation in any scheme framed 
under this section, with retrospective effect from a date not  earlier than the appointed day.  
(5) A copy of every scheme, and every amendment thereto, framed under this section shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, b efore each House of Parliament.  
(6) The provisions of this section and of any scheme fra med under it shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any other law or any agreement, award or other instrument for the 
time being in force.]  
CHAPTER VI  
FUNCTIONS OF  CORPORATION AND ACQUIRING COMPANIES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT  
18. Functions of Corporation. —(1) The functions of the Corporation shall include — 
(a) the carrying on of any part of the general insurance business, if i t thinks it desirable to do so;  
(b) aiding, assisting and advising the acquiring companies in the matte r of setting up of standards 
of conduct and sound practice in general insurance business and in the matter of rendering efficient 
service to holders of  policies of general insurance;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1984 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for section 17 (w.e.f. 15-5-1986)  
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 1985, s. 4 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1984 ). 11 
 (c) advising  the acquiring companies in the matter of controlling their expenses including the 
payment of commission and other expenses;  
(d) advising the acquiring companies in the matter of the investment of their funds;  
(e) issuing directions to acquiring companies  in relation to the conduct  of general insurance 
business:  
1[Provided that all the functions of the Corporation specified in this sub -section, on and from the 
commencement of the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 2002, shall be 
performed by the Central  Government. ] 
(2) In issuing any directions under sub -section ( 1), the 2[Central Government]  shall keep in mind the 
desirability of encouraging competition amongst the acquiring companies as far as possible in order to 
render their services more efficient.  
19. Functions of acquiring companies .—(1) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central 
Government in this behalf and to its memorandum and articles of association, it shall be the duty of every 
acquiring company to carry  on general insurance business.  
(2) Each acquiring company shall so function under this Act as to secure that general insurance 
business is developed to the best advan tage of the community.  
(3) In the discharge of any of its functions, each acquiring compa ny shall act so far as may be on 
business principles and where any directions have been issued by the 3[Central Government or the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999) ], shal l be guided by such 
directions.  
(4) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that the Corporation  and any acquiring company 
may, subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Government in this behalf, enter into such contracts 
of reinsurance or reinsurance treaties as it may think fit for the protection of its interests.  
20. Balance of profit how to be utilised. —(1) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, 
depreciation in assets, provi dent, superannuation, welfare and other funds, debts due to Government and 
all other matters for which provision is necessary under any law or which are usually provided for by 
insurance companies, every acquiring company shall distribute the balance of pr ofit as dividends.  
(2) Any profit made by the Corporation and any sums received by the Corporation by way of 
dividends or otherwise shall be dealt with by it in such manner as may be prescribed.  
21. Interim provisions for management of Indian insurance companies. —(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Companies Act  or in the memorandum and articles of association of any Indian 
insurance company, on and from the appointed day and until a new board of directors of the Indian 
insurance company is dul y constituted, the management of the company shall continue to vest in the 
Custodian in charge of the management of the undertaking of that company immediately before the 
appointed day by virtue of the provisions contained in the General Insurance (Emergen cy Provisions) Act, 
1971  (17 of 1971) , and the Custodian shall be entitled, subject to such directions as the Central 
Government may issue in this behalf, to exercise all the powers and do all acts and things as may be 
exercised or done by the compan y or b y its board of directors.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to prevent the Central Government from 
appointing any other person to take charge of the management of the undertaking of any Indian insurance 
company during the period refe rred to in that sub -section if for any reason it becomes necessary so to do, 
and any person so appointed may exercise all the powers and do all acts and things which a Custodian 
may exercise or do under sub -section ( 1). 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -3-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 21 -3-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 21 -3-2003).  
 12 
 (3) The Custodian referred to in sub -section ( 1) and the person appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall 
be entitled to such salaries and other allowances as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and 
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
22. Power of Centr al Government to transfer employees. —1[The Central Government or any 
person authorised by it may at any time transfer any officer]  or employee from an acquiring company or 
the Corporation to any other acquiring company or the Corporation, as the case may be, and the officer or 
employee so transferred, shall continue to have the same terms and conditions of service as were 
applicable to him immediately before such transfer.  
23. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—The Corporation and every acquiring 
company shall, in the discharge of its functions, be guided by such directions in regard to matters of 
policy involving public  interest as the Central Government may give.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Acquiring companies to have the exclusive privilege of carrying on general insurance 
business. —(1) Except to the extent expressly provided in this Act, on and from the appointed day, the 
Corporation and the acquiring companies shall have the exclusive privilege of carrying on gener al 
insurance business in India.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 36, any certificate of registration granted under the Insurance 
Act to any insu rer other than an insurer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, on and from the appoi nted day, 
cease to have effect:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the carrying on by the Life Insurance 
Corporation of life insurance business and c apital redemption and annuity certain business.  
2[24A. Exclusive privilege of Corporation and acquiring companies to cease .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the exclusive privilege of the Corporation and the acquiring companies of 
carrying on general insurance business in India shall cease on and from the commencement of the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development A uthority Act, 1999 and the Corporation and the acquiring 
companies shall, thereafter, carry on general insurance business in India in accordance with the provisions 
of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) :] 
3[Provided that the Corporation shall, on and from  the commencement of the General Insurance 
Business (Nationalisation) Amendment Act, 2002, cease to carry on general insurance busi ness. ] 
25. [Properties in India not to be insured with foreign insurers except with permission of Central 
Government .] Omitted by the Insurance Laws (Amendment ) Act, 2015 (5 of 2015), s. 104                        
(w.e.f . 26-12-2014).  
26. Acquiring companies and income -tax.—For the purposes of the Income -tax Act, 1961                 
(43 of 1961), every acquiring company s hall be deemed to be an Indian company and a company in which 
the public are substantially interested.  
27. Power to reduce amounts of insurance in certain cases.—An acquiring company may, having 
regard to its financial condition on the 13th day of May, 1971 or the financial condition on the said date 
of any existing insurer whose undertaking has been transferred to and vested in it under this Act reduce 
the liabilities which have arisen under contracts of general insurance entered into before the said da te in 
such manner and subject to su ch conditions as it thinks fit:  
Provided that no such reduction shall be made except in accordance with specific proposals made by 
the acquiring company in this behalf and approved by the Central Government.  
28. Right of acquiring company to seek relief in respect of certain transactions. —(1) Where an 
existing insurer has at any time within five years be fore the 13th day of May, 1971 — 
(a) made any payment to an y person without consideration,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2002, s. 6, for “The Corporation may at any time transfer any officer” (w.e.f. 21 -3-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 1999, s. 32  and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 19 -4-2000).  
3. Ins. by Act 40 of 2002, s. 7 (w.e.f. 21 -3-2003).  13 
 (b) sold or disposed of any pro perty of the insurer without consideration or f or an inadequate 
consideration,  
(c) acquired any property or rights for an excessive consideration,  
(d) entered into or varied any agreement so as to require an excessive consideration to be paid or 
given by t he insurer,  
(e) entered into any other transaction of such an onerous nature as to cause a loss to, or impose a 
liability on, the insurer exceeding any benefit accruing to the insurer,  
and the payment, sale, disposal, acquisition, agreement or variation thereof or other transaction was not 
reasonably necessary for the purpose of the general insurance business of the insurer or was made with an 
unreasonable lack of prudence on the part of the insurer, regard being had in either case to the 
circumstances at  the time, the acquiring company may apply for  relief to the court in respect of such 
transaction, and all parties to the transaction shall, unless the court otherwise directs, be m ade parties to 
the application.  
(2) The court may make such order against any of the parties to the application as it thinks just having 
regard to the extent to which those parties were respectively responsible for the transaction or benefited 
from it and all  the circumstances of the case.  
(3) Where an application is made to the  court under this section in respect of any transaction and the 
application is determined in favour of the acquiring company, the court shall have exclusive jurisdiction 
to determine any claim outstanding in respect of the transaction.  
29. Duty to deliver possession of property and documents relating thereto .—(1) Where any 
property appertaining to an existing insurer has been transferred to and vested in an Indian insurance 
compan y under section 5, — 
(a) every person in whose possession, custody or control a ny such property may be, shall deliver 
the property to the Indi an insurance company forthwith,  
(b) any person who immediately before such vesting has in his possession, custody or control any 
books, documents or other papers relating to an existing insurer  shall be liable to account for the said 
books, documents and papers to the Indian insurance company, and shall deliver them to that 
company or to such person as that company ma y direct.  
(2) In particular, all the assets of an existing insurer appertaining  to the undertaking held in deposit by 
the Reserve Bank of India under the Insurance Act or by trustees in trust shall be delivered t o the Indian 
insurance company.  
(3) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this section, it shall be lawful  for each 
Indian Insurance company to take all necessary steps for taking possession of all properties which have 
been transferred to and vested in it under this Act.  
30. Penalty for withholding property, etc. —If any person wilfully withholds or fails to d eliver to an 
Indian insurance company as required by section 29 any property or any books, documents or other 
papers which may be in his possession or unlawfully retains possession of any property of an existing 
insurer which has been transferred to and ve sted in an Indian insurance company under section 5 or 
wilfully applies any such property to purposes other than those expressed in or authorised by this Act, he 
shall, on the complaint of the Indian insurance company, be punishable with imprisonment for a  term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
31. Officers and employees of Corporation or of acquiring companies  to be public            
servants. —Every officer or other employee of the Corporation  or of an acquiring company shall be 
deemed to be a public servant for the purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
32. Indemnity. —Every officer of the Central Government and every officer or other employee of the 
Corporation and of an y acquiring company shall be indemnified by the Central Government or the 
Corporation or the acquiring company, as the case may be, against all losses and expenses incurred by 
him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties under this Act except suc h as have been caused by his 
own wilful act or default.  
33. Dissolution of Corpo ration and acquiring companies. —No provision of law relating to the 
winding up of companies shall apply to the Corporation or to an acquiring company, and neither the 14 
 Corporati on nor any such company shall be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Government 
and in such manner as it may direct.  
34. Reference to existing insurer in other laws. — Any reference to an existing insurer in any law 
other than this Act or any contract or other instrument shall, in so far as it relates to an acquiring 
company, be construed as a reference to that company.  
35. Application of Insurance Act. —Subject to such exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, 
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, the Insurance Act shall apply to or 
in relation to the Corporation and every acquiring company as if the Corporation or the acquiring 
company, as the case may be, were an insurer carrying on general insurance business within the meaning 
of that Act.  
35A. [Deduction of income -tax not to be made on interest or dividend payable to the Corporation, 
etc.] Omitted by The Finance Ac t 2002 (20 of 2002), s. 158 ( w.e.f . 1-6-2002).  
36. Exemptions. —(1) Nothing contained in this A ct shall apply in relation to — 
(a) any general insurance business carried on by a State Government, to the extent to which such 
insurance relates to properties belonging to it or undertakings owned wholly or  mainly by the State 
Government  or to properties belonging to semi -government bodies, or any Board or body corporate 
established by the State Government under any statue or any industrial or commercial undertaking in 
which  the State Government has substantial financial interest, whether as sh areholder, lender or 
guarantor;  
(b) any general insurance business not falling within clause ( a) which has been carried on by a 
State Government before the commencement of this Act, to the extent to which it is necessary to 
allow such business to run off:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorise the State Government 
to issue any new policies or renew any existing policies;  
(c) any  insurer whose business is being voluntarily wound up o r is being wound up by a court;  
(d) the insurance business carried on by the Calcutta Hospital and Nursing Hom e Benefits 
Association Limited;  
(e) the insurance business carried on by the Export Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited and 
the Deposit Insurance Corporation established under section 3 of the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
Act, 1961 (47 of 1961);  
(f) any scheme in existence immediately before the 14th day of May, 1971 or any scheme framed 
after the said day with the approval of the Central Government for the insurance of crops or of cattle 
or of flood risk s or of war or emergency risks.  
(2) If the Central Government is satisfied that an insurer, whether established before or after the 
appoin ted day, carries on only such general insurance business as is not carried on ordinarily by insurers, 
it may, by notification, direct that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such insurer.  
37. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings. —No act  or proceeding of the Corporation or of 
an acquiring company shall be called in question merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, 
or defect in the constitution of, the Corporation or the company.  
38. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any officer of the Central Government or officer or other employee of the Corporation or of the 
acquiring company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
39. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made unde r this 
section may provide for— 
(a) the manner in which the profits, if any, and other moneys received by the  Corporation may be 
dealt with;  
1[(b) the conditions, if any, subject to which the Corpora tion shall carry on re -insurance business;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40  of 2002, s. 8, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 21 -3-2003).  15 
 (ba) the conditions, if any, subject to which the acquiring companies shall carr y on general 
insurance business ;] 
 (c) the terms and conditions subject to which any reinsurance contracts o r treaties may be entered 
into; 
(d) the form and manner in which any notice or application may be given or made to the Central 
Government;  
(e) the reports which may be called for by the Central Government from the Corporation and the 
acquiring companies;  
(f) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section and every notification issued under section 35 shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days  which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notif ication or both Houses agree that the 
rule or notification should not be made, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified fo rm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
notification.  
40. [Omission of section 14 of Act 17 of 1971 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1978             
(38 of 1978), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 26-11-1978).  
 
  16 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 11)  
Amounts to be paid  
PART A 
 
Serial  
Number  Name of Indian Insurance company     Amount to  
be paid  
(1)  (2) (3) 
     Rs. 
1. All India General Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 10,00,000  
2. Anand  Insurance Company Ltd . Preference  
Shares  
 3,50,000  
  Equity Shares  2,00,000  
3. Bhabha Marine Insurance Company 
Ltd. . . . 54,448  
4. Bharat General Reinsurance Ltd.  Preference  
Shares  
  8,18,000  
  Ordinary Shares  13,49,844  
5. British India General Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 37,50,000  
6. Calcutta Insurance Limited  . . . 7,49,442  
7. Central Mercantile Assurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 3,38,499  
8. Clive Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 26,12,600  
9. Commonwealth Assurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
10. Concord of India Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 39,77,100  
11. Devkaran Nanjee  Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 16,80,000  
12. General Assur ance Society Ltd.  . . . 8,06,000  
13. Hercules Ins urance Company Ltd.  . . . 87,48,000  
14. Hindusthan Gener al Insurance  
Society Ltd.  . . . 15,52,500  
15. Hindusthan Ideal  Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 25,20,605  
16. Howrah Ins urance Company Ltd.  . . . 975 
17. Hukumchand  Insurance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 10,00,000  
18. India Reinsuranc e Corporation Ltd.  . . . 2,05,02,200  
19. Indian Guarantee & General 
Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 1,95,69,760  
  17 
 Serial  
Number  Name of Indian Insurance company     Amount to  
be paid  
(1)  (2) (3) 
     Rs. 
20. Indian Mercanti le Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 50,33,195  
21. Indian Merchants ’ Marine 
Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 2,28,753  
22. Indian Ocean Insuran ce Company 
Ltd.  . . . 1,00,000  
23. Indian Trade & G eneral Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 61,21,200  
24. Jalanath Insurance Ltd.  . . . 10,42,955  
25. Jupiter Gener al Insurance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 26,24,445  
26. Kalyan Marine  Insurance Company 
Ltd. . . . 1,79,880  
27. Liberty Insuran ce Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
28. Madras Motor and G eneral 
Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 1,77,69,600  
29. Madura Insurance Compa ny Ltd.  Preference  Shares  700 
   Ordinary Shares  15,83,900  
  Deferred Shares  12,500  
30. Marine & General Insuranc e 
Company Ltd.   . . . 8,95,300  
31. Mother India Fire & General 
Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 7,44,345  
32. Motor Owners ’ Insurance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 1,65,575  
33. Naranji Bha nabhai & Company 
Ltd. . . . 49,200  
34. Narhari Mari ne Insurance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 2,36,400  
35. National I nsurance Company Ltd.  . .  60,58,15 0 
36. Neptune A ssurance Company Ltd.  . . . 10,00,000  
37. New Great Insura nce Company of 
India Ltd.  . . . 43,50,000  
38. New India Ass urance Company 
Limited .  . . . 8,20,37,678  
39. New Merchants I nsurance 
Company Ltd.  . .  68,91 2 
  18 
 Serial  
Number  Name of Indian Insurance company     Amount to  
be paid  
(1)  (2) (3) 
     Rs. 
40. New Premier Ins urance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 1,21,110  
41. Northern India General  Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 998 
 
42. Oriental Fire & General Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 2,43,98,000  
43. Pandyan Insuran ce Company Ltd.  . . . 90,00,000  
44. Pioneer Fire & Gen eral Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 11,82,610  
45. Porbandar Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 59,194  
46. Prachi Ins urance Company Ltd.  . . . 21,375  
47 Ruby General Insu rance Company 
Ltd. . . . 1,38,74,000  
48. Shree Mahasa gar Vima Company 
Ltd.  . . . 1,18,252  
49. South Indian I nsurance Company 
Ltd. . . . 60,63,000  
50. Sterling General Insurance 
Company Ltd.  Preference Shares  23,000  
  Ordinary Shares  16,08,139  
51 Triton Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 47,07,180  
52. United India Fire & General 
Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 21,39,991  
53. Universal Fire & General I nsurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 24,71,618  
54. Vanguard Insurance Compa ny Ltd.  . . . 896 
55. Vulcan I nsurance Company Ltd.  . . . 32,49,617  
PART B 
 
Serial  
Number  Name of insurer     Amount to  
be paid  
(1)  (2) (3) 
     Rs. 
1. Co-operative Fire & General 
Insurance Society Ltd.  . . . 18,69,000  
2. Co-operative Gen eral Insurance 
Society Ltd.   . . . 5,93,000  
  19 
 Serial  
Number  Name of insurer     Amount to  
be paid  
(1)  (2)   (3) 
     Rs. 
3. Indian Mutual Gen eral Insurance 
Society Ltd.  . . . 1,40,000  
4. Life Insurance Corporation of India  . . . 2,81,34,000  
5. Millowners’ Mutu al Insurance 
Association Ltd.  . . . 12,89,000  
6. Orissa Co -operative Insura nce 
Society Ltd.  . . . 2,83,000  
7. Reinsurance Association of India 
(International) Ltd.  . . . 13,000  
8. Union Co -operati ve Insurance 
Society Ltd.  . . . 37,60,000  
9. Alliance Assurance Company Ltd.  . . . 36,65,000  
10. American Insurance Company  . . . 3,30,000  
11. Atlas Assurance Company Ltd.  . .  64,85,000  
12. Baloise Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 22,67,000  
13. British Aviatio n Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
14. Caledonian Insurance Company  . . . 81,000  
15. Century Insura nce Company Ltd.  . . . 6,04,000  
16. Commercial Union Assurance 
Company Ltd.   . . . 85,20,000  
17. Eagle Star Ins urance Company Ltd.  . . . 37,12,000  
18. Gerling Global R einsurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
19. Great American Insurance 
Company  . . . 3,81,000  
20. Guardian Ass urance Company Ltd.  . . . 19,98,000  
21. Hanove r Insurance Company  . . . 42,13 ,000 
22. Hartford Fir e Insur ance Company  . . . 2,96,000  
23. Hom e Insurance Company  . . . 3,73,000  
24. Legal & General Assurance Society 
Ltd.  . . . 5,28,000  
25. Liverpool and London and Globe 
Insurance Compa ny Ltd.  . . . 8,23,000  
26. London Assurance  . . . 12,30,000  
27. London Guarante e & Accident 
Company Ltd.  . . . 40,000  
  20 
 Serial  
Number  Name of insurer     Amount to  
be paid  
(1)  (2)   (3) 
     Rs. 
28. London & Lancash ire Insurance 
Company Ltd.   . . . 47,70,00 0 
29. L’Union Fire, Accident and General 
Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
30. National Employers ’ Mutual 
General Insurance Association Ltd.  . . . 3,17,003  
31. National Insuranc e Company of 
New Zealand Ltd. . . . 1,000  
32. New Hampshire Insurance 
company  . . . 19,08,000  
33. New Zealand Insurance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 10,84,000  
34. Norwich Union Fire Insurance 
Society Ltd.  . . . 31,43,000  
35. Phoenix Assurance Company Ltd.  . . . 2,63,000  
36. Provincial Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
37. Queensland I nsurance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 10,31,000  
38. Royal Exchange Assurance  . . . 49,62,000  
39. Royal Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 73,28,000  
40. Scottish Unio n & National 
Insurance Company   . . . 43,15,000  
41. Skandia I nsurance Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
42. South British Insurance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 18,42,000  
43. Sun Insur ance Office Ltd.  . . . 25,86,000  
44. Switzerland General Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 6,35,000  
45. Threadneedle  Insurance Company 
Ltd.  . . .  1,000  
46. Tokio Marine & Fire Insurance 
Company Ltd.  . . . 92,000  
47. Union Insurance Society of Canton 
Ltd.  . . . 5,89,000  
48. United Scottish Insurance Company 
Ltd.  . . . 83,000  
49. Welfare Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
50. Western Assurance Company  . . . 13,92,000  
51. Yorkshire Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 16,31,000  
52. Zurich Insurance Company Ltd.  . . . 1,000  
 
--------------------------The Khadi and other Handloom Industries Development (Additional Excise Duty on Cloth) Amendment Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE KHADI AND OTHER HANDLOOM INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT (ADDITIONAL 
EXCISE DUTY ON CLOTH) AMENDMENT ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 60 OF 1972  
[26th November, 1972.]  
An Act further to amend the Khadi  and other Handloom Industries Development (Additional 
Excise Duty on Cloth) Act, 1953.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Khadi and other Handloom Industrie s Development 
(Additional Excise Dut y on Cloth) Amendment Act, 1972.  
2. [Amendment of section  2.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1978  (38 of 1978 ), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule (w.e.f. 26-11-1978). 
3. [Amendment of section  5.] Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 26-11-1978). 
4. Validation of duty of excise levied and collected under the principal Act in respect of certain 
period.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act, or in the rules made thereunder, 
the duty of excise levied and collected or purporting to have been levied and collected under the principal 
Act during the period beginning on the 1 st day of March, 1 969 and ending with the 6 th day of July, 1970, 
on the cotton fabrics referred to in sub -section ( 2), manufactured by a manufacturer, shall be deemed to 
have been validly levied and collected in accordance with the rules published with the notification of t he 
Government of India in the former Ministry of Commerce and Industry No. S.R.O. 1479, dated the 25 th 
July, 1953, as subsequently amended by the notification of the Government of India, in the Ministry of 
Foreign Trade No. S.O. 2369, dated the 7 th July, 1 970, as if those rules as so amended were in force at all 
material times when such duty was levied and collected and accordingly — 
(i) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of any 
such duty so levied and c ollected;  
(ii) no court shall enforce a decree or order directing the refund of any such duty so levied and 
collected; and  
(iii) any such duty levied or assessed under the principal Act in respect of the aforesaid period, 
but not collected, may be recovere d in th e manner provided under the principal Act.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section, “manufacturer” means a person who is engaged in the         
business of — 
(i) spinning of co tton twist, yarn or thread; or  
(ii) weaving of cotton fabrics; or  
(iii) processing of cotton fa brics, 
with the aid of power and who has a proprietary interest in at least two of the aforesaid businesses.  
(2) The cotton fabrics referred to in sub -section ( 1), are — 
(i) medium A fabrics, unprocessed;  
(ii) medium  B and coarse fabrics, being — 
(a) unprocessed; or  
(b) bleached; or  
  2 
 (c) dyed; or  
(d) if bleached and dyed, not printed; or  
(e) “Dhoti”, “Sari”, “Long Cloth”, “Shirting” or “Drill” within the meaning of the 
Explanation  to the notification of the Taxtile Co mmissioner No. S.O. 3656, dated the 13 th 
October, 1964 issued under clause 22 of the Cotton Taxtiles (Control) Order, 1948.  
--------------------------The Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1972--------------------------
 
1 THE LIMESTONE AND DOLOMITE MINE S LABOUR WELFARE FUND ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 62 OF 1972  
[2nd December , 1972.]  
An Act to provide for the levy and collecti on of a cess on limestone and dolomite for the 
financing of activities to promote the welfare of persons employed in th e limestone and 
dolomite mines.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Limestone and Dolomite 
Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “agent ” and “owner ” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( c) and ( l) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(b) “factory ” and “occupier ” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( m) and 
(n) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (6 3 of 1948);  
2[(bb) “limestone ” includes minerals like lime -shell, calcareous sand and sea sand essentially 
composed of lime -shell, marl, kanka r or lime -kankar;]  
(c) “manager ” means the manager referred to in section 17 of t he Mines Act, 1952 (3 5 of 1952);  
(d) a person is said to be employed in  a limestone or dolomite mine, — 
(1) if he is employed within the premises or in the vicinity of such mine by the owner, agent 
or manager of such mine or by a contractor or any other agency exclusively in any one or m ore of 
the following, namely: — 
(i) any limestone or dolomite mining operation;  
(ii) the operation, servicing, maintenance or repair of any ma chinery or any part ther eof 
used in or about such mine;  
(iii) the loading, unloading or despatch of limestone or dolomite or any other material 
connected with the m ining of limestone or dolomite;  
(iv) any work in any office, canteen or creche situate within the precincts of  such mine;  
(v) any welfare, health, sanitary or conservancy services or any watch and ward duties at 
any place situate within such premises or vicinity, not being a place occupied by any 
residential building; or  
(2) if, in any such area as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette 
in this behalf, he is employed by the owner, agent or manager of such mine or by a contractor or 
any other agency exclusively in the loading, unloading or despatch of limestone or do lomite or 
any other material connected with the m ining of limestone or dolomite;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
                                                           
1. 1st December, 1973, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1272, dated 14th November, 1973, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec.  3(i).  
2. Ins. by Act 70 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).    
2 3. Levy and collection of cess on limestone and dolomite. —With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be levied and 
collected as a cess for the purposes of this Act on so much of limestone and dolomite produced in any 
mine— 
(i) as is sold  or otherwise disposed of to the occupier of any factory; or  
(ii) as is used by the owner of such mine for any purpose in connection w ith the manufacture of 
cement, 1[iron, steel, ferro -alloys, alloy steels, chemicals, sugar, paper, fertilizers, refractories, iron 
ore pelletisation or such other article or goods or class of articles or goods, as the Central Government 
may, from time to time, specify by notifi cation in the Official Gazette ,] 
a duty of excise, at such rate not exceeding one rupee pe r metric tonne of limestone or dolomite, as the 
case may be, as the Central Government may, from time to time, fix by notifi cation in the Official 
Gazette.  
Explanation .—Where the owner of any limestone or dolomite mine is also the occupier of any 
factory, then, for the purposes of clause  (ii), all limestone or dolomite, as the case may be, produced in the 
mine and not sold or otherwise disposed of to the occupier of any other factory shall be deemed, unless 
the contrary is proved, to have been used by such owner for any purpose in connection with the 
manufacture of 2[any article or goods referred to in or specified under clause ( ii)]. 
4. Payment of duty of excise. —(1) Every duty of excise leviable under this Act on limesto ne or 
dolomite shall be payable — 
(a) to the occupier of the factory, by the person by whom such limestone or dolomite is sold or 
otherwise disposed of to such occupier;  
(b) to the Central Government, by the owner of the limestone or dolomite mine where the 
limestone or dolomite is used by su ch owner for any purpose in connection with the manufacture of 
3[any article or goods referred to in or specified under clause ( ii) of section 3 ,] 
within such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) All amounts referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall be collected by the occupier of the 
factory in such manner, and paid by him to the Central Government within such period, as may be 
prescribed.  
5. Application of proceeds of duty of excise. —(1) An amount equivalent to the proceeds of the duty 
of excise lev ied under this Act, reduced by the cost of collection as determined by the Central 
Government, together with any income from investment of the said amount and any other moneys 
received by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act, shall, after du e appropriation made by 
Parliament by law, be paid to the credit of a fund to be called the Limestone and Dolomite Labour 
Welfare Fund (hereinafter referred to as the Fund).  
(2) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the expenditure in curred in 
connection with measures which, in the opinion of that Government, are necessary or expedient to 
promote the welfare of persons employed in the limestone or dol omite mines; and in particular — 
(a) to defray the cost of measures for the benefit of persons employed in the limestone or 
dolomite mines directed towards — 
(i) the improvement of public health and sanitation, the prevention of disease and the 
provision and improvement of medical facilities;  
(ii) the provision and improvement of water suppl ies and facilities for washing;  
(iii) the provision and improvement of educational facilities; 4*** 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 70 of 1982, s. 3, for “iron or steel” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “cement, iron or steel” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “cement, iron or steel” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. The word “and” omitted by Act 15 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).    
3 (iv) the improvement of standards of living including housing and nutrition, the amelioration 
of social conditions and the provis ion of recreational faciliti es; 
1[(v) the provision of family welfare, including family planning education and services;]  
(b) to grant loan or subsidy to a State Government, a local authority or the owner of a limestone 
or dolomite mine, in aid of any scheme approved by the Central G overnment for any purpose 
connected with the welfare of persons employed in limestone or dolomite mines;  
(c) to pay annually grants -in-aid to such of the owners of limestone or dolomite mines who 
provide to the satisfaction of the Central Government welfare facilities of the prescribed standard for 
the benefit of person employed in their mines, so, however, that the amount payable as grants -in-aid 
to any such owner shall not exceed — 
(i) the amount spent by him in the provision of welfare facilities as  determined by the Central 
Government or any person specified by it in this behalf, or  
(ii) such amount as may be prescribed,  
whichever is less:  
Provided that no grant -in-aid shall be payable in respect of any welfare facilities provided by the 
owner of a limestone or dolomite mine where the amount spent thereon determined as aforesaid is less 
than the am ount prescribed in this behalf;  
(d) to meet the allowances, if any, of the members of the Advisory Committees and the Central 
Advisory Committee constitute d under sections 6 and 7 respectively and the salaries and allowances, 
if any, of per sons appointed under section 8;  
(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be defrayed from the 
Fund.  
6. Advisory Committees. —(1) The Central Government may constitute as many Advisory 
Committees as it thinks fit, but not exceeding one for each of the principal limestone or dolomite 
producing States, to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of 
this Act a s may be referred to it by that Government, including matters relating to the application of the 
Fund.  
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may be appointed to it by 
the Central Government and the members shall be chosen i n such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that each Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members representing the 
Government, the owners of limestone and dolomite mines and the persons employed in the limestone and 
dolomite mines and that  at least one member of each s uch Committee shall be a woman.  
(3) The Chairman of each Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all members of every 
Advis ory Committee.  
7. Central Advisory Committee. —(1) The Central Government may constitute a Central Advisory 
Committee to co -ordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 6 and to advise 
the Central Government on any matter arising o ut of the adminis tration of this Act.  
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may be appointed to 
it by the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in s uch manner as may be prescribed : 
Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members 
representing the Government, the owners of limestone and dolomite mines and the persons employed in 
the limestone and dolomite mines.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).   
4 (3) The Chairman of the Central Advisory Committee sha ll be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all members of the 
Central Advisory Committee.  
1[7A. Power to co -opt, etc.—(1) An Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, 
at any time and for such period as it thinks fit, co -opt any pers on or persons to the Committee.  
(2) A person co -opted under sub -section ( 1) to a Committee shall exercise and discharge all the 
powers and functions of a member thereof, but shall not be  entitled to vote.]  
8. Appointment of Insp ectors, etc., and their powers. —(1) The Central G overnment may appoint 
as many 2[Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Administrators, Inspectors] and such other officers and staff 
as it thinks necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every person so appointed shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 
21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) 3[Any Welfare Commissioner, Welfare Ad ministrator or Inspector] may, — 
(a) with such assistance, if  any, as he may think fit, enter at any reasonable time, any place which 
he considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act;  
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his duties; and  
(c) exercise such  other powers as may be prescribed.  
9. Power of  Central Government to exempt. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if 
the Central Government is satisfied that there is in force in any State or part thereof a law making 
adequate provision for the  financing of activities to promote the welfare of persons employed in the 
limestone or dolomite mines, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the 
provisions of this Act shall not apply or shall apply to such State or pa rt thereof subject to such exceptions 
and modifications as may be specified in the notification.  
10. Annual report of activities finan ced under the Act. —The Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be, after the end of each financial year cause to be publi shed in the Official Gazette a report giving 
an account of its activities financed under this Act during the previous financial year, together with a 
statement of accounts.  
11. Interest payable by occupiers of factories and owners of mines. —If any occupier  of a factory 
or any owner of a limestone or dolomite mine fails to pay any amount payable by him to the Central 
Government under section 4 within the period prescribed therefor under that section, such occupier or 
owner, as the case may be, shall be liabl e to pay simple interest at twelve per cent. per annum on the 
amount to be paid, from the date on which such payment is due till such amount is actually paid.  
12. Penalty for non -payment of duty of excis e within the prescribed period. —If any duty of 
excise  payable by the occupier of the factory or the owner of the limestone or dolomite mine to the 
Central Government under section 4 is not paid to that Government within the period prescribed 
thereunder, it shall be deemed to be in arrears and the authority p rescribed in this behalf may, after such 
inquiry as it deems fit, impose on the occupier of the factory or, as the case may be, on the owner of the 
limestone or dolomite mine a penalty not exceeding the amount of duty of excise in arrears:  
Provided that be fore imposing any such penalty such occupier or such owner, as the case may be, 
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard and, if after such hearing the said authority is 
satisfied that the default was for any good and sufficient reason, no pe nalty shall be imposed under this 
section.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 70 of 1982, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Inspectors, Welfare Administrators” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “ Any Inspector  or Welfare Administrator” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   
5 13. Recovery  of amounts due under the Act. —Any amount due under this Act (including the 
interest or penalty, if any, payable under section 11 or section 12, as the case may be) from any occupier 
of a factory or an y owner of a limestone or dolomite mine may be recovered by the Central Government 
in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
14. Penalty for evasion of duty of excise. —(1) Whoever wilfully or intentionally evades or attempts 
to evade the payment of duty of excise payable by him to the Central Government under this Act, shall, 
on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) No court shall take cogniz ance of an offence punishable under this section, save on a complaint 
made by or under the authority of the Central Governme nt. 
15. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the  offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordi ngly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect o n the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
16. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the assessment and collection of the duty of excise levied under this Act ; 
(b) the period within which the person selling or otherwise disposing of the limestone or dolomite 
to the occupier of the factory shall pay the duty of ex cise to such occupier;  
(c) the period within which the owner of the limestone or dolomite mine shall pay the duty of 
excise  to the Central Government ; 
(d) the manner in which the occupier of the factory shall collect the duty of excise;  
(e) the period with in which the occupier of the factory shall pay to the Central Government the 
duty of excise collected by him;  
(f) the determination of the cost of collection of the duty of excise levied under this Act ; 
(g) the manner in which the Fund may be applied for t he measures specified in section 5 ; 
(h) the conditions governing the grant of loan or subsidy under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of 
section 5 ;  
6 (i) the standard of welfare facilities to be provided by owners of limestone or dolomite mines for 
the purposes of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(j) the determination of the amounts referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 5 an d in the proviso to that clause ; 
(k) the composition of the Advisory Committees and the Centr al Advisory Committee constituted 
under sections 6 and 7 respectively, the manner in which the members thereof shall be chosen, the 
term of office of such members, the allowances, if any, payable to them, and the manner in which the 
said Advisory Committee s and the Central Advisory Committee shall conduct their business;  
(l) the recruitment, conditions of service and the duties of all persons appointed under section 8;  
(m) the po wers that may be exercised by 1[a Welfare Commissioner or a Welfare Administrat or 
or an Inspector] under section 8;  
(n) the furnishing to the Central Government by the occupier of factorie s 2[, the purchasing agents 
or sto ckists of limestone or dolomite ] and the owners, agents or managers of limestone or dolomite 
mines, of such statistical and other information as may be required to be furnished from time to time 
by that Government ; 
(o) the authority which may impos e any penalty under section 12.  
(3) In making any rule under clause ( b) or clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may 
direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred r upees.  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
followi ng the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the  case may be; so, however, that any such modification or  
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 70 of 1982, s. 7, for “an Inspector or a Welfare Administrator” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   
--------------------------The Marine Products Export Development Authority Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE MARINE PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 197 2                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
MARINE PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Authority.  
5. Acts or proceedings of Authority or its Committees not to be invalidated.  
6. Salary and allowances of Chairman.  
7. Executive officers of the Authority and other sta ff. 
8. Committees of the Authority.  
9. Functions of the Authority.  
10. Dissolution of the Authority.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION  
11. Registration of fishing vessel, processing plant, etc.  
12. Application, cancellation, fee payable and other matters relating t o registration.  
13. Returns to be made by owners.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
14. [Repealed .] 
15. [Repealed .] 
16. Grants and loans by the Central Government.  
17. Constitution of the Fund.  
18. Borrowing powers of the Authority.  
19. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
20. Power to prohibit or control imports and exports of marine products.  
21. Directions by Central Government.  
22. Returns and reports.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Penalty for making false returns.  
24. Penalties for obstructing a member or officer of the Authority in the discharge of his duties 
and for failure to produce books and records.  
25. Other penalties.  2 
 SECTIONS  
26. Offences by companies.  
27. Jurisdiction of court.  
28. Previous sanction of Central  Government.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Power to delegate.  
31. Suspension of operation of Act.  
32. Application of other laws not barred.  
33. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
34. Power to make regulations.   3 
 THE MARINE PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 13 OF 1972  
[20th April, 1972.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of an Authority for the development of the marine 
products industry under the control of the Union and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India a follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Marine Products Export 
Development Authority Act, 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It sha ll come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Declaration  as to expediency of control by the Union. —It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the marine products industry.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Authority ” means the Marine Products Export Development Authority established under      
section 4;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Authority;  
(c) “conveyance ” includes a carrier vessel or a vehicle;  
(d) “dealer” means a dealer  in any of the marine products;  
(e) “Director” means the Director of Marine Products Export Development appointed under 
section 7;  
(f) “export” and “import” mean respectively taking out of, or bringing into, India by land, sea     
or air;  
(g) “fishing vess el” means a ship or boat fitted with mechanical means of propulsion which is 
exclusively engaged in sea -fishing for profit;  
(h) “marine products ” includes all varieties of fishery products known commercially as shrimp, 
prawn, lobster, crab, fish, shell -fish, other aquatic animals or plants or part thereof and any other 
products which the Authority may, by notification in the Gazette of India, declare to be marine 
products for the purposes of this Act;  
(i) “member” means a member of the Authority;  
(j) “owner”, in relation to any fishing vessel or in relation to any processing plant or storage 
premises for marine products or in relation to any conveyance used for the transpor t of marine 
products, includes — 
(i) any agent of the owner; and  
(ii) a mortgagee, lessee or other person in actual possession of the fishing vessel, processing 
plant, storage premises or conveyance;  
                                                           
1. 12th July , 1972 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 388(E), dated 12th July, 1972,  in respect of the provisions of sections other  
than sections 11 to 19 (both inclusive), see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec.  3(i). 
     15th January, 1973, vide notification No.  G.S.R. 8(E), dated 10th January, 1973,  in respect of the provisions of     
sections 11 to 19 (both inclusive), see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec.  3(i). 4 
 (k) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) “processing ”, in relation to marine products, includes the preservation of such products such as 
canning, freezing, drying, salting, smoking, peeling or filleting and any other method of processing 
which the Authority may, by notification in the Gazette of India, specify in this behalf.  
CHAPTER II  
MARINE PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Authority. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purposes of t his Act, an Authority to be called the Marine Product s Export Development 
Authority.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both  movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following membe rs, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) the Director of Marine P roducts Export Development, ex-officio ; 
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People and 
one by the Council of States ; 
(d) five members to represent respectively the Ministries of the C entral Government dealing 
with— 
(i) agriculture,  
(ii) finance,  
(iii) foreign trade,  
(iv) industry, and  
(v) shipping and transport;  
(e) such number of other members not exceeding twenty as the Central Government may think 
expedient, to be appointed by that Government by notification i n the Official Gazette from among 
persons who are in its o pinion capable of representing — 
(i) the Governments of the States or Union territories having a  sea-coast;  
(ii) the interests of owners of fishing vessels, processing plants or storage premises for marine 
products and conveyances used for the transport of marine products;  
(iii) the interests of dealers;  
(iv) the interests of persons employed in the marine products industry;  
(v) the interests of persons employed in research institutions engaged in the  researches 
connected with the said industry; and  
(vi) such other persons or class of persons who, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
ought to be represented on the Authority.  
(4) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the cat egories specified in   
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3), the term of office of the members other than the member referred to in 
clause ( b) of that sub -section, and the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of the ir functions by the members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) Any officer of the Central Government, not being a member of the Authority, when deputed by 
that Government in this behalf, shall have the right to attend meetings of the Authority and tak e part in the 
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote.  5 
 (6) The Authority shall elect from among its members a Vice -Chairman who shall exercise such of 
the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may  be 
delegated to him by the Chairman.  
5. Acts or proceedings of Authority or its Committees not to be invalidated. —No act or 
proceeding of the Authority or any Committee appointed by it under section 8, shall be i nvalidated merely 
by reason of — 
(a) any  vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority or such Committee; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority or such 
Committee; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Authority or such Committee not affecting the merits 
of the case.  
6. Salary and allowances of Chairman. —The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and 
allowances and such conditions of service in respect of leave, p ension, provident fund and other matters 
as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central Government.  
7. Executive officers of the Authority and other staff. —(1) The Central Government shall appoint 
a Director of Marine Products Export Development to exe rcise such powers and perform such duties 
under the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairman.  
(2) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Authority to exercise such powers and 
perform such duties under the  Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the 
Chairman.  
(3) The Director and the Secretary to the Authority shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances 
and such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may be 
fixed by the Central Government.  
(4) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Authority may appoint such 
other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions a nd pay 
them such salaries and allowances as it may determine from time to time.  
(5) The Chairman, the Director, the Secretary and other employees of the Authority shall not 
undertake any work unconnected with their duties under this Act except with the per mission of the 
Central Government.  
8. Committees of the Authority. —(1) The Authority may appoint such Committees as may be 
necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall have the  power to co -opt as members of any Committee appointed under   
sub-section ( 1) such other number of persons who are not members of the Authority, as it may think fit.  
9. Functions of the Authority. —(1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote, by such 
measures as it thinks fit, the development under the control of the Central Government of the marine 
products industry with special reference to exports.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures refer red to 
therein may provide for — 
(a) developing and regulating off -shore and deep -sea fishing and undertaking measures for the 
conservation and management of off -shore and deep -sea fisheries;  
(b) registering fishing vessel s, processing plants or storage prem ises for marine products and 
conveyances used for the transport of marine products;  
(c) fixing of standards and specifications for marine products for purposes of export;  
(d) rendering of financial or other assistance to owners of fishing vessels engaged i n off -shore 
and deep -sea fishing and owners of processing plants or storage premises for marine products and 
conveyances used for the transport of marine products, and acting as an agency for such relief and 
subsidy schemes as may be entrusted to the Autho rity; 6 
 (e) carrying out inspection of marine products in any fishing vessel, processing plant, storage 
premises, conveyance or other place where such products are kept or handled, for the purpose of 
ensuring the quality of such products;  
(f) regulating  the export of marine products;  
(g) improving the marketing of marine products outside India;  
(h) registering of exporters of marine products on payment of such fees as may be prescribed;  
(i) collecting statistics from persons engaged in the catching of fish or  other marine products, 
owners of processing plants or storage premises for marine products or conveyances used for the 
transport of marine products, exporters of such products and such other persons as may be prescribed 
on any matter relating to the marin e products industry and the publishing of statistics so collected , or 
portions thereof or extracts therefrom;  
(j) training in various aspects of the marine products industry; and  
(k) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Authority shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with and subject to such 
rules as may be made by the Central Government.  
10. Dissolution of the Authority. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and for reasons to be specified therein, direct that the Authority shall be dissolved from such date 
and for such period as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to th e Authority to make representations against the proposed dissolution and shall consider 
the representations, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) When the Authority is dissolved under the provisions of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all members notwithstanding that their term of office has not expired, shall, from the date of 
dissolution, vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Authority shall, during the period of dissolution, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Centr al Government may appoint in this behalf;  
(c) all funds and other property vested in the Authority shall, during the period of dissolution, vest 
in the Central Government; and  
(d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Authority shall be reconst ituted in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION  
11. Registration of fishing vessel, processing plant, etc. —(1) Every owner of a fishing vessel, 
processing plant or storage premises for marine products or conveyance used for the transport of marine 
products shall, before the expiration of one month from the date on which he first became owner of such 
fishing vessel, processing plant, storage premises or conveyance, or before the expiration of three months 
from the date of comi ng into force of this section, whichever is later, apply to the Authority for 
registration under this Act of every such fishing vessel, processing plant, storage premises, or conveyance 
owned by him:  
Provided that the Authority may, for sufficient reason, extend the time -limit for registration by such 
period as it thinks fit.  
(2) Registration once made shall continue to be in force until it is cancelled by the Authority.  
12. Application, cancellation, fee payable and other matters relating to registration. —The form 
of application for registration under section 11 and for the cancellation of such registration, the fee 
payable on such applications, the particulars to be included in such applications, the procedure to be 
followed in granting and cancelling regi stration and the registers to be kept by the Authority shall be such 
as may be prescribed.  7 
 13. Returns to be made by owners. —(1) Every owner referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 11 
shall furnish to the Authority at the prescribed time and in the presc ribed manner such returns as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Authority may authorise a member or any of its officers to inspect any fishing vessel, 
processing plant, storage premises or conveyance at any time to verify the accuracy of any return made 
under this  section.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
14. [Imposition of a cess on marine products exported. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending                       
Act, 2006  (24 of 2006 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 1-6-2006 ). 
15. [Payment of proceeds of cess to the Authority. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending  Act, s. 2 and 
the First Schedule ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-2006 ). 
16. Grants and loans by the Central Government. —The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority by way of grants or loans 
such sums of money as the Central Government may consider necessary.  
17. Constitution of the Fund. —(1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Marine Products 
Export Dev elopment Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) the proceeds of the cess made over to the Authority by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of registration made under this Act;  
(c) any  other fee that may be levied and collected by the Authority under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder;  
(d) any grants or loans that may be made by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act;  
(e) any grants or loans that may be made by any insti tution for the purposes of this Act ; and 
(f) all sums realised by the Authority in carrying out the measures referred to in section 9.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for meeting the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the officers and other 
employees of the Authority;  
(b) for meeting the other administra tive expenses of the Authority;  
(c) for meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 9; and  
(d) for repayment of any loans from the Central Government or from any institution.  
18. B orrowing powers of the Authority. —Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the 
Authority shall have power to borrow on the security of the Marine Products Export Development Fund 
or any other asset for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
19. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the profit and loss account and the 
balance -sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Gover nment in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connect ion with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same  rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connecte d vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority.  8 
 (4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with t he audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
20. Power to prohibit or control imports and exports of marine products. —(1) The Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting 
or otherwise controlling the import or export of marine products, either generally or in specified classes of 
cases.  
(2) All marine products to which any order under sub -section ( 1) applies, shall be deemed to be  
goods of which the import or export has been prohibited under section 11 of the Customs                                
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), and all the pro visions of that Act  shall have effect accordingly.  
(3) If any person contravenes any order made under sub -section ( 1), he shall, without prejudice to    
any confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of the Customs                                     
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), as applied by sub -section ( 2), be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
21. Directions by Central Government. —The Authority shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
22. Returns and reports. —(1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time 
and in such form and manne r as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns 
and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion 
and development of the marine products industry, as the Central Government ma y, from time to time, 
require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Authority shall, as soon as possible 
after the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and before 
such date, as may be  prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes 
during the previous financial year.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Pen alty for making false returns. —Any person who being required by or under this Act to 
furnish any return fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false 
and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees.  
24. Penalties for obstructing a member or officer of the Authority in the discharge of his duties 
and for failure to produce books and records. —Any person who — 
(a) obstructs any me mber authorised by the Chairman in writing or any officer or other employee 
of the Authority authorised by it in this behalf or any person authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government or by the Authority, in the exercise of any power conferred, or i n the discharge of any 
duty imposed, on him by or under this Act; or  
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails to produce such 
book or record when required  to do so by or under this Act,  
shall be punishable with imprison ment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
25. Other penalties. —Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder other than the provisions, punishment for the 
contravention whereof has been provided for in sections 20,  23 and 24, shall be punishable with 9 
 imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thous and 
rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the 
first such contravention.  
26. Offences by comp anies.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company sh all be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was com mitted without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to  be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
27. Jurisdiction of court. —No court inferior to that of a Presidency magistrate or a Magistrate of the 
first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
28. Previous sanction of Cent ral Government. —No prosecution for any offence punishable under 
this Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Government, or the Authority or any Committee appointed by it, or any member of the 
Authority or such Committee, or any officer or other employee of the Government or of the Authority or 
any other person authorised by the Government or the Au thority, for anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
30. Power to delegate. —The Central Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it unde r this Act (not being the power to make rules under                     
section 33) may also be exercised, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in the order, by such officer or authority as may be specified therein.  
31. Suspension of operation of Act. —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances 
have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act should cease to be 
imposed or if it considers necessary or expedient so t o do in the public interest, the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to a specified extent, either indefinitely or 
for such period as may be specified in the notification, the operation of all or any of the pro visions of this 
Act. 
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has under sub -section ( 1) been suspended or 
relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or relaxation may at any time while this Act remains in force be 
removed by the Central Government b y notification in the Official Gazette.  
32. Application of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
33. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
  10 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all o r any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in 
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 4, the term of office and other conditions of service of 
members, the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of 
their functions by, such members;  
(b) the circumstances in which and the authority by which a member may be removed;  
(c) the holding of a minimum number of meetings of the Author ity every year;  
(d) the procedure to be followed at meetings of the Authority for the conduct of business and the 
number of members which shall form a quorum at a meeting;  
(e) the maintenance by the Authority of records of business transacted by the Author ity and the 
submission of copies thereof to the Central Government;  
(f) the powers of the Authority, its Chairman, the Director and Committees of the Authority with 
respect to the incurring of expenditure;  
(g) the conditions subject to which the Authority may incur expenditure outside India;  
(h) the preparation of budget estimates of receipts and expenditure of the Authority and the 
authority by which the estimates are to be sanctioned;  
(i) the form and manner in which the accounts should be kept by the Authority;  
(j) the deposit of the funds of the Authority in banks and the investment of such funds;  
(k) the conditions subject to which the Authority may borrow;  
(l) the conditions subject to whi ch and the manner in which contracts may be entered into by or 
on behalf of the Authority;  
(m) the additional matters in respect of which the Authority may undertake measures in the 
discharge of its functions;  
(n) the remuneration and other allowances paya ble to the person or persons referred to in      
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(o) the form of, and the particulars to be contained in, any returns or reports to be made to the 
Authority under this Act;  
(p) the form of, and the manner of making applications for registration and for its cancellation by 
the Authority, the fee payable on such applications and the procedure to be followed in granting and 
cancelling registration and the conditions governing such registration;  
(q) the collection  of any information or statistics in respect of marine products;  
(r) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed by, or provided for by rules under, this 
Act. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be , after it is mad e, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the suc cessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however , that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
34. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Authority may make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act and the rules made thereu nder for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act.  
  11 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  procedure to be followed at meetings of the Committees appointed by the Authority and 
the number of members which shall form a quorum at a meeting;  
(b) the delegation to the Chairman, members, Director, Secretary or other officers of the 
Authority of any of the powers and duties of the Authority under this Act;  
(c) the travelling and other allowances of members of the Authority and of Committees thereof;  
(d) the pay and allowances and leave and other conditions of service of officers (other than those 
appo inted by the Central Government) and other employees of the Authority;  
(e) the maintenance of its accounts;  
(f) the maintenance of the registers and other records of the Authority and its various Committees;  
(g) the appointment by the Authority of agents t o discharge on its behalf any of its functions;  
(h) the persons by whom, and the manner in which, payments, deposits and investments may be 
made on behalf of the Authority.  
(3) No regulation made by the Authority shall have effect until it has been approve d by the Central 
Government and published in the Official Gazette, and the Central Government, in confirming a 
regulation, may make any change therein which appears to it to be necessary.  
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gaze tte, cancel any regulation which 
it has confirmed and thereupon the regulation shall cease to have effect.  
1[(5) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in ses sion, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in makin g any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annu lment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 5-5-1986).  
--------------------------The National Service Act, 1972--------------------------
1 THE NATIONAL SERVICE ACT, 1972  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
LIABILITY OF PERSONS TO RENDER NATIONAL SERVICE  
3. Liability of persons to be called up for national service.  
4. Voluntary service in lieu of national service.  
5. Liability to complete interrupted service.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct a person to render service with the Armed Forces of Union 
or other national service.  
7. Discipline.  
8. Power of Central Government to require any employer to release qualified persons.  
9. Transfer.  
10. Persons not to leave national service or be discharged therefrom unless permitted by Central 
Government.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION AND ENLISTM ENT FOR NATIONAL SERVICE  
11. Persons required to register.  
12. Registration.  
13. Notice of likelihood of calling up for national service.  
14. Enlistment for national service.  
15. Salary, wages, etc., and travelling allowances to be paid to persons enlisted  for national service.  
16. Training.  
17. Discharge.  
CHAPTER IV  
POSTPONEMENT OF NATIONAL SERVICE  
18. National Service (Hardship) Committee.  
19. Application for postponement on grounds of hardship.  
20. Appeal from decision of the National Service (Hardship) Committee.  
21. Revocation of postponement certificate.  
22. Suspension of right to postponement of liability to be called up for national service.  
CHAPTER V  
REINSTATEMENT OF QUALIFIED PERSONS CALLED UP FOR NATIONAL SERVICE  
23. Reinstatement.  
24. Preservation of certain rights of qualified persons required to render national service.  2 CHAPTER VI  
OTHER OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
25. False statement and forgery.  
26. General provision as to offences.  
27. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Information to be furnished by Universities, etc.  
29. Information to be furnished by District Magistrate.  
30. Priority of debts.  
31. Summary trial of offences.  
32. Jurisdiction to try offences.  
33. Pro tection of action taken in good faith.  
34. Removal of difficulties.  
35. Power s to delegate.  
36. Power to make rules.  
37. Power to make regulation s. 
38. Rules and regulation s to be laid before Parliament.  3 THE NATIONAL SERVICE ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1972  
[9th June,  1972.]  
An Act to provide for the registration of qualified persons and for the rendering of national 
service by such persons and f or matters connected  therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the National Service          
Act, 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “employer”  means any person who employs any qualified person for doing any work in any 
establishment and includes any person entrusted with the supervision and control of qualified persons 
in such establishment.  
(b) “establishment ” means— 
(i) any office, or  
(ii) any  place where any industry, trade, business or occupation is carried on,  and includes 
any technical in stitution  or training centre ; 
(c) “national service ” means any service which is likely to assist the defence of India and civil 
defence or the efficient co nduct of military operations and includes such social service as the Central 
Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary for public purposes so to do, by notif ication 
specify in this behalf;  
(d) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in  the Official Gazette;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “qualified person ” means a citizen of India who is ordinarily resident in India and who, — 
(i) has obtained a recognised medical qualification within the meaning of t he India n Medical 
Council Act, 1956  (102 of 1956) , or 
(ii) has obtained, or has passed an examination which entitles him to obtain, a degree of a 
University or its equivalent qualification in any branch of eng ineering or technology or both.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Act, a qualified person who is resident in India shall be 
deemed to be or dinarily resident there unless — 
(a) he is residing there only for the purposes of attending a course of education; or  
(b) the circumstances of his residence t here are otherwise such as to show that he is residing 
there for a temporary purpose only; or  
(c) he, being a person who was born or domiciled in any country outside India, has been 
resident in India for less than two years.  
CHAPTER II  
LIABILITY OF PERSONS  TO RENDER NATIONAL SERVICE  
3. Liability of persons to be called up for national service. —(1) Every person who — 
(a) is a qualified person at the commencement of this Act, or  4 (b) becomes a qualified person after such commencement,  
shall, if he has not attained the age of thirty years at such commencement , or, as the case may be, on the 
date on which he becomes a qualified person, be liable until he attains the age of thirty years, to be called 
up for national service for a period of not more than four y ears. 
(2) The period of national service for which a qualified person shall be liable to be called up under 
this Act shall begin from the date on which he is required by an enlistment notice served under this Act to 
present himself to the authority specifi ed therein and shall end on the day when his term of national 
service is completed in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act.  
4. Voluntary servi ce in lieu of national service. —(1) If a qualified person has been enlisted under 
any other law for the time  being in force, for service in one of the Armed Forces of the Union for a period 
of not less than four years, he shall perform the service required of the members of that Force in lieu of 
the national s ervice required under this Act.  
(2) If a qualified person has rendered or is rendering service, other than service in one of the Armed 
Forces of the Union and such service is declared by the Central Government to be equivalent to national 
service, the period of such service shall be deemed to be service in  lieu of the national service required 
under this Act and he shall (unless he has ceased to be liable under this Act to be called up for national 
service) , be liable to be called up for national service for such term as will, together with the service 
comp leted by him, be equivalent to the term of service for which persons are liable to serve under this 
Act. 
(3) If any qualified person h as been enlisted as a member of — 
(a) the Indian Reserve Forces, regulated under the Indian Reserve Forces Act, 1888  (4 of 1888), 
(b) the Territorial Army constituted under the Territor ial Army Act, 1948  (56 of 1948 ), 
(c) the Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force Reserve constituted under the Reserve and 
Auxiliary Air Force s Act, 1952  ( 62 of 1952 ), 
(d) the Indian Naval Reserve Forces raised and maintained under the Navy                                            
Act, 1957  (62 of 1957 ), or 
(e) any other Force of the foregoing nature,  
he shall not be called up, so long as he continue s to be a member of that Force, to render national service 
under this Act : 
Provided that he shall, after he has ceased to be a member of such Force, be liable to render national 
service (unless he has ceased to be liable under this Act to be called up for national service), f or such term 
as will, together with the actual service rendered by him as a member of that Force, be equivalent to the 
term of service for which persons are liable to serve under this Act.  
5. Liability to complete interrupted service. —If any qualified person serving in the Armed Forces 
of the Union ceases to serve therein before he has completed four years of such service, he shall, unless 
he has ceased to be liable under this Act to be called up for national service, be liable to be ca lled up to 
serve for such term as will, together with the service completed by him, be equivalent to the term of 
service for which persons are liable to serve under this Act.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct a person to render service with the Arme d Forces of 
Union or other national service .—Subject to the provisions of section 3, the Central Government may, 
by order, require a qualified person to render service in the Armed Forces of the Union or such other 
national service, as it may specify in th is behalf, for such period and at such place as may be specified in 
the order.  
7. Discipline. —(1) Every qualified person enlisted under this Act for national service in the Armed 
Forces of the Union shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be bound to serve in any 
branch of the Armed Forces to which he is for the time being attached, and shall be subject to all laws, 
rules, regulations and orders in force for the time being in relation to such branch.  5 (2) Every qualified person enlisted for any national service, other than service in the Armed Forces of 
the Union shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be bound to serve in any position or post 
to which he is appointed for the time being, and shall be subject to all laws, rules , regulations and orders 
in force for the time being in relation to such position or post . 
8. Power of Central Government to require any employer to release qualified persons.—(1) The 
Central Government may, by order in writing, require any employer to rel ease any qualified person for 
employment in national service within such time as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Where an employer releases a qualified person for employment in national service, such employer 
shall not be liable to pay the salary, wages  and other emoluments, if any, of the qualified person for the 
period during which national service is or has been rendered by the qualified person.  
(3) No contract, subsisting between a qualified person and his employer on the date of release of the 
qualified person for employment in national service, shall be enforceable until such qualified person has 
been discharged from national service.  
(4) In computing the period specified in any contract of service in relation to a qualified person who 
has been  called upon to render national service, the period of national service actually rendered by such 
qualified person shall be excluded.  
(5) If any employer fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order made under                                   
sub-section ( 1), he shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years and also with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
9. Transfer .—The Central Government may, by regulations, make provisions for enabling  or 
requiring a qualified person rendering national service in any branch of the Armed Forces of the Union to 
be transferred to any other branch of that Force or to any other branch of national service or vice versa . 
10. Persons not to leave nationa l servi ce or be discharged ther efrom unless permitted by 
Central Government. —(1) No qualified person rendering national service under this Act shall leave 
such service until he is discharged therefrom under section 17.  
(2) No qualified person who has been served with a notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 13 or an 
enlistment notice under section 14 shall, if he is in any employment at the date of service of such notice, 
leave such employment or be discharged therefrom, except in accordance with the provisions o f this Act:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply where the employment of a qualified person is 
terminated for the reason that the said person has been guilty of gross insubordination, habitual absence 
from work, or serious misconduct or ha s been convicted of an offence.  
(3) If a qualified person who has been served with a notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 13 or an 
enlistment notice under section 14 leaves any employment in which he is engaged at the date of service of 
such notice or i s discharged therefrom otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act, he or, 
as the case may be, the person by whom he is discharged, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees . 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION AND ENLISTMENT FOR NATIONAL SERVICE  
11. Persons required to register. —(1) Every qualified person shall, if he is liable, at the 
commencement of this Act, to be called up for national service, make an application, within ninety days 
from such commencement, t o be registered under this Act.  
(2) Every qualified person who becomes liable after the commencement of this Act, to be called up 
for national service, shall, within thirty days from the date on which he becomes so liable, make an 
application to be registered under this Act.  
12. Registration. —(1) The Central Government shall, by general order, direct qualified persons who 
are required t o be registered under this Act, — 
(a) to furnish at such place and time, in such manner and to such authority or person as may be 
specified therein, such particulars about them selves as the order may require; and  6 (b) to make at such place, in such manner and to such authority or person as may be specified in 
the order , an application to be registered under this Act.  
(2) The order made under sub -section ( 1) may make different pro visions in relation to different 
classes of qualified persons subject to registration and may provide for exempting from any requirements 
of the order of any class of qualified persons with respect to whom the Central Government is satisfied 
that particulars sufficient for the purposes of this Act can be ascertained otherwise than b y virtue of those 
requirements.  
(3) If any qualified person fai ls to comply with any requirement of the order made under                            
sub-section ( 1), he shall be liable to be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or w ith both.  
(4) The Central Government shall ensure — 
(a) that upon an application duly made for registration under this Act, the name and address of 
the applicant together with the particulars of the matters with respect to which information was given 
by the  applicant in pursuance of the order made under sub -section ( 1) are entered in a register kept for 
the purposes of this Act, to be known as the “National Service Register” ; and  
(b) that upon the applicant being registered, a certificate of registration is issued to the applicant 
in the prescribed form.  
(5) The information contained in the National Service Register shall not be used for any purpose other  
than the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude the Central Gover nment from disclosing, for 
statistical purposes, any information contained in  the National Service Register.  
(6) The Central Government may cause registration to be made of, and a certificate of registration to 
be issued to, any qualified person of a class  exempted from any of the requirements of sub -section ( 1) as 
if that person had duly applied to be registered under this Act.  
(7) (a) If any qualified person subject to registration under this Act communicates to the Central 
Government in the prescribed ma nner, that he has a preference for the Army, Air Force or Naval Service, 
that fact shall be recorded in the National Service Register.  
(b) If a qualified person belonging to a class which is exempted from registration under this Act has a 
preference for th e Army, Air Force or Naval Service, he shall intimate such preference to the Central 
Government in such manner as that Government may specify and, on receipt of such intimation, the 
Central Government shall cause such preference to be recorded in  the Natio nal Service Register.  
(8) (a) If any change occurs in the name or address of any qualified person while such person remains 
registered under this Act, or if any such person acquires any additional academic or professional 
qualification or distinction, he s hall forthwith communicate the change of his name or address, or, as the 
case may be, the acquisition by him of additional academic or professional qualification or distinction to 
the Central Government in the prescribed manner and at the same time return to the Central Government, 
for correction, any certificate of registration held by him and if he fails to communicate the change of his 
name or address, or, as the case may be, the acquisition by him of the additional academic or professional 
qualification  or distinction, he shall be liable to be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees.  
(b) Upon the receipt of a communication of the change of name or address of any qualified person 
registered under this Act or of acquisition by him of add itional academic or professional qualification or 
distinction, the Central Government shall cause the necessary corrections to be made in the entries in the 
National Service Register and shall either cause the certificate to be corrected and returned to su ch person 
or cause a fresh certificate  to be issued to him.  
(9) The Central Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the issue, in specified 
circumst ances, of fresh certificates of  registration in place of certificates which have been lost , destroyed 
or defaced.  7 13. Notice of likelihood of c alling up for national service. —(1) The Central Government may from 
time to time cause to be served on any qualified person subject to registration under this Act, and, if he is 
engaged in any employment, also on his employer, a written notice in the prescribed form stating that 
such person is likely to be called upon, at any time within a period of twelve months next following , to 
render national service.  
(2) Omission to serve any notice referr ed to in sub -section ( 1) on an employer or the service of such 
notice on a person who is not, at the time of service of such notice, the employer of the qualified person 
concerned, shall not invalidate the notice served under sub - section ( 1) on the qualif ied person and shall 
not affect the liability of the qualified person to be called up for national service.  
(3) The Central Government may cause to be served, on any qualified person served with a notice 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), a written notice req uiring that person to submit himself to an examination, 
by such authority, at such place and at such time, as may be specified in the notice, of his physical and 
mental fitness for being called up for national service.  
(4) The Central Government may  make r egulations for the exami nation of the physical and mental 
fitness of persons subject to registration under this Act and such regulations may, in particular, enable t he 
medical and other authority — 
(a) in a case where he is unable to complete the examinatio n on one occasion, to direct the person 
examined to submit himself for a further examinatio n on a specified time and place;  
(b) to direct the person examined to submit himself for examination by a specialist.  
(5) The Central Government may by regulations d etermine the categories in which persons examined 
under this section are to be placed with reference to their physical and mental condition.  
(6) If any qualified person fails to comply with the requirements of a notice served on him under            
sub-section ( 3) or any regulations made or directions given under sub -section ( 4), he shall  be liable to be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both . 
(7) The court by which a qualified person is convicted of an offence under this section may, without 
prejudice to any penalty which may be imposed on him, order him to submit himself to an examination of 
his physical and mental fitness, further examination or examinatio n by a specialist, as the case may be, at 
such place and at such time as may be fixed by the court and any such order may provide that such person 
shall be detained in custody until that time and shall be taken by a police officer to that place and at that  
time:  
Provided that no person shall be detained in custody by virtue of any such order for more than 
twenty -four hours.  
(8) A qualified person who, having been ordered by a court under sub -section ( 7) to submit himself to 
an examination of his physical and mental fitness and to be detained in custody, is taken by a police 
officer to the place and at the time at which he is to be examined, does not submit himself to an 
examination of his physical and mental fitness in accordance with the order, he may be arrested by that or 
any other police officer without a warrant.  
(9) A qualified person, who fails to submit himself to an examination of his physical and mental 
fitness in accordance with an order made under sub -section ( 7), shall be liable to be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and also with fine which may  extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
(10) A notice served on any qualified person under this section shall cease to have effect if, before 
that date on which he is require d to submit himself to an examination of his physical and mental fitness, 
he ceases to be subject to registration under this Act.  
(11) The Central Government may pay to the medical or other authority, specialist, or any qualified 
person undergoing examinat ion of his physical and mental fitness under this section such travelling and 
other allowances, including compensation for loss of remunerative time, in accordance with such scales 
as may be prescribed.  8 14. Enlis tment for nationa l service.—(1) Subject to such priorities as may be prescribed, the Central 
Government may cause to be served on any qualified person for the time being liable under this Act to be 
called up for national service, who has been found, after an examination of his physical  and mental 
condition, fit for such service, a written notice in the prescribed form (in this Act referred to as the 
“enlistment notice ”) stating that he is called up for national service in such one of the Armed Forces of 
the Union or in such other servic e as may be specified in the enlistment notice and requiring him to 
present himself at such place and at such time and to such authority, as may be specified in the notice : 
Provided that an enlistment notice under this section shall not require the person upon whom it is 
served to present himself on a day earlier than the fourteenth day after the date of service of the notice or 
such earlier day as may be determined at his request.  
(2) An enlistment notice served on any qualified person shall cease to have effect if, before the day on 
which he is thereby required to present himself, he ceases to be liable to be called up for national service 
under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may pay to persons required to present themselves in pursuance of an 
enlist ment notice served upon them travelling and other allowances in accordance with such scales as 
may be prescribed.  
(4) If on the day specified in the enlistment notice as the day on which the person to whom the notice 
relates is required to prese nt himself for national service — 
(a) a postponement certificate relating to him is in force, or  
(b) any appeal or application by him for postponement of national service is pending,  
the enlistment notice served on him shall be of no effect.  
(5) The enlistment notice shall be served in such manner as may be prescribed.  
15. Salary, wages, etc., and travelling allowances to be paid to persons enlisted for national   
service.—(1) Every qualified person who is called up for national service under this Act, or who is 
transf erred from one form of national service to another, shall be paid such salary, wages, allowances, 
pension, disability and death compensations and other  benefits as may be prescribed:  
Provided that such payments shall be on scales not less favourable than t hose admissible to persons of 
like qualifications, experience and length of service in similar positions under the Government.  
Explanat ion.—For the purposes of the f oregoing proviso, the length of standing of a qualified person 
as an engineer or medical pr actitioner, as the case may be, shall be construed as the length of his service.  
(2) Any qualified person who is called up for national service or transferred from one form of 
national service, or from one pl ace of employment in the national service, to an other, shall be paid 
travelling allowance for journey to his place of employment under this Act at such rate as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) A qualified person who, on the date of the service of the enlistment notice on him, is engaged in 
any employment, or a qualified person who is transferred from one form of national service, or from one 
place of employment in the national service, to another, shall be paid, for the period of his transit from the 
place of his former employment to the place of his employment under this Act, salary or wages (including 
allowances) at the rate fixed by the Central Go vernment under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) A qualified person who was in any employment on the date on which he was called up for 
national service under this Act, shall, on his discharge from such service, be paid salary or wages 
(including allowances) for the period of his transit from the place of his employment under this Act to the 
place of his former employment at the rate fixed by the Central Government under sub -sectio n (1). 
(5) A qualified person who is called up for national service under this Act shall, on the termination of 
his national service, be paid travelling expenses at such rate as may be prescribed, for journey to the place 
of his former employment, or, if h e was unemployed when he was first called up for national service 
under this Act, to the place of his residence.  9 16. Training. —During his term of national service a qualified person may be required to undergo 
training for such period as may be prescribed.  
17. Discharge. —(1) Every qualified person enlisted under this Act shall be entitled to receive his 
discharge from national service on the expiration of the period for which he was enlisted and such person 
may, prior to the expiration of that period, be dis charged from national service by such authority and 
subject to such c onditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) A person receiving discharge under this section shall be given a certificate in such form as may be 
prescribed certifying that he has been discharged from national service.  
(3) A person who has received discharge under this section shall not be required to render national 
service after su ch discharge : 
Provided that a person who has received discharge under this section before he has completed four 
years  of national service , shall, unless he has ceased to be liable to be called up for national service under 
this Act, be liable to be called up for national service under this Act for such term as will, together with 
the period of national service rendered b y him, be equivalent to four years.  
CHAPTER IV  
POSTPONEMENT OF NATIONAL SERVICE  
18. National Service (Hardship) Commi ttee.—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a 
National Service (Hardship) Committee consisting of a Chairman and two  other members ap pointed by it.  
(2) The Chairman of the National Service (Hardship) Committee shall be a person who is, or has 
been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court.  
(3) The members of the National Service (Hardship) Committee shall hold office for a period of three 
years but shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(4) The proceedings of the National Service (Hardship) Committee shall not be invalid by reason of 
any defect in the constitution of, or any vacancy in, such Committee.  
(5) Any vacancy in the National  Service (Hardship) Committee shall be filled by the Central 
Government in such manner as it may think fit.  
(6) The Central Government may constitute Regional National Service (Hardship) Committees for 
such regions as it may think fit and on such constitut ion such Regional National Service (Hardship) 
Committees shall have all the powers, functions and privileges of the National Service (Hardship) 
Committee and shall be subject to the same provisions as ar e applicable to that Committee.  
(7) The National Serv ice (Hardship) Committee shall have power to regulate its own procedure with 
regard to any investigation under this Act and shall have for the purposes of such investigation the powers 
of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908  (5 of 1908) , in respect of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of d ocuments producible as evidence ; 
(c) receiving evidence on o ath; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witness es or docum ents;  
(e) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
19. Application for postponement on grounds of hardship. —(1) Any qualified person who is for 
the time being liable to  be called up for national service under this Act and who has been served with a 
notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 13, or any employer of such qualified person, may apply, in 
the prescribed manner to the Central Government for a certificate of postponement of liability to be called 
up for national service on the ground that exceptional hardship would ensue if such qualified person were 
called up for national service, and may, on that ground apply, in the prescribed manner, for the rene wal of 
the postponement certificate granted to him.  10 (2) Where an applicat ion for a postponement certificate  or for the renewal thereof is made, the Central 
Government shall refer the appli cation for decision to the National Service (Hardship) Committee.  
(3) No application for the grant of a postponement certificate shall be referred by the Central 
Government to the National Service (Hardship) Committee unless such application is made within sixty 
days from the date of service of the notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 13:  
Provided that the Central Government may refer an application for the grant of a postponement 
certificate to the Nation al Service (Hard ship) Committee made after the expiry of the said period if it is 
satisfied, having regard to the  grounds on which the application is made, that the making thereof has not 
been unreasonably delayed.  
(4) The Central Government may by regulations specify the principles to be applied and the 
circumstances to which regard is to be or not to be had for the  hearing of an application for the grant or 
renewal of a postponement certificate and as to the period for which the postponement certificate may be 
granted or renewed.  
(5) The National Service (Hards hip) Committee may, after consi deration of the applicati on for a 
postponement certificate or renewal thereof, grant or reject the same.  
(6) The period within which the postponement certificate is in force shall be added to the period 
during which the person to whom the certificate was granted is liable under this A ct to be called up for 
national  service and accordingly this Act shall in relation to that person have effect as if for reference 
therein to the age of thirty years, there were substituted, an age being the sum of thirty years and the 
period during which— 
(i) the postponement certificate is in force, and  
(ii) the enlistment notice was of no effect by reason of the provisions of clause ( b) of                                
sub-section ( 4) of section 14.  
(7) If any qualified person or an employer makes an application for a postponement certificate on a 
ground which he knows to be f alse or does not believe to be  true or on a ground which, in the opinion of 
the National Service (Hardship) Committee, is frivolous, he shall be liable to be punished with 
impr isonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
20. Appeal from decision of the National Service (Hardship) Committee. —(1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), an appeal shall l ie against the decision of the National Service (Hardship) 
Committee to the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territory in which the applicant for 
the postponement certificate voluntarily resides, carries on business or personally works  for gain.  
(2) No appeal referred to in s ub-section ( 1) shall lie unless — 
(i) it is preferred within thirty days from the date of the decision of the National Service 
(Hardship) Committee, and  
(ii) the National Service (Hardship) Committee certifies that the case involves a substantial 
question of law.  
(3) Where the National Service (Hardship) Committee has refused to give a certificate referred to in 
sub-section ( 2), the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of l aw, 
grant special leave to appeal against the decision of the Nationa l Service (Hardship) Committee.  
(4) The High Court may, after hearing the appeal, confirm, modify or reverse the decision of the 
National Service (Hardship) Committee.  
21. Revocation of p ostponement certificate. —(1) If, at any time, while a postponement certificate is 
in force, it appears to the Central Government that, by reason of any change in the circumstances of the 
qualified person to whom the certificate was granted or of his employ er, where such certificate was 
granted on the application of such employer, the certificate ought to be revoked or the period for which it 
was granted or last renewed ought to be shortened, the Central Government may apply to the National 
Service  (Hardship ) Committee, and that  Committee may either reject the application or cancel the 
certificate or vary it by shortening the period.  11 (2) Where an application is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom the postponement 
certificate in question was granted, and where such certificate was granted on the application of an 
employer, such employer, shall be entitled to be heard on the application and the provisions as to appeals 
contained in section 20 shall apply in relation to the application as if it were an application for the grant of 
a postponement certificate.  
22. Suspension of right to postponement of liability to be called up for national service. —(1) The 
Central Government may,  if it is satisfied at any time  that by reason of the gravity of the situation it is 
necessary so to do, by order — 
(a) cancel, either generally or in relation to a specified class of qualified persons, all 
postponement certificates in force at the date of the order, and  
(b) abrogate, either generally or in relation to a specified class of qualified persons, any right to 
apply for the grant of a postponement certificate and any right to appeal from the refusal to grant such 
a certificate, and may, by order, vary or revoke any order in force under this section, without 
prejudice however to the previous effect of that order.  
(2) Where , on the day on which an order comes into force under this section abrogating any right to 
appeal from the refusal to grant a postponement certificate, an appeal preferred by a person to whom the  
order applies or the time for preferring such appeal by such person has not expired, the appeal shall be 
deemed to be dismissed or the time shall be deemed to expire on the expiry of that day.  
CHAPTER V  
REINSTATEMENT OF QUALIFIED PERSONS CALLED UP FOR NAT IONAL SERVICE  
23. Reinstatement. —(1) In this section, — 
(a) “former employee ” means a qualified person who was released by an employer for 
employment in national service;  
(b) “former employer ” means the employer by whom a former employee was employed in an 
establishment immediately before the enlistment of such employee for national service;  
(c) “former employment ” means the employment in which the former employee was employed 
immediately befor e his enlistment for national service.  
(2) (a) A former employee may, on the termination of his national service, make an application in 
such manner and within such period as may be prescribed to his former employer for reinstatement in his 
former employme nt. 
(b) On receipt of an application referred to in clause ( a), the former employer shall be under an 
obligation (unless the employment of the former employee in the national service was terminated by 
dismissal for misconduct) to reinstate such employee be fore the expiry of a period of fifteen days from 
the date of receipt of such application.  
(3) (a) If, on receipt of an application referred to in sub -section ( 2), the former employer refuses to 
reinstate the applicant on the ground that his circumstances have so changed as to make it impossible or 
unreasonable for him to do so, or denies his liability to reinstate such former employee, or represents that 
the rein statement by him of the former employee is impracticable, he shall, before the expiry of a period 
of fifteen days from the date of receipt of such application, make an application to the National Service 
(Hardship) Committee for relieving him from the obli gation referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(b) A former employee, who is not reinstated in his former employment within fifteen days from the 
date of delivery of the application made under sub -section ( 2), may, within a further period of fifteen days 
(computed  from the date on which the first -mentioned period of fifteen days expires), represent to the 
National Service (Hardship) Committee that his former employer has not discharged the obligation 
imposed on him by sub -section ( 2). 
(c) On receipt of the applicat ion referred to in clause ( a) or the representation referred to in clause ( b), 
the National Service (Hardship) Committee shall, after considering all matters placed before it and after 
making such inquiry in the matter as it may think fit, make an order — 
(i) relieving the former employer from the obligation refe rred to in sub -section ( 2), or 12 (ii) requiring the former employer to reinstate the former employ ee in his former employment, or  
(iii) requiring the former employer to pay to the former employee by way of compensation, for 
failure or inability to reinstate him, a sum not exceedin g an amount equal to six months’  remuneration 
at the rate at which remuneration was last payable by the former e mployer to the former employee.  
(d) Where the National Service  (Hardship) Committee has directed the reinstatement of any person in 
his former employment, the former employer shall be under an obligation to pay to such person salary 
and allowances at the rates specified by the National Service (Hardship) Committee fr om the date of 
receipt of the application referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) (a) A former employer, who has refused to reinstate his former employee on any of the grounds 
specified in sub -section ( 3) and who has omitted or failed, without any reasonable e xcuse, to make an 
application to the National Service (Hardship) Committee within the time specified in sub -section ( 3), 
shall be punished, without any prejudice to the provisions of clause ( b) of this sub -section, with 
imprisonment for a term which may ex tend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five  thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
(b) If any former employer fails to obey any order made by the National Service (Hardship) 
Committee under sub -section ( 3), he shall be punished with imprisonment for a  term which may extend to 
one month, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and the court by which 
such former employer is convicted under this sub -section shall order him to pay to the person whom he 
has failed to re -employ, a sum not exceedin g an amount equal to six months’  remuneration at the rate at 
which his last remuneration was payable to him by the former employer and any amount so required to be 
paid shall be recoverable as if it wer e a fine imposed by such court.  
(5) Where in pursuance of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) a former employer reinstates his former 
employee and thereafter terminates the employment of such former employee at any time within a period 
of six months from the date of such reinstatement, the for mer employer shall, notwithstanding anything to 
the contrary contained in the conditions of employment of the former employee, be liable to pay to the 
former employee, at the time of terminating his employment as aforesaid, a sum equal to the 
remuneration which the former employee would have earned under the terms and conditions of his                  
re-emplo yment for the unexpired portion  of the said period of six months:  
Provided that a former employer shall not be liable to make such payment as aforesaid where the 
employment of the former employee is terminated for the reason that the former employee has been guilty 
of gross insubordination , habitual absence from work or any serious misconduct or has been convicted of 
any offence:  
Provided further that a former employee whose employment is terminated within the said period for 
any such reason as aforesaid may refer the matter to the National Service (Hardship) Committee an d that 
Committee shall, after due consideration, decide whether or not the employer is liable as aforesaid under 
this sub -section; and any such decision shall be final and binding on the partie s. 
Explanation .—Any sum required to be paid under this sub -section shall be in addition to the amount, 
if any, which the employer may, under the conditions of employment be liable to pay in respect of the 
termination of the employment of the former employee without notice.  
(6) No change in the name, constitution or ch aracter of the former e mployer shall affect the right of 
reinstatement of a former employee who has been released from employm ent in national service.  
(7) (a) The occupation in which and the terms and conditions under which a qualified person may be 
reinst ated after completion of national service shall not be less favourable to him than those which would 
have been applicable to him had his employment not been interrupted by reason of his being called up for 
national service.  
(b) In determining the terms and conditions of reinstatement of the former employee, regard shall be 
had to the additional skill and experience acquired by such employee in the course of his employment in 
the national service.  13 24. Preservation of certain rig hts of qualified persons requi red to render national service. —
While any qualified person, required to render national service under this Act, has any rights under any 
provident fund or other scheme for the benefit of employees maintained in connection with  the 
employment he relinquishes, he shall continue, so long as he is engaged in national service and if he is 
reinstated, until such reinstatement under the provisions of this Act, to have in respect of such fund or 
scheme such  rights as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
OTHER OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
25. False statement and forgery. —(1) If any qualified person — 
(a) on whom an enlistment notice has been served under this Act in respect of whom no 
postponement certi ficate is in force or no appli cation or appeal for postponement of national service 
is pending, fails or omits to render the service which he is required by such notice to render, or  
(b) having commenced to render national service, leaves that service without obtainin g a 
discharge under section 17,  
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine 
which may  extend to two thousand rupees.  
(2) Any person w ho— 
(a) in giving any information for the purposes of this Act, knowingly or recklessly makes a 
statem ent which is false in material particulars or which he does not believe to be true, or  
(b) (i) with the intention of deceiving, forges or uses or lends or allows to be used for any person 
any certificate issued under this Act, or  
(ii) makes, or has in his possession, any document so closely resembling any certificate so issued 
as to be calculated to deceive,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or with fine not exceeding one 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
26. General provision as to offences. —Any qualified person who contravenes any provision of this 
Act for the contravention of which no penalty is separately specified in this Act, sh all be punished with 
fine which  may extend to five hundred rupees:  
Provided that in an y proceedings for an offence punishable under this section, it shall be a defence for 
the accused to prove that he was prevented from complying with the provisions of this Act by 
circumstances beyond his control.  
27. Offences by companies. —(1) Where any pr ovision of this  Act or of any order made there under is 
contravened by a company, every person who at the time the contravention was made was in charge of, 
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the o ffence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any such offence has been 
committed and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance, or is 
attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” mean s any  body corporate and includes a firm or other association of                
individuals; and  14 (b) “director ”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Information to be furnished by Universities, etc. —It shall be the duty of every University or 
other persons having the management of any University, school or other educational institution, to give to 
the Central Government, at its request, such information in their possession, or reasonably available to 
them, about persons receiving, or who have received education in engineering, technology, medical 
sciences or  surgery as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  
29. Information to be furnished by District Magistrate. —It shall be the duty of every District 
Magistrate to give to the State Government such information in his possession ab out qualified persons 
within the local limits of his jurisdiction as may be prescribed, and it shall be the duty of every State 
Government to give to the Central Government all information in its possession about qu alified persons in 
the State.  
30. Priorit y of debts. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Presidency Towns                   
Insolvency Act, 1909  (3 of 1909),  the Provincial Insolvency Act , 1920  (5 of 1920) , the Companies Act, 
1956  (1 of 1956),  or the Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) , any c ompensation payable under this Act shall 
have priority over all other unsecured debts.  
31. Summary trial of offences. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , every offence punishable under this Act shall be tried summarily.  
32. Jurisdiction to try offences. —No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
33. Protection  of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or any rules, regulations or orders made thereu nder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government for any damage caused 
or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rules, regulations or orders made thereund er. 
34. Removal of difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may make such order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may 
appear to it to be necessary for the purpose o r removing the difficulty : 
Provided that no order shall be made under this sub -section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as  soon as 
may be after it is made and the provisions of section 38 shall apply to such order as if it were a rule made 
under this Act.  
35. Power s to delegate. —The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any of the 
powers which may be exe rcised by it under this Act shall, in such circumstances and under such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised also by any State Government or 
any other authority owned or controlled by the Central Government.  
36. Power t o make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying o ut the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the principles governing the calling up of  persons for national service;  
(b) the form and contents of the National Service Register;  
(c) the form in which the certificate of registration is to be issued;  15 (d) the manner of notification  of preference for any branch of the Armed Forces of the Union;  
(e) the manner of notification of change of name or address of, or acquisition of academic or 
professional qualification or distinctions by, a qualified person registered un der this Act;  
(f) the circumstances under which fresh certificates of registration in place of certificates which 
have been lost, destroyed or defaced may be issued;  
(g) the form and contents of the notice for examination of physical and mental fitness;  
(h) the scale in acco rdance with which travelling and other allowances may be paid to medical or 
other authority or specialist or to any qualifi ed person undergoing any exami nation of physical and 
mental fitness and the scale according to which compensation may be paid  for los s of remunerative 
time;  
(i) the priorities in accordance with which qualified persons may be enlisted for national service ; 
(j) the form and contents of the enlistment notice and  the manner of service thereof;  
(k) the scales of salary, wages, allowances, pensions, disability and death compensations and 
other financial benefits admissible to those performing national service;  
(l) the scales of travelling allowances requ ired to be paid under this Act;  
(m) the authority by which and conditions subject to whic h prior discharge from national service 
may be made;  
(n) the form of discharge certificate;  
(o) the manner of application for a certificate of postponement of liability to be called up for 
national service or for renewal thereof and the time within  which s uch application for re newal should 
be made;  
(p) the conditions of reinstatement of persons released from employment in the national service 
and matters connected therewith;  
(q) further inquiry which may be made by the National Service (Hardship) Committee where 
reinstatement of qualified persons released from employment in the national service is refused or 
denied or where such reinstatement is represented to be impracticable;  
(r) the preservation of rights of provident fund, etc., of qualified pers ons rend ering national 
service;  
(s) the information relating to qualified persons which every District Magistrate shall furnish to 
the State Government ; 
(t) any other matter which is required to be, or ma y be prescribed under this Act.  
(3) Any rule made under this  Act may provide that a contravention of the rule shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
37. Power to make regulation s.—The Central Government may make regulations not inconsistent 
with this Act, to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) enabling or requiring a qualified person to be transferred to any branch of the Armed Forces 
of the Union or to any other branch of national servic e; 
(b) examination of physical and mental fitness of qualified persons subject to registration under 
this Act;  
(c) determination of the categories in which qualified persons whose physical and mental fitness 
has been examined shall be placed by reference t o their physica l or mental conditions or both;  
(d) specification of the principles to be applied and the circumstances to be considered while 
hearing an application for the grant or renewal  of a postponement certificate;  16 (e) specification of the period for  which a postponement certifi cate may be granted or renewed;  
(f) any other matter for which regulations are required to be, or may be, made under this  Act. 
38. Rules and regulatio ns to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every regulation made by 
the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and  if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
to the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the ru le or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
--------------------------The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
2A. Continuous service.  
3. Controlling authority . 
4. Payment of gratuity . 
4A. Compulsory insurance.  
5. Power  to exempt . 
6. Nomination . 
7. Determination of the amount of gratuity . 
7A. Inspectors.  
7B. Powers of Inspectors.  
8. Recovery of gratuity . 
9. Penalties . 
10. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases.  
11. Cognizance of offences.  
12. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
13. Protection of gratuity . 
14. Act to override other enactments, etc.  
15. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1972  
[21st August , 1972.]  
An Act to provide for a scheme for the payment of gratuity to employees engaged in facto ries, 
mines, oilfields, plantations, ports, railway companies, shops or other establishments and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Payment of 
Gratuity Act, 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that in so far as it relates to plantations or ports, it shall not extend to the State of Ja mmu 
and Ka shmir.  
(3) It shall apply to — 
(a) every factory, mine, oilfield, planta tion, port and railway company;  
(b) every shop or establishment within the meaning of any law for the time being in force in 
relation to shops and establishments in a State, in which ten or more persons are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months;  
(c) such oth er establishments or class of establishments, in which ten or more employees are 
employed, or were employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months, as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  
1[(3A) A shop or establishment to which this Act has become applicable shall continue to be governed 
by this Act notwithstanding that the number of persons employed therein at any time after it has become 
so applicable falls below ten.]  
(4) It shall come into forc e on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to an establishment — 
(a) belonging to, or under the cont rol of, the Central Government,  
(b) having branches in more than one State , 
(c) of a factory belonging to, or under the cont rol of, the Central Government,  
(d) of a major port, mine, oilfield or railway company, the Central Government , 
 (ii) in any ot her case, the State Government;  
(b) “completed year of service ” means co ntinuous service for one year;  
3[(c) “continuous service ” means continuous ser vice as defined in section 2A;]  
(d) “controlling authority ” means an authority appointed by the appropri ate Governm ent under 
section 3;  
  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 26 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f . 18-5-1984). 
2.16th September,  1972, vide notification No. S.O. 601(E) , dated 16th September,  1972, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii).  
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1984, s. 3, for clause ( c) and the Explanations  (w.e.f. 18-5-1984 ). 3 
 1[(e) “employee ” means any person (other than an apprentice) who is employed for wages , 
whether the terms of such employment are express or implied, in any kind of work, manual or 
otherwise, in or in connection with the work of a factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway 
company, shop or other establishment to which this Act applies, but does not include any such person  
who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government and is governed by any other 
Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity ;] 
(f) “employer ” means, in relation to any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation,  port, 
railway company or shop — 
(i) belonging to, or under the control of, the Central Government or a State Government, a 
person or authority appointed by the appropriate Government for the supervision and control of 
employees, or where no person or autho rity has been so appointed, the head of the Minist ry or the 
Department concerned,  
(ii) belonging to, or under the control of, any local authority, the person appointed by such 
authority for the supervision and control of employees or where no person has be en so appointed, 
the chief executive officer of the local authority,  
(iii) in any other case, the person, who, or the authority which, has the ultimate control over 
the affairs of the establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway compan y or shop, 
and where the said affairs are entrusted to any other person, whether called a manager, managing 
director or by any other name, such person;  
(g) “factory ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Fa ctories Act, 1948 
(63 of 1948);  
(h) “family ”, in relation to an employee , shall be deemed to consist of — 
(i) in the case of a male employee, himself, his wife, his children, whether married or 
unmarried, his dependent parents 2[and the dependent parents of his wife and the wido w] and 
children of his predeceased son, if any,  
(ii) in the case of a female employee, herself, her husband, her children, whether married or 
unmarried, her dependent parents and the dependent parents of her husband and the widow and 
children of her predec eased son, if any:  
3*   *   *  *  *        * 
Explanation. —Where the personal law of an employee permits the adoption by him of a 
child, any child lawfully adopted by him shall be deemed to be included in his family, and where 
a child of an employee has been adopted by another person and such adoption is, under the 
personal law of the person making such adoption, lawful, such child shall be deemed to be 
excluded from the family of the employee;  
(i) “major port ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 8) of section 3 of the Indian Ports Act, 
1908  (15 of 1908);  
(j) “mine ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of th e Mines 
Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
4[(k) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified ” shall be construed accordingly] ; 
(l) “oilfield ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( e) of section 3 of the Oilfields (Regulation 
and Devel opment) Act, 1948 (53 of 19 48); 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 2009, s. 2, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 3 -4-1997).  
2. Subs. by Act 22  of 1987, s. 2, for “and the wi dow” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
3. The proviso omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
4. Subs . by Act  12 of 2018, s. 2 , for clause ( k) (w.e.f. 29 -3-2018).  4 
 (m) “plantation ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour 
Act, 1951 (69 of 1951);  
(n) “port” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 4) of section 3 of the India n Ports Act, 1908 
(15 of 1908);  
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(p) “railway company ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 5) of section 3 of the Indian 
Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890);  
(q) “retirement ” means termination of the service of an employee ot herwise than on 
superannuation;  
1[(r) “superannuation ”, in relation to an employee, means the attainment by the employee of such 
age as is fixed in the contract or conditions of service as the age on the attainment of which the 
employe e shall vacate the em ployment;]  
(s) “wages ” means all emoluments which are earned by an employee while on duty or on leave in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of his employment and which are paid or are payable to him 
in cash and includes dearness allowance but does no t include any bonus, commission, house rent 
allowance, overtime wages and any other allowance.  
2[2A. Continuous service. —For the purposes of this Act, — 
(1) an employee shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he has, for that period, 
been in uninterrupted service,  including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness, 
accident, leave, absence from duty without leave (not being absence in respect of which an order 3*** 
treating the absence as break in service has been passed in a ccordance with the standing orders, rules 
or regulations governing the employees of the establishment), lay -off, strike or a lock -out or cessation 
of work not due to any fault of the employee, whether such uninterrupted or interrupted service was 
rendered before or afte r the commencement of this Act;  
(2) where an employee (not being an employee employed in a seasonal establishment) is not in 
continuous service within the meaning of clause ( 1), for any period of one year or six months, he shall 
be deemed to be in continuo us service under the employer — 
(a) for the said period of one year, if the employee during the period of twelve calendar 
months preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked 
under th e employer for n ot less than — 
(i) one hundred and ninety days, in the case of an employee employed below the ground 
in a mine or in an establishment which works for less than six days in a week; and  
(ii) two hundred and  forty days, in any other case;  
(b) for the said per iod of six months, if the employee during the period of six calendar 
months preceding the date with reference to which the calculation is to be made, has actually 
worked under the employer for not less than — 
(i) ninety -five days, in the case of an employee  employed below the ground in a mine or 
in an establishment which works for less than six days in a week; and  
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1984, s. 2, for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1984).  
3. The words “imposing a punishment or penalty or ” omitted by Act 22 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  5 
 1[Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( 2), the number of days on which an employee 
has actually worked under an employer sh all include the days on which — 
(i) he has been laid -off under an agreement or as permitted by standing orders made 
under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (20 of 1946), or under the 
Industrial Dispute s Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or under any other law a pplicable to the 
establishment;  
(ii) he has been on leave with full wage s, earned in the previous year;  
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by accident arising out of 
and in th e cou rse of his employment; and  
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been on maternity leave; so, however, that the total 
period of such maternity leave  does not exceed  2[such period as may be notified by the 
Central Government from time to time] ;] 
(3) where a n employee, employed in a seasonal establishment, is not in continuous service within 
the meaning of clause ( 1), for any period of one year or six months, he shall be deemed to be in 
continuous service under the employer for such period if he has actually worked for not less than 
seventy -five per cent. of the number of days on which the establishment was in operation during such 
period.]  
3. Controlling authority. —The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint any officer to 
be a controlling authority, who shall be responsible for the administration of this Act and different 
controlling authorities may be appointed for different areas.  
4. Payment of gratuity. —(1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his 
employment after he has rendered continuous service for not les s than five years, — 
(a) on his superannuation, or  
(b) on hi s retirement or resignation, or  
(c) on his death or disablem ent due to accident or disease:  
Provided that the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be necessary where the 
termination of the employment of any employee is due to death or disablement:  
3[Provided further that in the case of death of t he employee, gratuity payable to him shall be paid to 
his nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his heirs, and where any such nominees or heirs is a 
minor, the share of such minor, shall be deposited with the controlling authority who shall invest  the same 
for the benefit of such minor in such bank or other financial institution, as may be prescribed, until such 
minor attains ma jority.]  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, disablement means such disablement as incapacitates 
an employee fo r the work which he was capable of performing before the accident or disease  resulting in 
such disablement.  
(2) For every completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months, the employer shall 
pay gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days ’ wages based on the rate of wages last d rawn by the 
employee concerned:  
Provided that in the case of a piece -rated employee, daily wages shall be computed on the average of 
the total wages received by him for a period of three months immediately preceding the termination of his 
employment, and, for this purpose, the wages paid  for any overtime work shall not be taken into account:  
                                                           
1. Explanation  inserted  by Act 22 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 12 of 2018, s. 3 , for “twelve weeks”  (w.e.f. 29-3-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 2 of 1987 , s. 4, for the second proviso (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  6 
 Provided further that in the case of 1[an employee who is employed in a seasonal establishment and 
who is not so employed throughout the year], the employer shall pay the gratuity at the rate of seve n days ’ 
wages for each season.  
2[Explanation .—In the case of a monthly rated employee, the fifteen days ’ wages shall be calculated 
by dividing the monthly rate of wages last drawn by him by twenty -six and multip lying the quotient by 
fifteen.]  
(3) The amou nt of gratuity payable to an employee shall not e xceed 3[ 4[such amount as may be 
notified by the Central Government from time to time] ]. 
(4) For the purpose of computing the gratuity payable to an employee who is employed, after his 
disablement, on reduced wages, his wages for the period preceding his disablement shall be taken to be 
the wages received by him during that period, and his wages for the period subsequent to his disablement 
shall be taken  to be the wages as so reduced.  
(5) Nothing in thi s section shall affect the right of an employee receive better terms of gratuity under 
any award or agreement or contract with the employer.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the gratuity of an employee, whose services have be en terminated for any act, wilful omission 
or negligence causing any damage or loss to, or destruction of, property belonging to the employer, 
shall be forfeited to the extent o f the damage or loss so caused;  
(b) the gratuity payable to an employee 5[may b e wholly or partially forfeited] — 
(i) if the services of such employee have been terminated for his riotous or disorderly conduct 
or any oth er act violence on his part, or  
(ii) if the services of such employee have been terminated for any act which constitutes an 
offence involving moral turpitude, provided that such offence is committed by him in the course of 
his employment.  
6*   *    *    *    * 
7[4A. Compulsory insurance .—(1) With effect from such date as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government in this behalf, every employer, other than an employer or an establishment belonging to, or 
under the control of, the Central Government or a State Government, shall, subject to the  provisions of 
sub-section ( 2), obtain an insurance in the manner prescribed, for his liability for payment towards the 
gratuity under this Act, from the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India Act, 195 6 (31 of 1956) o r any other prescribed insurer:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different establishments or class of establi shments 
or for different areas.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, subject to such conditions as may be prescrib ed, exempt every 
employer who had already established an approved gratuity fund in respect of his employees and who 
desires to continue such arrangement, and every employer employing five hundred or more persons who 
establishes an approved gratuity fund in  the manner prescribed from the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) For the purpose of effectively implementing the provisions of this section, every employer shall 
within such time as may be prescribed get his establishment registered with the controlling authority in 
the prescribed manner and no employer shall be regis tered under the provisions of this section unless he 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1984, s. 3, for “an employee  employed in a seasonal establishment” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
2. Explanation  inserted by Act 22 of 1987, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2010, s. 2, for “three lakhs and fifty thousand rupees”  (w.e.f 24 -5-2010).  
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 2018, s. 4,  for “ten lakh rupees” (w.e.f. 29 -3-2018) . 
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 1984, s. 3, for “shall be wholly forfeited” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
6. Sub -section ( 7) omitted by Act 34 of 1994, s. 3 (w.e.f 24 -5-1994).  
7. Ins. by Act 22 of 1987, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  7 
 has taken an insurance referred to in sub -section ( 1) or has established an approved gratuity fund referred 
to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules to give effect to the provisions of 
this section and such rules may provide for the composition of the Board of Trustees of the approved 
gratuity fund and for the recovery by the controlling authority of the amount of the gratuity payable to an 
employee from the L ife Insurance Corporation of India or any other insurer with whom an insurance has 
been taken under sub -section ( 1), or as the case may be, the Board of Trustees  of the approved gratuity 
fund.  
(5) Where an employer fails to make any payment by way of premi um to the insurance referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) or by way of contribution to an approved gratuity fund referred to in sub -section ( 2), he 
shall be liable to pay the amount of gratuity due under this Act (including interest, if any, for delayed 
payments)  forthwit h to the controlling authority.  
(6) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 5) shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees and in the case of a continuing offence with a further fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees for each day duri ng which the offence continues.  
Explanation. —In this section “approved gratuity fund ” shall have the same meaning as in clause ( 5) 
of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).]  
5. Power to exempt. —1[(1)] The appro priate Government may, by notification, and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, 
plantation, port, railway company or shop to which this Act applies from the operation of the  provisions 
of this Act if, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, the employees in such establishment, factory, 
mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop are in receipt of gratuity or pensionary benefits 
not less favourable than the  benefits conferred under this Act.  
2[(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the notification, exempt any employee or class of employees employed in any establishment, 
factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or  shop to which this Act applies from the 
operation of the provisions of this Act, if, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, such employee or 
class of employees are in receipt of gratuity or pensionary benefits not less favourable than the benefits 
conferred under this Act.]  
3[(3) A notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may be issued retrospectively a 
date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, but no such notification shall be issued so as 
to prejudicially aff ect the interests of any person.]  
6. Nomination. —(1) Each employee, who has completed one year of service, shall make, within such 
time, in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed, nomination for the purpose of the second 
proviso to sub -section  (1) of secti on 4.  
(2) An employee may, in his nomination, distribute the amount of gratuity payable to him under this 
Act amongst more than one nominee.  
(3) If an employee has a family at the time of making a nomination, the nomination shall be made in 
favour of one or more members of his family, and any nomination made by such employee in favour of a 
person who is not a memb er of his family shall be void.  
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the employee has no family, the nomination may be made in 
favour of any person or persons but if the employee subsequently acquires a family, such nomination 
shall forthwith become invalid and the employee shall make, within such time as may be prescribed, a 
fresh nomination in favour of one  or more members of his  family.  
                                                           
1. Section 5 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 26 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-5-1984 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 1987, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  8 
 (5) A nomination may, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), be modified by an 
employee at any time, after giving to his employer a written notice in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescri bed, of his intention to do so.  
(6) If a nominee predeceases the employee, the interest of the nominee shall revert to the employee 
who shall make a fresh nomination, in the prescribed for m, in respect of such interest.  
(7) Every nomination, fresh nomination or alteration of nomination, as the case may be, shall be sent 
by the employee to his employer, who shall keep the same in his safe custody.  
7. Determination of the amount of gratuity. —(1) A person who is eligible for payment of gratuity 
under this Act or any person authorised, in writing, to act on his behalf shall send a written application to 
the employer, within such time and in such form, as may be prescribed , for payment of such gratuity.  
(2) As soon as gratuity becomes payable, the employer shall, whether an application refer red to in 
sub-section ( 1) has been made or not, determine the amount of gratuity and give notice in writing to the 
person to whom the gratuity is payable and also to the controlling authority specifying the amount of 
gratuity so determined.  
1[(3) The empl oyer shall arrange to pay the amount of gratuity within thirty days from the date it 
becomes payable to the person t o whom the gratuity is payable.  
(3A) If the amount of gratuity payable under sub -section ( 3) is not paid by the employer within the 
period s pecified in sub -section ( 3), the employer shall pay, from the date on which the gratuity becomes 
payable to the date on which it is paid, simple interest at such rate, not exceeding the rate notified by the 
Central Government from time to time for repaymen t of long -term deposits, as that Governmen t may, by 
notification specify:  
Provided that no such interest shall be payable if the delay in the payment is due to the fault of the 
employee and the employer has obtained permission in writing from the controlli ng authority for the 
delayed payment on this ground.]  
(4)(a) If there is any dispute as to the amount of gratuity payable to an employee under this Act or as 
to the ad missibility of any claim of, or in relation to, an employee for payment of gratuity, or a s to the 
person entitled to receive the gratuity, the employer shall deposit with the controlling authority such 
amount as he admits to be payable by him as gratuity.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[(b) Where there is a dispute wit h regard to any matter or matte rs specified in clause ( a), the 
employer or employee or any other person raising the dispute may make an application to the controlling 
authority for deciding the dispute.]  
4[(c) The controlling authority shall, after due inquiry and after giving the partie s to the dispute a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, determine the matter or matters in dispute and if, as a result of 
such inquiry any amount is found to be payable to the employee, the controlling authority shall direct the 
employer to pay such amou nt or, as the case may be, such amount as reduced by the amount already 
deposited by the employer.]  
5[(d)] The controlling authority shall pay the amount deposited, including the excess amount, if any, 
deposited by the employer, to the person entitled the reto.  
6[(e)] As soon as may be after a deposit is made under clause ( a), the controlling authority shall  pay 
the amount of the deposit — 
(i) to the applica nt where he is the employee; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1987, s. 7, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1-10-1987).  
2. The Explanation omitted by Act 25 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
3.  Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
5. Clause ( c) re-lettered as  clause  (d) thereof by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-1984 ). 
6. Clause ( d) re-lettered  as  clause ( e) thereof by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  9 
 (ii) where the applicant is not the employee, to the 1[nominee or, as the case may be, the guardian 
of such nominee or] heir of the employee if the controlling authority is satisfied that there is no 
dispute as to the right of the applicant to receive the amount of gratuity.  
(5) For the purpose of conducting an inquiry under sub -section ( 4), the controlling authority shall 
have the same powers as are vested in a court, while trying a suit, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the atten dance of any p erson or examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any inquiry under this section shall be a judicial pr oceeding within the meaning of sections 193 
and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal C ode (45 of 1860).  
(7) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 4) may, within sixty days from the date of 
the receipt of the order, pre fer an appeal to the appropriate Government or such other authority as may be 
specified by the appropr iate Government in this behalf:  
Provided that the appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as the case may be, may, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said 
period of sixty days, extend the said period by a further period of sixty days:  
2[Provided further that no appeal by an employer shall be admitted unless at the time of  preferring the 
appeal, the appellant either produces a certificate of the controlling authority to the effect that the 
appellant has deposited with him an amount equal to the amount of gratuity required to be deposited 
under sub -section ( 4), or deposits w ith the ap pellate authority such amount.]  
(8) The appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as the case may be, may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the decision of 
the con trolling authority.  
3[7A. Inspectors. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint as many 
Inspectors, as it deems fit , for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by general or special order, define the area to which the 
authority of an Inspector so appointed shall extend and where two or more Inspectors are appointed for 
the same area, also provide by such order, for the distribution or allocation of work to be pe rformed by 
them under this Act.  
(3) Every Inspector sha ll be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
7B. Powers of Inspectors. —(1) Subject to any rules made by the appropriate Government in this 
behalf, an Inspector may, for the purpose of ascertain ing whether any of the provisions of this Act or the 
conditions, if any, of any exemption granted thereunder, have been complied with, exercise all or any of 
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) require an employer to furnish such informatio n as he may consi der necessary;  
(b) enter and inspect, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any), being persons in the 
service of the Government or local or any public authority, as he thinks fit, any premises of or place 
in any factory, mine, oilfield, planta tion, port, railway company, shop or other establishment to which 
this Act, applies, for the purpose of examining any register, record or notice or other document 
required to be kept or exhibited under this Act or the rules made thereunder, or otherwise ke pt or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1984 , s. 4, for “nominee” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
2. The proviso ins . by s. 4 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-1984).  10 
 exhibited in relation to the employment of any person or the payment of gratuity to the employees, 
and require the pro duction thereof for inspection;  
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes aforesaid, the employer or 
any person whom he finds in such premises or place and who, he has reasonable cause to believe, i s 
an employee employed therein;  
(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any register, record, notice or other document, as he 
may consider relevant, and where  he has reason to believe that any offence under this Act has been 
committed by an employer, search and seize with such assistance as he may think fit, such register, 
record, notice or other document as he may consider relev ant in respect of that offence;  
(e) exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any person required to produce any register, record, notice or other document or to give any 
information by an Inspector under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the 
meaning of sections 175 and 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority 
of a warrant issued under section 94 of that Code.]  
8. Recovery of gratuity .—If the amount of gratuity payable under this Act is not paid by the 
employer, within the prescri bed time, to the person entitled thereto, the controlling authority shall, on an 
application made to it in this behalf by the aggrieved person, issue a certificate for that amount to the 
Collector, who shall recover the same, together with compound interes t thereon 1[at such rate as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify], from the date of expiry of the prescribed time, as 
arrears of land revenue and pay the same to the person entitled thereto:  
2[Provided that the controlling authority shall,  before issuing a certificate under this section, give the 
employer a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the issue of such certificate : 
Provided further that the amount of interest payable under this section shall, in no case exceed the 
amount  of gratuity payable under this Act.]  
9. Penalties. —(1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be made by himself under 
this Act or of enabling any other person to avoid such payment, knowingly makes or causes to be made 
any false statement or  false representation shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 3[ten th ousand rupees], or with both.  
(2) An employer who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, any of the pr ovisions of this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 4[which shall 
not be less than three months but which may extend to one year, or with fine which shall not be less than 
ten thousand rupees but which  may extend to twenty t housand rupees, or with both]:  
Provided that where the offence relates to non -payment of any gratuity payable under this Act, the 
employer shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 5[six months but  
which may extend to two years] unless the court trying the offence, for reasons to be recorded by it in 
writing, is of opinion that a lesser term of imprisonment or the imposition of a fine would meet the ends 
of justice.  
10. Exemption of employer from li ability in certain cases .—Where an employer is charged with an 
offence punishable under this Act, he shall be entitled, upon complaint duly made by him and on giving 
to the complainant not less than three clear days' notice in writing of his intention to d o so, to have any 
other person whom he charges as  the actual offender brought before the court at the time appointed for 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 198 7, s. 8, for “at the rate of nine per cent. per annum” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987). 
2. The p roviso s inserted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987). 
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  11 
 hearing the charge; and if, after the commission of the offence has been proved, the employer proves to 
the satisfaction of the court — 
(a) that he has used due diligence to enforce  the execution of this Act, and  
(b) that the said other person committed the offence in question without his knowledge, consent 
or connivance,  
that other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be li able to the like punishment as if he were 
the employer and the employer shall be discharged from any liability under this Act in respect of such 
offence:  
Provided that in seeking to prove as aforesaid, the employer may be examined on oath and his 
evidence and that of any witness whom he calls in his support shall be subject to cross -examination on 
behalf of the person he charges as the actual offender and b y the prosecutor:  
Provided further that, if the person charged as the actual offender by the employer cannot be brought 
before the court at the time appointed for hearing the charge, the court shall adjourn the hearing from time 
to time for a period not ex ceeding three months and if by the end of the said period the person charged as 
the actual offender cannot still be brought before the court, the court shall proceed to hear the charge 
against the employer and shall, if the offence be proved, convict the e mployer.  
11. Cognizance of offences. —(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act save on a complaint made by or under the authority  of the appropriate Government:  
Provided that where the amount of gratuity has not been paid,  or recovered, within six months from 
the expiry of the prescribed time, the appropriate Government shall authorise the controlling authority to 
make a complaint against the employer, whereupon the controlling authority shall, within fifteen days 
from the date of such authorisation, make such complaint to a magistrate having j urisdiction to try the 
offence.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a 1[Metropolitain magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class] 
shall try any offence punishable under this A ct. 
12. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
controlling authority or any other person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
13. Protection of gratuity .—No gratuity payable under this Act 2[and no gratuity payable to an 
employee employed in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or 
shop exempted under section 5] shall  be liable to attachment in execution of any decree or order of any 
civil, revenue or criminal court.  
14. Act to override other enactments, etc. —The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent  therewith contained in any enactment other than 
this Act or in any instrument or contract having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
15. Power to make rules. —(1) The  appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parlia ment while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, bot h Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1994, s. 4, for “Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 24 -5-1994).  
2. Ins. by A ct 25 of 1984, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
--------------------------The Richardson and Cruddas Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE RICHARDSON AND CRUDDAS LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKING) ACT, 197 2                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
PART I  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKING OF RICHARDSON AND CRUDDAS LIMITED  
CHAPTER I .—PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II. —ACQUISITION OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE RICHARDSON AND CRUDDAS LIMITED  
3. Undertaking of the old company to vest in the Central Government.  
4. General effect of meeting . 
5. Duty to deliver possession of property acquired and document s relating thereto.  
6. Duty to furnish particulars.  
7. Transfer of employees of the old company.  
8. Payment of amount.   
CHAPTER III. —MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE NEW COMPANY  
9. Formation and registration of a new company.  
CHAPTER IV. —MANAGEMENT OF THE OLD COMPANY  
10. Management of the old company.  
11. Custodian to be public servant.  
12. Vacation of office by directors, etc., of the old company.  
PART II  
RECTIFICATION OF THE REGISTER OF MEMBERS OF THE OLD COMPANY  
CHAPTER I. —CONSTITUTION OF A TRIBUNAL  
13. Constitution of a Tribunal.  
CHAPTER II. —POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBUNAL  
14. Tribunal to call upon persons to make claims.  
15. Determination of genuine shares.  
16. No compensation for cancellation of spurious shares.  
17. Power of Tribunal to entertain  and dispose of claims for reimbursement.  
18. Suits and legal proceedings, not to be commenced or proceeded with.   
19. Decision of the Tribunal to be final.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
CHAPTER III. —DUTY OF CUSTODIAN TO RECONSTRUCT REGISTER OF MEMBERS  OF THE OLD COMPANY  
20. Custodian to reconstruct register of members of the old company.  
21. Custodian to issue fresh share certificate s. 
22. No annual general meeting of the old company to be held before the reconstruction of the 
register of members.  
23. Custodian to file accounts until reconstruction of the register of members of the old company.  
PART III  
OFFENCES AND THEIR TRIAL  
24. Penalties.  
25. Offences by companies.  
26. Offences to be tri able by a Magistrate of the first class and not to be compoundable.  
PART IV  
MISCE LLANEOUS  
27. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
28. Contracts , etc., in bad faith may be cancelled or varied.  
29. Power to terminate contract of employment.  
30. Power to remove difficulty.  
31. Power to make rules.  
  3 
 THE RICHARDSON AND CRUDDAS LIMITED (ACQUISITION  AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKING) ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 78 OF 1972  
[30th December, 1972 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertaking of the Richardson and 
Cruddas Limited , for the reconstruction of the register of its members and for matters        
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Richardson and Cruddas Limited, a company formed and registered under the Indian 
Companies Act, 1913  (7 of 1913) , is engag ed in the production of goods needed by the defence 
establishments, railways, steel plants and power projects;  
AND WHEREAS the mismanagement of the said company by its erstwhile managing agents and Board 
of Directors had seriously affected the production a nd supply of goods by the said company;  
AND WHEREAS it is not possible for the said company to provide for its proper management by a duly 
constituted Board of Directors in view of the existence of a large number of duplicate shares in the capital 
of the s aid company;  
AND WHEREAS for ensuring, in the interests of the community, the continuity of production and 
supply of goods by the said company, it is expedient in the public interest to acquire the undertaking of 
the said company;  
BE it enacted by Parliame nt in the Twenty -third Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
PART I  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKING OF RICHARDSON AND CRUDDAS LIMITED  
CHAPTER I. —PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Richardson and Cruddas  Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1972.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint;  
(b) “Custodian ” means the person who is appointed, under section 10, as the Custodian of the old 
company;  
(c) “Nationalised Bank ” means a corresponding new bank as defined in the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970) ; 
(d) “new company” means the Government company, formed and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , in pursuance of the provisions of section 9;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “old company ” means the Richardson and Cruddas Limited, a company formed and registered 
under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913) and having its registered office in the State of 
West Bengal;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “scheduled bank ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Reserve Bank of India                      
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) , and includes a National ised Bank ; 
(i) “share” means a share in the capital of the old company;  
(j) “Tribunal” means the Tribunal constit uted under section 13.  
                                                           
1. 31st March, 1973, vide notification No. G.S.R. 165(E), dated 12 th March, 1973, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,    
sec. 3( i). 4 
 (2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                      
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , have , save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in that  Act. 
CHAPTER II. —ACQUISITION OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE RICHARDSON AND CRUDDAS LIMITED  
3. Undertaking of the old company to vest in the Central Government .—On the appointed day, 
the undertaking of the old company shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Gover nment , and 
that Government shall, immediately thereafter, provide, by notification, for the transfer to, and vesting in, 
of such undertaking in  the new company.  
4. General effect of meeting .—(1) The undertaking of the old company shall be deemed to include 
all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, cash 
balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of , such property 
as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the old 
company in relation to the undertaking, whether within or without India, and all book s of account, 
registers (other than register of members and documents relating thereto), records and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, li abilities and 
obligations of whatever kind t hen subsisting of the old company in relation to the undertaking.  
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers 
of attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having 
effect immediately before the appointed day which r elate to the undertaking of the old company, shall be 
of as full force and effect in favour of the Central Government, and on the transfer of such undertaking to 
the new company, of such new company and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectivel y as if 
they had related to the Central Government or the new company, as the case may be.  
(3) (a) If, on the appointed day, a proceeding instituted by the old company in relation to the 
undertaking referred to in section 3 is pending, such proceeding may,  as from that day, be continued by 
the Central Government or, on the transfer of the undertaking to the new company, by the new company.  
(b) If, on the appointed day, any cause of action is existing against the old company in relation to the 
undertaking re ferred to in section 3, such cause of action may, as from that day, be enforced against the 
Central Government or, on the transfer of the undertaking to the new company, against the new company.  
(c) Save as otherwise provided in clauses ( a) and ( b), no sui t, proceeding or cause of action by or 
against the old company shall be continued or enforced by or against the Central Government or the new 
company.  
5. Duty to deliver possession of property acquired and documents relating thereto .—(1) Where 
any property  has vested in the Central Government under section 3, every person in whose possession or 
custody or under w hose control the property may be, shall deliver the property to the Central Government 
forthwith.  
(2) Any person who, on the appointed day, has in his possession or under his control any books, 
documents or other papers relating to the undertaking which has vested in the Central Gover nment under 
this Act and which belong to the old company, or, would have so belonged if the undertaking of the old 
company had not vested in the Central Government, shall be liable to account for the said books,        
docu ments or other papers to the Central Government and, on the transfer of such undertaking to the new 
company, to that company, and shall deliver them u p to the Central Government or the new company, as 
the case may be, or to such other person as the Central Government or the new company may specify in 
this behalf.  
(3) The Central Government may take , or cause to be taken, all necessary steps for securing  
possession of all properties which have vested in that Government under section 3.  
6. Duty to furnish particulars .—(1) The old company shall, within such period as the Central 
Government may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government, and the new company, a complete 
inventory of all the properties and assets (including particulars of investments) of the old company  on the 
appointed day, all liabilities and obligations of the old company subsisting on that day and also all 5 
 agreements entered into by the old company and in force on that day including agreements , whether 
express or implied, relating to leave, pension, gratuity and other terms of service of any officer or other 
employee of the old company under which, by virtue of this Act, the Central Government has , or will 
have, or may have, the liabilities and, for this purpose, the Central Government and the new com pany 
shall afford the old company all reasonable facilities.  
(2) The old company shall, if required by the Central Government or new company so to do, furnish 
such returns or information relating to the undertaking referred to in section 3, or, any person employed 
by the old company for the purpose of such undertaking , as may be specified in such requisi tion. 
7. Transfer of employees of the old company .—(1) Every officer or other employee of the old 
company (except a director or any managerial personnel sp ecified in section 197A of the Companies   
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or any other person entitled to manage the whole or a substantial part of the 
business of the old company under a special agreement with that company) in the employment of the old 
company im mediately before the appointed day shall, in so far as such officer or other employee is 
employed in connection with the affairs of the undertaking of the old company, become, as from the 
appointed day, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the Central Government and, on the 
transfer of such undertaking to the new company, of that company, and shall hold his office on the same 
terms and conditions and with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been 
admissi ble to him if the undertaking of the old company had not been transferred to and vested in the 
Central Government or the new company, and continue to do so unless and until his employment in the 
Central Government or the new company is duly terminated for until  the remuneration , terms or 
conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Government or the  new company , as the case may 
be: 
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to any officer or other employee, his 
employment shall be termina ted on payment to him by the Central Government or the new company, as 
the case may be, of an amount equivalent to three months ’ remuneration in the case of permanent 
employees and one month ’s remuneration  in the case of other employees : 
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any officer or other 
employee who has , by notice in writing given to the Central Government or the new company, within 
thirty days next following the appointed day , intimated his intention of not be coming an officer or other 
employee of the Central Government or the new company, as the case may be.  
(2) For the persons, who, immediately before the appointed day, were the trustees for any pension, 
provident fund, gratuity or other like fund constituted  for the officers or other employees of the old 
company, there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the Central Government or the new 
company may, by general or special order, specify.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Di sputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee from the 
old company to the Central Government or the new company shall n ot entitle such officer or other 
employee  to any compensation under that Act or other law , and no such claim shall be entertained by any 
court, tribunal or other authority.  
8. Payment of amount .—(1) For the transfer , under section 3, of the undertaking of the old company 
to the Central Government , there shall be paid by the Central Government to the Custodian an amount of 
rupees thirty lakhs.  
(2) The Custodian shall open an account in the name of the old company in any scheduled bank and 
credit the said amount to the said account and hold the said  amount in trust for and on behalf of the old 
company.  
CHAPTER III. —MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE NEW COMPANY  
9. Formation and registration of a new company .—For the efficient management and 
admin istration of the undertaking which will vest in the C entral Government under section 3, there shall 
be formed and registered, before the appointed day, a Government company, with the name “Richardson 
and Cruddas (1972) Limited ”, in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 6 
 CHAPTE R IV.—MANAGEMENT OF THE OLD COMPANY  
10. Management of the old company .—(1) The affairs of the old company shall be managed by a 
Custodian to be appointed by the Ce ntral Government in this behalf : 
Provided that the Central Government may, if the Custodian declines to become, or to continue to 
function as, the Custodian or if it is of opinion that it is necessary in the interests of the old company so to 
do, appoint any other person as the Custodian of the old company.  
(2) The Custodian appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall receive , from the funds of the old com pany, 
such emoluments as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.  
(3) The Custodian shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
11. Custodian to be public servant .—The C ustodian shall be a public servant within the mean ing of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
12. Vacation of office by directors, etc., of the old company .—(1) On the appointment of a 
Custodian, every person holding office , immediately before such appointment, as director or manager of 
the old company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
in any decree or order of any court or tribunal, vacate such office.  
(2) The Custodian  shall receive the sum referred to in section 8 and shall deal with the said sum for 
meeting any liability which is incurred by the old company after the appointed day , and the balance, if 
any, left after meeting the said liability, in accordance with the wishes of the members of the old 
company, expressed in a general meeting convened by the Custodian, and the provisions of the       
Compa nies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , shall, so far as may be, apply to such meeting.  
(3) The Custodian may, if the members of t he old company so desire, distribute the balance referred 
to in sub -section ( 2) amongst such members in accordance with their rights and interests and thereafter 
apply to the Court for the winding up of the old company by the Court.  
PART II  
RECTIFICATION OF THE REGISTER OF MEMBERS OF THE OLD COMPANY  
CHAPTER I. —CONSTITUTION OF A TRIBUNAL  
13. Constitution of a Tribunal .—(1) For the purpose of rectification of the register of members of 
the old company, the Central Government shall, by notification , constitut e a Tribunal consisting of one 
person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court.  
(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the presiding 
officer of the Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint another  person, in accordance with the 
provisions of this section, to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal 
from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.  
(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such sta ff as may be necessary for 
the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consoli dated 
Fund of India . 
(5) The Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure in  all matters arising out of the 
discharge of its functions including the place or places at w hich it shall hold its sittings : 
Provided that the Tribunal shall, as far as practicable, follow the procedure laid down in the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the investigation of claims and the decision of the Tribunal shall be 
final.  
(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedur e, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in 
respect o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath , 7 
 (b) the discovery and production of any document or other material producible a s evidence , 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits , 
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any Court or office , 
(e) issue of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judi cial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , and the Tribunal shall be deemed to        
be a civil court for the purpose of section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal                  
Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) . 
CHAPTER II. —POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBUNAL  
14. Tribunal to call upon persons to make claims .—(1) The Tribunal shall, by notification and in 
such other manner as may be prescribed, call upon every person, who claims to have any interest in any 
share, to prefer his claim within thirty days from such date as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Every person claiming an interest in any share shall make his claim before the Tribunal in such 
form as may be prescribed, stating therein the rig hts claimed by him in the share and the manner in which, 
and the date on which , such right was acquired by him.  
(3) The Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that any claimant had sufficient cause for not preferring the 
claim within thirty days from the date sp ecified in the notification, admit such claim within a further 
period of thirty days.  
15. Determination of genuine shares .—The Tribunal shall, after taking such evidence as may be 
adduced before it and after making such inquiry as it may think fit and afte r hearing such persons as may 
desire to be heard, determine which of the documents purporting to be shares represent, in reality, a 
contribution to the capital of the old company, and on such determination, all other documents purport ing 
to be shares shal l stand declared to be spurious and shall stand cancelled.  
16. No compensation for cancellation of spurious shares .—(1) No holder of a document purporting 
to be a share shall be entitled to claim either from the Central Government or from the old or new 
company any damages for the cancellation of such document by virtue of the provisions of section 15.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), every person who had acquired a document, 
purporting to be a share, bona fide  for value without notice of the fact that it did not represent any 
contribution to the capital of the old company, shall be entitled to claim reimbursement from the person 
from whom such document was acquired by him, and, the period of limitation for any action for such 
reimbursement shall be deemed to commence on the date on which the document held by him as a share 
stands cancelled under section 15.  
17. Power of Tribunal to entertain and dispose of claims for reimbursement .—(1) The Tri bunal 
shall have j urisdiction to entertain and dispose of any claim for reimbursement referred to in                
sub-section ( 2) of section 16.  
(2) Every such claim shall be made before the Tribunal within thirty days from the date on which the 
document purporting to be  a share stands cancelled under section 15.  
18. Suits and legal proceedings, not to be commenced or proceeded with .—(1) On and from the 
date on which the Tribunal is constituted, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be commenced, or if 
pending at the da te of such constitution, shall be proceeded with, against the old company except with the 
leave of the Tribunal and subject to such terms as the Tribunal may impose.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Tribunal shall have, and no court or other  tribunal shall 
have, jurisdiction to entertain or dispose of — 
(a) any suit or proceeding by, or on behalf of, or against, the old company;  
(b) any claim made by, or on behalf of, or against, the old company;  8 
 (c) any  question of priorities and any other question whatsoever, whether of law or of fact, which 
may relate to, or arise in relation to, the genuineness or otherwise of, any share or in relation to any 
rights or obligations under such share,  
whether such suit o r proceeding has been instituted, or is instituted, or such claim or question has arisen 
or arises before or after the constitution of the Tribunal.  
(3) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature by or against the 
old company in relation to any business of that company is pending in any court, such suit, appeal or 
other proceeding shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
in any contract, stand transferred to, and shall b e disposed of by, the Tribunal and thereupon no other 
court or tribunal shall have jurisdiction to try such suit, appeal or proceeding.  
Explanation. —A suit or other proceeding relating to the title to, or claim in or in relation to, any share 
or any docume nt purporting to be a share shall be deemed to be a suit or other proceeding relating to the 
business of the old company.  
(4) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall apply to any petition or appeal arising out of 
any petition made under article  32, article 226 or article 227 of the Constitution.  
19. Decision of the Tribunal to be final .—Every decision, under this Act, of the Tribunal shall be 
final and shall not be called in question in any court except by way of a petition under article 32 or    
article 226 of the Constitution.  
CHAPTER III. —DUTY OF CUSTODIAN TO RECONSTRUCT REGISTER OF MEMBERS  OF THE OLD COMPANY  
20. Custodian to reconstruct register of members of the old company .—(1) The Custodian shall 
reconstruct the register of members of the old company and shall include therein the names of the holders 
of the shares which have been declared by the Tribunal as representing, in reality, a contribution to the 
capital of the old company and strike off from the register of members of the old compa ny the names of 
the holders of the documents purporting to be shares which stand, by reason of the determination made by 
the Tribunal under section 15, cancelled.  
(2) On and from the date of reconstruction of the register of members of the old Company, — 
(a) the register, as so reconstructed, shall be de emed  to be the register of members of the old 
company, and  
(b) all registers of members maintained by the old company, immediately before the said date, 
shall stand cancelled.  
21. Custodian to issue fresh share certificate s.—(1) The Custodian shall issue, in such form as may 
be prescribed, fresh share certificate in relation to the shares which have been declared  by the Tribunal as 
representing, in reality, a contribution to the capital of the old company.  
(2) All share certificates issued by the old company before the date of the determination made by the 
Tribunal shall, on and from such determination, stand cancelled.  
22. No annual general meeting of the old company to be held b efore the reconstruction of the 
register of members .—(1) Nothwithstanding anything contained in the Companies                               
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or any other law for the time being in force, no annual or other general meeting of 
the old c ompany shall be held until the reconstruction of the register of members of the old company has 
been completed in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No resolution purported to have been passed at any meeting of the members of the old com pany 
shall, until the reconstruction of its register of members, have effect.  
23. Custodian to file accounts until reconstruction of the register of members of the old 
company .—(1) Until the register of members of the old company is finally reconstructed, the C ustodian 
shall file every year with the Registrar , the annual accounts of the old company.  
(2) The provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , shall, as far as may be, apply to the 
annual ac counts referred to in sub -section ( 1). 9 
 PART III  
OFFENCES AND THEIR TRIAL  
24. Penalties .—(1) Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertaking 
which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, wrongfully withholds such property 
from the Centra l Government or new company, or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of any property forming part of such undertaking, or  
(c) being required by sub -section ( 2) of section 5 so to do, wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to 
the Central Government, new compan y or any other person specified by that Government or the new 
company, any document which may be in his possession, custody or control, or  
(d) wilfully fails to furnish an inventory as required by section 6, or furnishes an inventory 
contain ing any partic ulars which are incorrect or false in material particulars and which he either 
knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, or  
(e) being required by the Central Government or the new company in writing so to do, fails to 
furnish any return , statement or other information relating to the undertaking of the old com pany 
which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, or  
(f) makes a false or frivolous claim before the Tribunal with regard to the ownership of, or any 
right in, any s hare, or  
(g) fails to comply with any order of direction made under this Act,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years , or with fine which 
may extend to te n thousand rupees, or with both : 
Provided that the court trying any offence under clause ( a), clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this sub -section 
may, at the time of convicting the accused person, order him to deliver up or refund, within a period to be 
fixed by the court, any property or money wrongfully withheld or wrongfully obtained or any document 
wilfully withheld or not furnished.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section except with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government or an officer authorised by that Government i n this behalf.  
25. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsi ble 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to punish ment 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
commi tted by a company and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or o ther officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
  10 
 26. Offences to be tri able by a Magistrate of the first class and not to be             
compoundable .—Notwithsta nding anything contained in the Code of Criminal                           
Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) ,— 
(a) every offence against this Act shall be triable  by a Magistrate of the first class, and  
(b) no offence against this Act shall be compoundable.  
PART  IV 
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceed ing 
shall lie against the Custodian in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the Custodian or the 
new company for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act.  
28. Contracts , etc., in bad fait h may be cancelled or varied .—(1) If the Central Government is 
satisfied, after such inquiry as it thinks fit, that any contract or agreement entered into at any time within 
twelve months immediately preceding the appointed day, between the old company and  any other person 
has been entered into in bad faith and is detrimental to the interest s of the old company or of the new 
company, it may make an order cancelling or varying (either unconditionally or subject to such conditions 
as it may think fit to impos e) the contract or agreement and thereafter the contract or agree ment shall have 
effect accordingly : 
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied except after giving to the parties 
to the contract or agreement a reasonable opportuni ty of being heard.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1) may make an application to the 
Tribunal for the variation or reversal of such order and thereupon the Tribunal may confirm, modify or 
reverse such order.  
29. Power to terminate contract of employment .—If the Custodian is of opinion that any contract 
of employment entered into by or on behalf of the old company at any time before the appointed day is 
unduly onerous, he may, by giving to the employee one month ’s notice in writing or the salary or wages 
for one month in lieu thereof, terminate such contract of employment.  
30. Power to remove difficulty .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, n ot inconsistent with the provisions of this Act , remove the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notif ication, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore going power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the form and manner in which every claim shall be preferred before the Tribunal;  
(b) the form in which fresh shares shall be issued by the Custodian;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall  be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the  session imm ediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect  only in such 
modified form or be of n o effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica tion or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
--------------------------The Taxation Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE TAXATION LAWS (EXTENSION TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR) ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1972  
[6th June, 1972 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of certain taxation laws to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The Taxation Laws (Extension to 
Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1972.  
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of July, 1972.  
2. Extension of certain taxation laws to Jammu and Kashmir and amendments thereto .—(1) 
The provisions of Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1971  (32 of 1971) , and all rules made and 
notifications issued by the Central Government, and all regulations mad e by the Central Board of Excise 
and Customs, thereunder shall extend to, and come into force in, the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(2) The Tax on Postal Articles Act, 1971  (47 of 1971) , and the Inland Air Travel Tax                     
Act, 1971  (48 of 1971 ), and all rules made and notifications issued by the Central Government thereunder 
shall extend to , and come into force in, the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
1*                                    *                                     *                                     *                                *  
3. Constitution of references to Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 .—The reference to the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , in Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1971 (32 of 1971), and 
in sec tion 8 of the Inland Air Travel Tax Act, 1971  (48 of 1971) , shall, in relation to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force in that State.  
4. Power to remove difficulties .—If, in or in relation to the Sta te of Jammu and Kashmir,              
any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of Chapter VII of the Finance (No. 2)                          
Act, 1971 (32 of 1971), or of the Tax on Postal A rticles Act, 1971  (47 of 1971) , or of the Inland Air 
Travel Tax Act, 1971  (48 of 1971) , now extended to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Central 
Government may, as occasion may require, by order notified in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions or give such directions, not inconsistent with the p rovisions of that Chapter or Act , as appear to 
it to be necessary fo r the removal of the difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiration of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
[THE SCHEDULE .] Rep. by the Repealing an d Amending  Act, 1978  (38 of 1978 ), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 26-11-1978 ). 
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 3) rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1978 (38 of 1978), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f.  26-11-1978).  
--------------------------The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972--------------------------
1 
 THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES TO BE APPOINTED OR CONSTITUTES UNDER THE ACT 
3. Appointment of Director and other officers . 
4. Appointment of Life Warden and other officers . 
5. Power to delegate . 
5A. Constitution of the National Board for Wild Life . 
5B. Standing Committee of the National Board.  
5C. Functions of the National Board.  
6. Constitution of State Board for Wild Life . 
7. Procedure to be followed by the Board . 
8. Duties of  State Board for Wild Life . 
 
CHAPTER III  
HUNTING OF WILD ANIMALS  
9. Prohibition of hunting . 
10. [Omitted.]  
11. Hunting of wild animals to be permitted in certain cases . 
12. Grant of permit for special purposes . 
13. [Omitted .]  
14. [Omitted .]  
15. [Omitted .]  
16. [Omitted .]  
17. [Omitted .] 
 
CHAPTER IIIA  
PROTECTION OF SPECIFIED PLANTS  
17A. Prohibition of picking, uprooting, etc. of specified plant . 
17B. Grants of permit for special purposes . 
17C. Cultivation of specified plants without licence prohibited . 
17D. Dealing in specified plants without licence prohibited . 
17E. Declaration of stock . 
17F. Possession, etc., of plants by licensee . 
17G. Purchase, etc., of specified plants . 2 
 SECTIONS  
17H. Plants to be Government property . 
CHAPTER IV  
 PROTECTED AREAS  
Sanctuaries  
18. Declaration of sanctuary . 
18A. Protection to sanctuaries . 
18B. Appointment of Collectors . 
19. Collector to determine rights . 
20. Bar of accrual of rights . 
21. Proclamation by Collector . 
22. Inquiry by Collector . 
23. Powers of Collector . 
24. Acquisition of rights . 
25. Acquisition proceedings . 
25A. Time -limit for completion of acquisition proceedings . 
26. Delegation of Collector ’s powers . 
26A. Declaration of area as sanctuary . 
27. Restriction on entry in sanctuary . 
28. Grant of permit . 
29. Destruction, etc., in a sanctuary prohibited without a permit . 
30. Causing fire prohibited . 
31. Prohibition of entry into sanctuary with weapon . 
32. Ban on use of injurious substances . 
33. Control of sanctuaries . 
33A. Immunisation of live -stock . 
33B. Advisory Committee . 
34. Registration of certain persons in possession of arms . 
Natioanl Parks  
35. Declaration of National Parks . 
36. [Omitted .] 
36 A. Declaration and management of a conservation reserve . 
36 B. Conservation reserve management committee . 
36 C. Declaration and management of community reserve . 
36 D. Community reserve management committee . 
Closed Area  
37. [Omitted .] 
Sanctuaries or National Parks declared by Central Government  
38. Power of Central Government to declare areas as sanctuaries or National Parks . 
 
  3 
 CHAPTER IVA  
CENTRAL ZOO AUTHORITY AND RECOGNITION OF ZOOS  
SECTIONS  
38A. Constitution of Central Zoo Authority . 
38B. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and members, etc . 
38C. Functions of the Authority . 
38D. Procedure to be regulated by the Authority . 
38E.Grants and loans to Authority and Constitution of Fund . 
38F. Annual report . 
38G. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament . 
38H. Recognition of zoos . 
38I. Acquisition of animals by a zoo . 
38J. Prohibition of teasing, etc., in a zoo.  
CHAPTER IV B  
NATION AL TIGER  CONSERVATION  AUTHORITY  
38K. Definitions . 
38L.Constitution of National Tiger Conservation Authority . 
38M. Term of office and conditions of service of members . 
38N. Officers and employees of Tiger Conservation Authority . 
38-O. Powers and functions of Tiger Conservation Authority . 
38P. Procedure to be regulated by Tiger Conservation Authority . 
38Q. Grants and loans to Tiger Conservation Authority and Constitution of Fund . 
38R. Accounts and audit of Tiger Conservation Authority . 
38S. Annual report of Tiger Conservation Authority . 
38T. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament . 
38U. Constitution of Steering Committee . 
38V. Tiger Conservation Plan . 
38W. Alteration and de -notification of tiger reserves . 
38X. Establishment of Tiger Conservation Foundation . 
CHAPTER IV C  
TIGER AND OTHER ENDANGERED  SPECIES  CRIME  CONTROL  BUREAU  
38Y. Constitution of Tiger and other Endangered Species Crime Control Bureau . 
38Z. Powers and functions of the Wildlife Crime Control Burea u. 
CHAPTER V  
TRADE OR COMMERCE IN WILD ANIMALS, ANIMAL ARTICLES AND TROPHIES  
39. Wild animals, etc., to be Government property . 
40. Declarations . 
40A. Immunity in certain cases.  
41. Inquiry and preparation of inventories . 
42. Certificate of ownership . 
43. Regulation of transfer of animal, etc . 
44. Dealings in trophy and animal articles without licence prohibited . 
45. Suspension or cancellation of licences . 
46. Purchase . 
47. Maintenance of records . 
48. Purchase of animals, etc., by licensee . 4 
 SECTIONS  
[48A. Restrict ion on transportation of wild life . 
49. Purchase of captive animal, etc., by a person other than a licensee . 
CHAPTER  VA 
PROHIBITION OF TRADE OR COMMERCE IN TROPHIES, ANIMAL ARTICLES,  
ETC., DERIVED FROM CERTAIN ANIMALS  
49A. Definitions . 
49B. Prohibition of dealings in trophies, animal articles, etc. , derived from scheduled  
animals.  
49C. Declaration by dealers . 
CHAPTER VI  
PREVENTION AND DETECTION OF OFFENCES  
50. Power of entry, search, arrest and detention . 
51. Penalties . 
51A. Certain conditions to apply while granting bail.  
52. Attempts and abetment . 
53. Punishment for wrongful seizure . 
54. Power to compound offences . 
55. Cognizance of offences . 
56. Operation of other laws not barred . 
57. Presumption to be made in certain cases . 
58. Offences by Companies . 
 
CHAPTER VIA  
FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY DERIVED FROM ILLEGAL HUNTING AND TRADE  
58A.  Application.  
58B. Definitions .  
58C. Prohibition of holding illegally acquired property.  
58D. Competent authority.  
58E. Identifying illegally acquired property.   
58F. Seizure or freezing of illegally acquired property.   
58G. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter.  
58H. Notice of forfeiture of property.  
58-I. Forfeiture of property in certain cases.  
58J. Burden of proof.  
58K. Fine in lieu of forfeiture.  
58L. Procedure in relation to certain trust proper ties. 
58M. Certain transfer to be null and void.  
58N. Constitution of Applellate Tribunal.  
58-O. Appeals.  
58P. Notice or order not to be invalid for error in description.  
58Q. Bar of Jurisdiction.  
58R. Competent Authority and Appellate Tribunal to have pow ers of civil court.  
58S. Information to competent authority.  
58T. Certain officers to assist Administrator, competent authority and Appellate Tribunal.  5 
 SECTIONS  
58U.  Power to take possession.  
58V. Rectification of mistakes.  
58W. Findings under other laws not conclusive for proceedings under this Chapter.  
58X. Service of notices and orders.  
58Y. Punishment for acquiring property in relating to which proceeings have been taken under this 
Chapter.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
59. Officers to be public servants . 
60. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
60A. Reward to persons.  
60B. Reward by State Government.  
61. Power to alter entries in Schedules . 
62. Declaration of certain wild animals to be vermin . 
63. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
64. Power of State Government to make rules . 
65. Rights of Scheduled Tribes to be protected . 
66. Repeal and savings . 
 
  6 
 THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) ACT, 1972* 
ACT NO. 53 OF 1972  
[9th September , 1972 .]  
1[An Act to provide for the protection of wild animals, birds and plants and for matters connected 
therewith or ancillary or incidental thereto with a view to ensuring the ecological and environmental 
security of the country .] 
2*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Wi ld Life (Protection) 
Act, 1972.  
3[(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.]   
(3) It shall come into force in a State or Union territory to which it extends  4*** on such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act or for differe nt States or Union territories.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
5[(1) “animal ” includes amphibians, birds, mammals and reptiles and their young, and also 
includes, in the cases of birds and reptiles, their eggs; ] 
(2) “animal article ” means an article made from any captive animal or wild animal, other than 
vermin, and includes an art icle or object in which the whole or any part of such animal 6[has been 
used, and ivory imported into India and an article made therefrom] ; 
7*  *   *   *   * 
8[(4) “Board ” means a State Board for Wild Life constituted under sub -section (1) of section 6 ;] 
(5) “captive animal ” means any animal, specified in Schedule I, Schedule II, Schedule III or 
Schedule IV, which is capture d or kept or bred in captivity;  
9*  *   *   *   * 
(7) “Chief Wild Life Warden ’ means the person appointed as such under clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
10[(7A) “circus ” means an establishment, whether stationary or mobile, where animals are kept or 
used wholly or mainly for the purpose of performing tricks or manoeuvres;]  
11*   *   *   *  * 
12[(9) “Collector ” means the chief officer in charge of the revenu e administration of a district or 
any other officer not below the rank of a Deputy Collector as may be appointed by the State 
Government under section 18B in this behalf;]  
(10) “commencement of this Act ”, in relation to — 
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 16 of 2003, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. The preamble omitted by Act 44 of 1991, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2-10-1991 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f . 2-10-1991 ). 
4. The words “,  or may become extended in future,” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f . 2-10-1991) . 
5. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3, for clause ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 5, for “has been used” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
7.  Clause ( 3) omitted by s. 5 , ibid . (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
8. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3, for clause ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
9. Clause ( 6) omitted by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2-10-1991).  
10. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
11. Clause ( 8) omitted by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
12. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( 9) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
* Subject to verification a nd confirmation by the administrative ministry.  7 
 (a) a State, means commence ment of this Act in that State,  
(b) any provision of this Act, means the commencement of that provision In the concerned 
State ; 
1[(11) “dealer ” in relation to any captive animal, animal article, trophy, uncured trophy, meat or 
specified plant, means a person, who carries on the business of buying or selling any such animal or 
article, and includes a person who undertakes business in any single tr ansaction;]   
(12) “Director ” means the person appointed as Director of Wild Life Preservation under  
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
2[(12A) “Forest officer ” means the Forest officer appointed under clause ( 2) of section 2 of the 
Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927) or under any other Act for the time being in force in a State;  
(12B) “forest produce ” shall have the same meaning as in sub -clause ( b) of clause ( 4) of section 2 
of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927);]  
3*  *   *   *   * 
(14) “Government property ” means any prop erty referred to in section 39  4[or section 17H] ; 
(15) “habitat ” includes land, water or vegetation which is the natural home of any wild animal;  
(16) “hunting ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes, — 
5[(a) killing or poisoning of any wild animal or captive animal and every attempt to do so;  
(b) capturing, coursing, snaring, trapping, driving or baiting any wild or captive animal and 
every attempt to do so;]  
 (c) injuring or destroying or taking any part of the body of any such animal or, in the case of 
wild birds or reptiles, damaging the eggs of such birds or reptiles, or disturbing the eggs or n ests 
of such birds or reptiles;  
(17) “land” includes canals, creeks and other water channels, reservoirs, rivers, streams and lakes, 
whether artificial or natural, 6[marshes and wetlands and also includes boulders and rocks] ; 
(18) “licence ” means a licence granted under this Act;  
7[(18A) “livestock ” means farm animals and includes buffaloes, bulls, bullocks, camels, cows, 
donkeys, goats, sheep, horses, mules, yaks, pigs, ducks, geese, poultry and their young but does not 
include any animal specified in Schedules I to V;]  
8[(19) “manufacturer ” means a person who manufactures articles from any animal or plant 
specified in Schedules I to V and VI, as the case may be;  
(20) “meat ” includes blood, bones, sinew, eggs, shell or carapace, fat and flesh with or without 
skin, whether raw or cooked, of any wild animal or captive animal, other than a vermin;  
(20A) “National Board ” means the National Board for Wild Life constituted under se ction 5A;]  
 (21) “National Park ” means an area declared, whether under section 35 or section 38, or deemed, 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 66, to b e declared, as a National Park;  
(22) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(23) “permit ” means a permit granted under this A ct or any rule made thereunder;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3, for clause ( 11) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( 12A) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. Clause ( 13) omitted by Act 44 of 1991, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Subs. by Act  16 of 2003, s. 3, for sub -clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 5, for “and also includes boulders and rocks” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
7. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3, for clause ( 18A) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
8. Subs. by s.3, ibid., for clauses ( 19) and ( 20) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  8 
 (24) “person ” includes a firm;  
1[(24A) “protected area ” means a National Park, a sanctuary, a conservation reserve or a 
community reserve notified under sections 18, 35, 36A and 36C of the Act;]  
(25) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
2[(25A) “recognised zoo ” means a zo o recognised under section 38H;  
3[(25B) “reserve forest ” means the forest declared to be reserved by the State Government under 
section 20 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (16 of 1927), or declared as such under any other State Act;  
(26) “sanctuary ” means an area declared as a sanctuary by notification under the provisions of 
Chapter IV of this Act and shall also include a deemed sanctuary under sub -section ( 4) of section 66;]  
4[(27) “specified plant ” means any plant specified in Schedule VI;]  
5*   *   *   *  * 
(29) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator of that Union 
territory appointed by the President under a rticle 239 of the Constitution;  
6[(30) “taxidermy ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means the curing, 
preparation or preservation or mounting of trophies;]  
7[(30A) “territorial waters ” shall have the same meaning as in section 3 of the Territorial Waters, 
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act , 1976 (80 of 1976);]  
(31) “trophy ” means the whole or any part of any captive animal or wild animal, other than 
vermin, which has been kept or preserved by any means, whether artif icial or natural, and 
includes — 
(a) rugs, skins and specimens of such animal mounted in whole or in part through a process 
of taxidermy, and  
8[(b) antler, bone, carapace, shell, horn, rhinoceros horn, hair, feather, nail, tooth, tusk, musk, 
eggs, nests and honeycomb;]  
(32) “uncured trophy ” means the whole or any part of any captive animal or wild animal, other 
than vermin, which has not undergone a process of taxidermy, and include s a 9[freshly killed wild 
animal , ambergris, musk and other animal products] ; 
(33) “vehicle ” means any conveyance used for movement on land, water or air and includes 
buffalo, bull, bullock, camel, do nkey, elephant, horse and mule;  
(34) “vermin ” means any wild animal specified in Schedule V;  
(35) “weapon ” includes ammunition, bows and arrows, exp losives, firearms, hooks ’ knives, nets 
poison, s nares and traps and any instru ment or apparatus capable of anaesthetizing, decoying, 
destroying,  injuring or killing an animal;  
10[(36) “wild animal ” means any animal specified in Schedules I to IV and found wild in nature;]  
11[(37) “wild life ” includes any animal, aquatic or land vegetation which forms part of any 
habitat;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3, for clauses ( 25B) and ( 26) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991,  s. 5, for clause ( 27) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Clause ( 28) omitted by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( 30) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
7. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
8. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3, for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
9. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 5, for “freshly -killed wild animals” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
10. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3, for clause ( 36) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
11. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( 37) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  9 
 (38) “Wild Life Warden ” means the person appointed as such under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) 
of section 4;  
1[(39) “zoo” means an establishment, whether stationary or mobile, where captive animals are 
kept for exhibition to the public  2[and includes a circus and rescue centres but does not include an 
establishment]  of a licensed dealer in captive animals .] 
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES TO BE APPOINTED OR CONSTITUTED UNDER THE ACT 
3. Appointment of Director and other officers .—(1) The Central Government may, for the 
purposes of this Act, appoint, — 
(a) A Dire ctor of Wild Life Preservation;  
3*   *             *   *   * 
(c) such other officers and employees as may be necessary.  
(2) In the performance of his duties and exercise of his powers by or under this Act, the Director shall 
be subject to such general or special directions, as the Central Government may, from time to time, give.  
4[(3) The officers and other employees appointed under this section shall be required to assist the 
Director.]  
4. Appointment of Life Warden and other officers .—(1) The State Government May, for the 
purpose  of this Act, appoint, — 
(a) a Chief Wild Life Warden;  
(b) Wild Life Wardens; 5*** 
6[(bb) Honorary Wild Life Wardens ;]  
(c) such other officers and employees as may be necessary.  
(2) In the performance of his duties and exercise of his  powers by or under this Act, the Chief Wild 
Life Warden shall be subject to such general or special directions, as the State Governme nt may from 
time to time, give.  
(3) 7[The Wild Life Warden , the Honorary Wild Life Warden]  and other officers and employees 
appointed under this section shall be subordinate  to the Chief Wild Life Warden.  
5. Power to delegate .—(1) The Director may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, 
by order in writing, delegate all or any of  his powers and duties under this Act to any officer subordinate 
to him subject to such conditions, if any, as  may be specified in the order.  
(2) The Chief Wild Life Warden may, with the previous approval of the State Government, by order 
in writing, deleg ate all or any of his powers and duties under this Act, except those under clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11, to any officer subordinate to him subject to such conditions, if any, as  may 
be specified in the order.  
(3) Subject to any general or sp ecial direction given or condition imposed by the Director or the Chief 
Wild Life Warden, any person, authorised by the Director or the Chief Wild Life Warden to exercise any 
powers, may exercise those powers in the same manner and to the same effect as if  they had been 
conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of delegation.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 3, for “but does not include a circus and an establishment” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. Clause ( b) omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
5. The word “and” omitted by 44 of 1991, s. 6 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
6. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 5, for clause ( bb) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
7. Subs. by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 6, for “The Wild Life Warden” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  10 
   11 
 1[5A. Constitution of the National Board for Wild Life .—(1) The Central Government shall, 
within three months from the date of commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002  
(16 of 2003) , constitute the National Board for Wild Life  consisting of  the following members, 
namely: — 
(a) the Prime Minister as Chairperson;  
(b) the Minister in -charge of Forests and Wild Life as Vice -Chairperson;  
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be from the House of the People and one 
from the Council of States;  
(d) Member, Planning Commission in -charge of Forests and Wild Life;  
(e) five persons to represent non -governmental organizations to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(f) ten persons to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst eminent 
conservationists, ecologists and environmentalists;  
(g) the Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Ministry or Department of the 
Centra l Government dealing with Forests and Wild Life;  
(h) the Chief of the Army Staff;  
(i) the Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Ministry of Defence;  
(j) the Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting;  
(k) the Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance;  
(l) the Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Tribal Welfare;  
(m) the Director -General of Forests in the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
dealing with Forests and Wild Life;  
(n) the Director -General of Tourism, Government of India;  
(o) the Director -General, Indian Council for Forestry Research and Education, Dehradun;  
(p) the Director, Wild Life Institute  of India, Dehradun;  
(q) the Director, Zoological Survey of India;  
(r) the Director, Botanical Survey of India;  
(s) the Director, Indian Veterinary Research Institute;  
(t) the Member -Secretary, Central Zoo Authority;  
(u) the Director, National Institute of  Oceanography;  
(v) one representative each from ten States and Union territories by rotation, to be nominated by 
the Central Government;  
(w) the Director of Wild Life Preservation who shall be the Member -Secretary of the National 
Board.  
(2) The term of office of the members other than those who are members ex officio , the manner of 
filling vacancies referred to in clauses ( e), (f) and ( v) of sub -section ( 1), and the procedure to be followed 
in the discharge of their functions by the members  of the National Board shall be such, as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The members (except members ex officio ) shall be entitled to receive such allowances in respect 
of expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  12 
 (4) Notwithstandin g anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the office of a 
member of the National Board shall not be de emed to be an office of profit.  
5B. Standing Committee of the National Board .—(1) The National Board may, in its discretion, 
constitute a Standing Committee for the purpose of exercising such powers and performing such duties as 
may be delegated to the Committee by the National Board.  
(2) The Standing Committee shall consist of the Vice -Chairperson, the Member -Secretary, and not 
more than ten members to be nominated by the Vice -Chairperson from amongst the members of the 
National Board.  
(3) The National Board may constitute committees, sub -committees or study groups, as may be 
necessary, from time to time in proper discharge of th e functions assigned to it.  
5C. Functions of the National Board .—(1) It shall be the duty of the National Board to promote the 
conservation and development of wild life and forests by such measures as it thinks fit.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the measures refer red to therein 
may provide for — 
(a) framing policies and advising the Central Government and the State Governments on the ways 
and means of promoting wild life conservation and effectively controlling poaching and illegal trade  
of wild life and its products;  
(b) making recommendations on the setting up of and management of national parks, sanctuaries 
and other protected areas and on matters relating to restrictio n of activities in those areas;  
(c) carrying out o r causing to be carried but impact assessment of various projects and activiti es 
on wild life or its habitat;  
(d) reviewing from time to time, the progress in the field of wild life conservation in the country 
and suggesting measur es for improvement theret o; and  
(e) preparing and publishing a status report at least once in two year s on wild life in the country.]  
1[6. Constitution of State Board for Wild Life .—(1) The State Government shall, within a period of 
six months from the date of commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002  (16 of 
2003) constitute a State Board for Wild Life consisting of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Chief Minister of the State and in case of the Union territory, either Chief Minister or 
Administrator, as the case may be - Chairperson;  
(b) the Minister in -charge of Forests and Wild Life - Vice -Chairperson;  
(c) three members of the State Legislature or in the case of a Union territory with Legislature, two 
members of the Legislative Assembly of that Union te rritory;  
(d) three persons to represent non -governmental organizations dealing with wild life to be 
nominated by the State Government;  
(e) ten persons to be nominated by the State Government from amongst eminent conservationists, 
ecologists and environment alists including at least two representatives of the Scheduled Tribes;  
(f) the Secretary to the State Government or the Government of the Union territory, as the case 
may be, in -charge of Forests and Wild Life;  
(g) the Officer in -charge of the State Forest  Department;  
(h) the Secretary to the State Government, Department of Tribal Welfare;  
(i) the Managing Director, State Tourism Development Corporation;  
(j) an officer of the State Police Department not below the rank of Inspector -General;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 7, for section 6 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  13 
 (k) a representat ive of the Armed Forces not below the rank of a Brigadier to be nominated by the 
Central Government;  
(l) the Director, Department of Animal Husbandry of the State;  
(m) the Director, Department of Fisheries of the State;  
(n) an officer to be nominated by the Director, Wild Life Preservation;  
(o) a representative of the Wild Life Institute of India, Dehradun;  
(p) a representative of the Botanical Survey of India;  
(q) a representative of the Zoological Survey of India;  
(r) the Chief Wild Life Warden, who sha ll be the Member -Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of the members other than those who are members ex officio  and the manner of 
filling vacancies referred to in clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) and procedure to be followed shall be 
such, as may be pr escribed.  
(3) The member (except members ex officio ) shall be entitled to receive such allowances in respect of 
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as may be prescribed.]  
7. Procedu re to be followed by the Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at least twice a year at such 
place as the State Government may dire ct. 
(2) The Board shall regulate its own proce dure (including the quorum)  
(3) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of any 
vacancy therein or  any defect in the constitution thereof or any irregularity in the procedure of the Board 
not af fecting the merits of the case.  
8. Duti es of 1[State Board for Wild Life] .—It shall be the duty of 1[State Board for Wild Life]  to 
advise the State Government, — 
2[(a) in the selection and management of areas to be declared as protected areas;]   
3[(b) in formulation of the policy for protection and conservation of the wild life and specified 
plants;]  
(c) in any matter relating to the amendment of any Schedule; 4*** 
5[(cc) in relation to the measures to be taken for harmonising the needs of the tribals and other 
dwellers of the forest with the protection and conservation of wild life; and]  
(d) in any other matter connected with the protection of wild life, which may be  referred  to it by 
the State Government.  
CHAPTER III  
HUNTING OF WILD ANIMALS  
6[9. Prohibition of hunting .—No person shall hunt any wild animal specified in Schedules I, II, III 
and IV except as provided under section 11 and section 12.]  
[10. Maintenance of records of w ild animals killed or captured .]—Omitted by the Wild Life 
(Protection) Amendment Act, 1991  (44 of 1991 ), s. 10 (w.e.f. 2-10-1991 ). 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 8, for “the Wild Life Advisory Board” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1-4-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 8, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. The word “and” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
6. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for section 9 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  14 
 11. Hunting of wild animals to  be permitted in certain cases .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force and subject to  the provisions of Chapter IV, — 
(a) the Chief Wild Life Warden may, if he is satisfied that any wild animal specified in Schedule 
I has become dangerous to human life or is so disabled or  diseased as to be beyond recovery, by 
Order in writing and stating the reasons therefor, permit any person to hunt such animal or c ause such 
animal to be hunted;  
1[Provided that no wild animal shall be ordered to be killed unless the Chief Wild Life Warde n is 
satisfied that such animal cannot be captured, tranquilised or translocated:  
Provided further that no such captured animal shall be kept in captivity unless the Chief Wild Life 
Warden is satisfied that such animal cannot be rehabilitated in the wild a nd the reasons for the same 
are recorded in writing.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( a), the process of capture or translocation, as the case 
may be, of such animal shall be made in such manner as to cause minimum trauma to the said animal]  
(b) the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, if he is satisfied that any wild 
animal specified in Schedule II, Schedule III, or Schedule IV, has become dangerous to human life or 
to property (including standing crops on any land) or is so di sabled or diseased as to be beyond 
recovery, by order in writing and stating the reasons therefor, permit any person to hunt 2[such animal 
or group of animals in a specified area or cause such animal or group of animals in that specified area 
to be hunted ]. 
(2) The killing or wounding in good faith of any wild animal in defence of oneself or of any other 
person shall not be an offence:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall exonerate any person who, when such defence becomes 
necessary, was committi ng any act in contravention of any provision of this Act or any  rule or order made 
thereunder.  
(3) Amy wild animal killed or wounded in defence of any perso n shall be Government property.  
12. Grant of permit for special purposes .—Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this 
Act, it shall be lawful for the Chief Wild Life Warden, to grant  3*** a permit, by an order in writing 
stating the reasons therefor, to any person, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, which shall 
entitle the holder of s uch permit to hunt subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, any wild 
animal specified in s uch permit, for the purpose of, — 
(a) education;  
4[(b) scientific research;  
(bb) scientific management.  
Explanation .— For the purposes of clause ( bb), the expression,  “scientific m anage ment ” means — 
(i) translocation of any wild animal s to an alternative suitable habitat; or  
(ii) population management of wildlife , without killing or poisoning or destroying any wild 
animals;]  
 5[(c) collection of specimens — 
(i) for recognised zoos subject to the permission under section 38 -I; or 
(ii) for m useums and similar institutions;  
(d) derivation, collection or preparation of snake -venom for the manufacture of life -saving 
drugs:]  
6[Provided that no s uch permit shall be granted — 
(a) in respect of any wild animal specified in Schedule I, except with the previous permission 
of the Central Government, and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Ac t 16 of 2003, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. Subs. by s.  9, ibid., for “ such animal or cause such animal to be hunted” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. The words “ , with the previous permission of the State Government” omitted by Act 23 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -5-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 21 -5-1982).  
5. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 11, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
6. Ins. by Act 23 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -5-1982).  15 
 (b) in respect of any other wild animal, except with the previous permission of the State 
Government ;] 
(d) derivation, collection or preparation of snake -venom for the manufacture of life -saving 
drugs:]  
13. [Suspens ion or cancellation of licence ].—Omitted by the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 
1991  (44 of 1991 ), s. 12 (w.e.f. 2-10-1991 ). 
14. [Appeals ].—Omitted by , s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-10-1991 ). 
15. [Hunting of young and female of wild anim als].—Omitted by , s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-10-1991 ). 
 16. [Declaration of closed time ].—Omitted by , s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-10-1991 ). 
17. [Restrictions on hunting ].—Omitted by , s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 2-10-1991 ). 
 1[CHAPTER IIIA  
PROTECTION OF SPECIFIED PLANTS  
17A. Prohibition of picking, uprooting, etc. of specified plant .—Save as otherwise provided in this 
Chapter, no person shall — 
(a) wilfully pick, uproot, damage, destroy, acquire or collect any specified plant from any forest 
land and any area specified, by notification, by the Central Government;  
(b) posses, sell, offer for sale, or transfer by way of gift or otherwise, or transport any specified 
plant, whether al ive or dead, or part or derivative thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent a member of a scheduled tribe, subject to the 
provisions of Chapter IV, from picking, collecting or possessing in the district he resides any 
specified plant or  part or derivative thereof for his bona fide  personal use.  
17B. Grants of permit for special purposes .—The Chief Wild Life Warden may, with the previous 
permission of the State Government, grant to any person a permit to pick, uproot, acquire or collect from 
a forest land or the area specified under section 17A or transport, subject to such conditions as may be 
specified therein, any specified plant for the purpose of — 
(a) education;  
(b) scientific research;  
(c) collection, preservation and display in a herbarium of any scientific institution; or  
(d) propagation by a person or an institution approved by the Central Government in this regard.  
17C.  Cultivation of specified plants without licence prohibited .—(1) No person shall cultivate a 
specified plant except under and in accordance with a licence granted by the Chief Wild Life Warden or 
any other officer authorised by the State Government in this behalf:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent a person, who immediately before the 
commencemen t of the Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act, 1991  (44 of 1991) , was cultivating a 
specified plant from carrying on such cultivation for a period of six months from such commencement or 
where he has made an application within that period for the grant o f a licence to him, until the licence is 
granted to him or he is informed in writing that a licence cannot be granted to him.  
(2) Every licence granted under this section shall specify the area in which and the conditions, if any, 
subject to which the lice nsee shall cultivate a specified plant.  
17D. Dealing in specified plants without licence prohibited .—(1) No person shall, except under 
and in accordance with a licence granted by the Chief Wild Life Warden or any other officer authorised 
by the State Government in this behalf, commence or carry on business or occupation as a dealer in a 
specified plant or part or derivate thereof:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 13 (w.e.f. 20 -4-1995).  16 
 Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent a person, who, immediately before the 
commencement of the Wild Life (Pr otection) (Amendment) Act, 1991  (44 of 1991) , was carrying on such 
business or occupation, from carrying on such business or occupation for a period of sixty days from such 
commencement, or where he has made an application within that period for the grant of a licence to him, 
until the licence is granted to him or he is informed in writing that a licence cannot be granted to him.  
(2) Every licence granted under this section shall specify the premises in which and the conditions, if 
any, subject to which the  licensee shall carry on his business.  
17E. Declaration of stock .—(1) Every person cultivating, or dealing in, a specified plant or part or 
derivative thereof shall, within thirty days from the date of commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) 
(Amendment)  Act, 1991  (44 of 1991) declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or any other officer 
authorised by the State Government in this behalf, his stocks of such plants and part or derivative thereof, 
as the case may be, on the date of such commencement.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections ( 3) to ( 8) (both inclusive) of section 44, section 45, section 46 and 
section 47 shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to an application and a licence referred to in  
section 17C and section 17D as they apply in relation to the licence or business in animals or animal 
articles.  
17F. Possession, etc., of plants by licensee .—No licensee under this Chapter shall — 
(a) keep in his control, custody or possession — 
(i) any specified plant, or part or derivative thereof in respect of which a declaration under the 
provisions of section 17E has to be made but has not been made;  
(ii) any specified plant, or part or derivative thereof which has not been lawfully acquired 
under the provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder ; 
(b) (i) pick, uproot, collect or acquire any specified plant, or  
(ii) acquire, receive, keep in his control, custody or possession, or sell, offer for sale or transport 
any specified plant or part or derivative thereof,  
except in accordance with the conditions subject to which the licence has been granted and such rules as 
may be made under this Act.  
17G. Purchase, etc., of specified plants .—No person shall purchase, receive or acquire any specified 
plant or part or derivative thereof otherwise than from a licensed dealer:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any person referred to in section 17B.  
17H. Plants to be Government property .—(1) Every specified plant or part or derivative thereof, in 
respect of which any offence against this  Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been committed, 
shall be the property of the State Government, and, where such plant or part or derivative thereof has been 
collected or acquired from a sanctuary or National Park declared by the Central Govern ment, such plant 
or part or derivative thereof shall be the property of the Central Government.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 39 shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to 
the specified plant or part or derivative thereof or they apply in relation to wild animals and articles 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of that section.]  
CHAPTER IV  
1[PROTECTED AREAS ] 
Sanctuaries  
18. Declaration of sanctuary .—2[(1) The State Government may, by notification, declare its 
intention to constitute any area other than an area comprised within any reserve forest or the territorial 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 o f 2003, s. 10 for the heading (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 15, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  17 
 waters as a sanctuary if it considers that such area is of adequate ecological, faunal, flor al, 
geomorphological, natural or zoological significance, for the purpose of protecting, propagating or 
developing wild life or its environment.]  
(2) The notification referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall specify, as nearly as possible, the sit uation and 
limits of such area.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, it shall be sufficient to describe the area by roads, 
rivers, ridges or other well -known or r eadily intelligible boundaries.  
1[18A. Protection to sanctuaries .—(1) When the State Government declares its intention under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 18 to constitute any area, not comprised within any reserve forest or territorial 
waters under that sub -section, as a sanctuary, the provisions of sections 27 to 33A (both  inclusive) shall 
come into effect forthwith.  
(2) Till such time as the rights of affected persons are finally settled under sections 19 to 24 (both 
inclusive), the State Government shall make alternative arrangements required for making available fuel, 
fodder and other forest produce to the persons affected, in terms of their rights as per the Government 
records.  
18B. Appointment of Collectors .—The State Government shall appoint, an officer to act as 
Collector under the Act, within ninety days of coming in to force of the Wild Life (Protection) 
Amendment Act, 2002  (16 of 2003) , or within thirty days of the issue of notification under section 18, to 
inquire into and determine the existence, nature and extent of rights of any person in or over the land 
compris ed within the limits of the sanctuary which may be notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 18.]  
19. Collector to determine rights .—2[When a notification has been issued under section 18 ,] the 
Collector shall inquire into, and determine, the existence, nature and extent of the rights of any person in 
or over the land comprised with in the limits of the sanctuary.  
20. Bar of accrual of rights .—After the issue of a notification under section 18, no right shall be 
acquired in, on or over the land comprised within the limits of the area specified in such notification, 
except by success ion, testamentary or intestate.  
21. Proclamation by Collector .—When a notification has been issued under section  18, the 
Collector shall  3[within a period of sixty days]  publish in the regional language in every town and village 
in or in the neighbourhood of the area com prised therein, a proclamation — 
(a) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and t he limits of the sanctuary; and  
(b) requiring any person, claiming any right mentioned In section 19, to prefer before the 
Collector,  within two months from the date of such proclamation, a written claim in the prescribed form, 
specifying the  nature and extent of such right with necessary details and the amount and particulars of 
compensation, if a ny, claimed in respect thereof.  
22. Inquiry by Collector .—The Collector shall, after service of the prescribed notice upon the 
claima nt, expeditious ly inquire into — 
(a) the claim preferred before him unde r clause ( b) of section 21, and  
(b) the existence of any right mentioned in section 19 and not claimed under clause ( b) of  
section 21,  
so far as the same may be ascertainable from the records of the State Government and the evidence of any 
person acquainted with the same.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 16 of 2003, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 16, for “Whenever any area is declared to be a sanctuary” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s . 12 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  18 
 23. Powers of Collector .—For the purpose of such inquiry, the Collector may exercise the following 
powers, namely: — 
(a) the power to enter in or upon any land and to survey, demarcate and make a map of the same 
or to author ise any other officer to do so;  
(b) the same powers as are vested in a civi l court for the trial of suits.  
24. Acquisition of rights .—(1) In the case of a claim to a right in or over any land referred to in 
section 19, the Collector shall pass an order admitting or rejectin g the same in whole or in part.  
(2) If such claim is admitted in whole or in part, the Collector may either — 
(a) exclude such land from the limit s of the proposed sanctuary, or  
(b) proceed to acquire such land or rights, except where by an agreement between the owner of 
such land or holder of rights and the Government, the owner or holder of such rights has agreed to 
surrender his rights to the Government, in or over such land ” and on paymen t of such compensation, 
as is provided in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894(1 of 1894 ). 
1[(c) allow, in consultation with the Chief Wild Life Warden, the continuation of any right of any 
person in or over any land within the limits of the sanctuary.]   
25. Acquisition proceedings .—(1) For the purpose of acquiring such land, or  rights in or over such 
land, — 
(a) the Collector shall be deemed to be a Collector, proceeding under t he Land Acquisition Act, 
1894 (1 of 1894);  
(b) the claimant shall be deemed to be a person interested and appearing before him in pursuance 
of a notice giv en under section 9 of that Act;  
(c) the provisions of the sections, preceding section 9 of that Act, shall be dee med to have been 
complied with;  
(d) where the claimant does not accept  the award made in his favour ha the matter of 
compensation, he shall be deemed, within the meaning of section 18 of that Act, to be a person 
interested who has not accepted the award, and shall be entitled to proceed to claim relief against the 
award unde r the provisio ns of Part III of that Act;  
(e) the Collector, with the consent of the claimant, or the court, with the consent of both the 
parties, may award compensation in land or money or partly i n land and partly in money; and  
(f) in the case of the st oppage of a public way or a common pasture, the Collector may, with the 
previous sanction of the State Government, provide for an alternative public way or common pasture, 
as far as ma y be practicable or convenient.  
(2) The acquisition under this Act of any land or interest therein shall be deemed to be acquisition  for 
a public purpose.  
2[25A. Time -limit for completion of acquisition proceedings .—(1) The Collector shall, as far as 
possible, complete the proceedings under sections 19 to 25 (both inclusive), within a period of two years 
from the date of notification of declaration of sanctuary under section 18.  
(2) The notification shall not lapse if, for any reasons, the proceedings are not completed within a 
period of two years.]  
 26. De legation of Collector ’s powers .—The State Government may, by general or special order, 
direct that the Powers exercisable or the functions to be performed by the Collector under sections 19 to 
25 (bo th inclusive) may be exercised and performed by such other officer  as may be specified in the 
order.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 17 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  19 
 1[26A. Declaration of area as sanctuary .—(1) When — 
(a) a notification has been issued under section 18 and the period for preferring claims has 
elapsed, and all claims, if any, made in relation to any land in an area inte nded to be declared as a 
sanctuary, have been disposed of by the State Government; or  
(b) any area comprised within any reserve forest or any part of the territorial waters, which is 
considered by the State Government to be of adequate ecological faunal floral geomorphological, 
natural or zoological significance for the purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wild life or 
its environment, is to be included in a sanctuary,  
the State Government shall issue a notification specifying the limits of th e area which shall be comprised 
within the sanctuary and declare that the said area shall be sanctuary on and from such date as may be 
specified in the notification:  
Provided that where any part of the territorial waters is to be so included, prior concurr ence of the 
Central Government shall be obtained by the State Government:  
Provided further that the limits of the area of the territorial waters to be included in the sanctuary shall 
be determined in consultation with the Chief Naval Hydrographer of the Ce ntral Government and after 
taking adequate measures to protect the occupational interests of the local fishermen.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), the right of innocent passage of any vessel 
or boat through the territorial waters shall not be affected by the notification issued under sub -section ( 1). 
 2[(3) No alteration of the boundaries of a sanctuary shall be made by the State Government except on 
a recommendation of the National Board.]   
27. Res triction on entry in sanctuary .—(1) No person other than, — 
(a) a public servant on duty,  
(b) a person who has been permitted by the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer to 
reside with in the limits of the sanctuary,  
(c) a person who has any right over immovable property with in the limits of the sanctuary,  
(d) a person passing through the sanctu ary along a public highway, and  
(e) the dependants of the person referred to in clause ( a), clause ( b) or clause ( c), shall enter or 
reside in the sanctuary, except under and in accordance  with the conditions of a permit granted under 
section 2 8. 
(2) Every person shall, so long, as he resi des in the sanctuary, be bound — 
(a) to prevent the commission, in the sanctuary, of an offence against this Act;  
(b) where there is reason to believe that  any such offence against this Act has been committed in 
such sanctuary, to help in discover ing and arresting the offender;  
(c) to report the death of any wild animal and to safeguard its remains until the Chief Wild Life 
Warden or the authorise d officer t akes charge thereof;  
(d) to extinguish any fire in such sanctuary of which he has knowledge or information and to 
prevent from spreading, by any lawful means in his power, any fire within the vicinity of such 
sanctuary of which he ha s knowledge or informat ion; and  
(e) to assist any forest officer, Chief Wild Li fe. Warden, Wild Life Warden or police officer 
demanding his aid for preventing the commission of any offence against this Act or in the 
investigation of any such offence.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 18 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Subs. by Act  16 of 2003, s. 14, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  20 
  1[(3) No person shall, with  intent to cause damage to any boundary -mark of a sanctuary or to cause 
wrongful gain as defined in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), alter, destroy, move or deface such 
boundary -mark.  
(4) No person shall tease or molest any wild animal or litter t he grounds of sanctuary.]  
28. Grant of permit .—(1) The Chief Wild Life Warden may, on application, grant to any person a 
permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary for all or any of t he following purposes, namely: — 
(a) investigation or study of wild life and  purposes a ncillary or incidental thereto;  
(b) photography;  
(c) scientific research;  
(d) tourism;  
(e) transaction of lawful business with any pe rson residing in the sanctuary.  
(2) A permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary shall be issued subject to such conditions and on 
payment of  such fee as may be prescribed.  
2[29. Destruction, etc., in a sanctuary prohibited without a permit .—No person shall destroy, 
exploit or remove any wild life including forest produce from a sanctuary or destroy or damage or dive rt 
the habitat of any wild animal by any act whatsoever or divert, stop or enhance the flow of water into or 
outside the sanctuary, except under and in accordance with a permit granted by the Chief Wild Life 
Warden, and no such permit shall be granted unle ss the State Government being satisfied in consultation 
with the Board that such removal of wild life from the sanctuary or the change in the flow of water into or 
outside the sanctuary is necessary for the improvement and better management of wild life th erein, 
authorises the issue of such permit:  
Provided that where the forest produce is removed from a sanctuary the same may be used for 
meeting the personal bona fide  needs of the people living in and around the sanctuary and shall not be 
used for any commercial purpose.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, grazing or movement of livestock permitted under 
clause (d) of section 33 shall not be deemed to be an act prohibited under this section.]  
30. Causing fire prohibited .—No person shall set fire to a sanctuary, or kindle any fire, or leave any 
fire burning, in a sanctuary, in such manner  as to endanger such sanctuary.  
31. Prohibition of en try into sanctuary with weapon .—No person shall enter a sanctuary with any 
weapon except with the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life W arden or the authorised  
offcer.  
32. Ban on use of injurious substances .—No person shall use, in a sanctuary, chemicals, explosives 
or any other substances which may cause injury to, or endanger, a ny wild life in such sanctuary.  
33. Control of sanctuaries .—The Chief Wild Life Warden shall be the authority who shall control, 
manage and maintain all sanctuaries and for that purpose, within the limits of any sanctu ary,— 
(a) may construct such roads, bridges, buildings, fences or barrier gates, and carry out such other 
works as he may consider necessary for the purposes of such sanctuary:  
3[Provided that no construction of comm ercial tourist lodges, hotels, zoos and safari parks 
shall be undertaken inside a sanctuary except with the prior approval of the National Board.]  
(b) shall take such steps as will ensure the security of wild animals in the sanctuary and the 
preservation of the sanc tuary and wild animals therein;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 19 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 15, for section 29 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  21 
 (c) may take such measures, in the interests of wild life, as he may consider necessary for the 
improvement of any habitat;  
(d) may regulate, control or prohibit, in keeping with the interests of wild life, the  grazing or 
movement of 1[live-stock.]  
2*** 
3[33A. Immunisation of live -stock .—(1) The Chief Wild Life Warden shall take such measures in 
such manner, as may be prescribed, for immunisation against communicable diseases of the live -stock 
kept in or within five kilometres of a sanctuary.  
(2) No person shall take, or cause to be taken or grazed, any live -stock in a sanctuary without getting 
it immunised.]  
4[33B. Advisory Committee .—(1) The State Government shall constitute an Advisory Committee 
consisting of the Chief Wild Life Warden or his nominee not below the rank of Conservator of Forests as 
its head and shall include a member of the State Legislature within whose constituency the sanctuary is 
situated, three representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions , two representatives of non -governmental 
organisations and three individuals active in the field of wild life conservation, one representative each 
from departments dealing with Home and Veterinary matters, Honorary Wild Life Warden, if any, and the 
offic er-in-charge of the sanctuary as Member -Secretary.  
(2) The Committee shall render advice on measures to be taken for better conservation and 
management of the sanctuary including participation of the people living within and around the sanctuary.  
(3) The Committee shall regulate its own procedure including quorum.]  
34. Registration of certain  persons in possession of arms .—(1) Within three months from the 
declaration of any area as a sanctuary, every person residing in or within ten kilometres of any such 
sanctuary and holding a licence granted under the Arms Act, 1959(54 of 1959 ), for the possession of arms 
or exempted from the provisions of that Act and possessing arms, shall apply in such form, on payment of 
such fee and within such time as may be prescribed, to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised 
officer, fo r the registration of his name.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised 
officer shall register the name of the applicant in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 5[(3) No new licences under the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959) shall be granted within a radius of ten 
kilometres of a sanctuary without the prior concurrence of the Chief Wild Life Warden.]   
National Parks  
35. Declaration of National Parks .—(1) Whenever it appears to the State Government that an area, 
whether within a sanctuary or not, is, by reason of its ecological, faunal, floral, geomorphological or 
zoological association or importance, needed to be constit uted as a National Park for the purpose of 
protecting, propagating or developing wild life therein or its environment, it may, by notification, declare 
its intention to constitut e such area as a National Park.  
 6[Provided that where any part of the territo rial waters is proposed to be included in such National 
Park, the provisions of section 26A shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the declaration of a 
National Park as they apply in relation to the declaration of a sanctuary.]  
(2) The notification referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall define the limits of the area which is intended 
to be declared as a National Park.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s.  21, for “cattle;” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Clause ( e) omitted by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
5. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 22A (w.e.f. 21 -5-2001).  
6. Added by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  22 
 (3) Where any area is intended to be declared as a National Park, the provisions of sections 1[19 to 
26A (both inclusive  except cause (c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 24)]  shall, as far as may, be, apply to 
the investigation and determination of claims, and extinguishment of rights, in relation to any land in such 
area as they apply to the said matters in relat ion to any land in a sanctua ry. 
(4) When the following events have occurred, namely, — 
(a) the period for preferring claims has elapsed, and all claims, if any, made in relation to any 
land in an area intended to be declared as a National Park, have been disposed of by the State 
Government, and  
(b) all rights in respect of lands proposed to be included in the National Park have become vest ed 
in the State Government,  
the State Government shall publish a notification specifying the limits of the area which shall be 
comprised within the National Park and declare that the said area shall be a National Park on and from 
such date as may be  specified in the notification.  
 2[(5) No alteration of the boundaries of a National Park by the State Government shall be made 
except on a recommendation of the National Board.  
 (6) No person shall destroy, exploit or remove any Wild Life including forest produce from a 
National Park or destroy or damage or divert the habitat of any wild animal by any act whatsoever or 
divert, stop or enhance  the flow of water into or outside the National Park, except under and in 
accordance with a permit granted by the Chief Wild Life Warden, and no such permit shall be granted 
unless the State Government being satisfied in consultation with the National Boar d that such removal of 
wild life from the National Park or the change in the flow of water into or outside the National Park is 
necessary for the improvement and better management of wild life therein, authorises the issue of such 
permit:  
Provided that whe re the forest produce is removed from a National Park, the same may be used for 
meeting the personal bona fide  needs of the people living in and around the National Park and shall not be 
used for any commercial purpose.]  
 (7) No grazing of any 3[live-stock]  shall be permitted in a National Park and no 3[live-stock] shall be 
allowed to enter therein except where such 3[live-stock]  is used as a vehicle by a person authoris ed to 
enter such National Park.  
(8) The provisions of sections 27 and 28, sec tions 30 to 32 (both inclusive), and clauses ( a), (b) and 
(c) of 4[section 33, section 3 3A] shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to a National Park as they ap ply 
in relation to a sanctuary.  
5[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, in case of an area, whether within a sanctuary or 
not, where the rights have been extinguished and the land has become vested in the State Government 
under any Act or otherwise, such area may be notified by it, by a notification, as a National Park and the 
proceeding s under sections 19 to 26 (both inclusive) and the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of this 
section shall not apply.]  
6*** 
36. [Declaration of game reserve .]—Omitted by the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 1991   
(44 of 1991 ), s. 24 (w.e.f. 2-10-1991 ). 
7[36A. Declaration and management of a conservation reserve .—(1) The State Government may, 
after having consultations with the local communities, declare any area owned by the Government, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 23, for “section 23, for “19 to 26 (both inclusive)” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 19, for sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 23, for “cattle” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for “section 33” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
6. The sub -heading “GAME RESERVE” omitted by Act 44 of 1991, s. 24 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
7. Ins. by Act 16  of 2003, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  23 
 particularly the areas adjacent to National Parks and sanctuaries and those areas which link one protected 
area with another, as a conservation reserve for protecting landscapes, seascapes, flora and fauna and their 
habitat:  
Provided that where the conservation reserve includes any land owned by the Central G overnment, its 
prior concurrence shall be obtained before making such declaration.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 18, sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 27, sections 
30, 32 and clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 33 shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to a conservation 
reserve as they apply in relation to a sanctuary.  
36B. Conservation reserve management committee .—(1) The State Government shall constitute a 
conservation reserve management committee to advise the Chief Wild Life Wa rden to conserve, manage 
and maintain the conservation reserve.  
(2) The committee shall consist of a representative of the forest or Wild Life Department, who shall 
be the Member -Secretary of the Committee, one representative of each Village Panchayat in w hose 
jurisdiction the reserve is located, three representatives of non -governmental organisations working in the 
field of wild life conservation and one representative each from the Department of Agriculture and 
Animal Husbandry.  
(3) The Committee shall regulate its own procedure including the quorum.  
36C. Declaration and management of community reserve .—(1) The State Government may, 
where the community or an individual has volunteered to conserve wild life and its habitat, declare a ny 
private or community land not comprised within a National Park, sanctuary or a conservation reserve, as a 
community reserve, for protecting fauna, flora and traditional or cultural conservation values and 
practices.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 18, sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 27, sections 
30, 32 and clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 33 shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to a community 
reserve as they apply in relation to a sanctuary.  
(3) After the issue of notificati on under sub -section ( 1), no change in the land use pattern shall be 
made within the community reserve, except in accordance with a resolution passed by the management 
committee and approval of the same by the State Government.  
36D. Community reserve manag ement committee .—(1) The State Government shall constitute a 
Community Reserve management committee, which shall be the authority responsible for conserving, 
maintaining and managing the community reserve.  
(2) The committee shall consist of five representa tives nominated by the Village Panchayat or where 
such Panchayat does not exist by the members of the Gram Sabha and one representative of the State 
Forests or Wild Life Department under whose jurisdiction the community reserve is located.  
(3) The committe e shall be the competent authority to prepare and implement the management plan 
for the community reserve and to take steps to ensure the protection of wild life and its habitat in the 
reserve.  
(4) The committee shall elect a Chairman who shall also be the  Honorary Wild Life Warden on the 
community reserve.  
(5) The committee shall regulate its own procedure including the quorum.]  
Closed Area  
37. [Declaration of closed area .]—Omitted by the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002   
(16 of 2003 ), s. 21 (w.e.f. 1-4-2003 ).  
Sanctuaries or National Parks  declared by Central Government  
38. Power of Central Government to declare areas as  sanctuaries or National Parks .—(1) Where 
the State Government leases or otherwise transfers any area under its control, not being an area within a 
sanctuary, to the Central Government, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the conditions 24 
 specified in section 18 are fulfilled  in relation to the area so transferred to it, declare such area, by 
notification, to be a sanctuary and the provisions of 1[sections 1 8 to 35 ] (both inclusive), 54 and 55 shall 
apply in relation to such sanctuary as they apply in relation to a sanctuary d eclared by the State 
Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the conditions specified in section 35 are 
fulfilled in relation to any area referred to in section ( 1), whether or not such area has been declared, to be 
a sub sanctuary by the Central Government or the State Government, declare such area, by notification, to 
be a National Park and the provisions of sections 35, 54 and 55 shall apply in relation to such National 
Park as they apply in relation to a National Park d eclar ed by the State Government.  
(3) In relation to a sanctuary or National Park declared by the Central Government, the powers and 
duties of the Chief Wild Life Warden under the sections referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), shall be 
exercised and disc harged by the Director or by such other officer as may be authorised by the Director in 
this behalf and references, in the sections aforesaid, to the State Government shall be construed as 
references to the Central Government and reference therein to the L egislature of the State shall be 
construe d as a reference to Parliament.  
2[CHAPTER IVA  
CENTRAL ZOO AUTHORITY AND RECOGNITION OF ZOOS 
38A. Constitution of Central Zoo Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a body 
to be known as the Central Zoo Authority (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the Authority), to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall consist of — 
(a) chairperson;  
(b) such number of members not exceeding ten; and  
(c) Member -Secretary,  
to be appointed by the Central Government.  
38B. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and members, etc .—(1) The 
chairperson and every member  3[other than the Member -Secretary] shall hold office for  such period, not 
exceeding three years, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.  
(2) The chairperson or a member may by writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, resign from the office of chairperson or, as the case may be, of the member.  
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of chairperson or member referred 
to in sub-section ( 2) if that person — 
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;  
(b) gets convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an o ffence which in the opinion of the 
Central Government involves moral turpitude;  
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;  
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the authority, absent from three consecutive 
meetings of the Authority; or  
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused the position of chairperson or member 
as to render that person ’s continuance in office detri mental to the public interest:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 25, for “sections 19 to 35” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Ins. by s. 26, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 22 (w.e.f.1 -4-2003).  25 
 Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause unless that person has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(4) A vacancy caused under sub -section ( 2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh appointment.  
(5) The salaries  and allowances and other conditions of appointment of chairperson, members and 
Member -Secretary of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) The Authority shall, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, employ such officers 
and ot her employees as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the Authority.  
(7) The terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Authority sha ll be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(8) No act or proceeding of the Authority shall  be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely 
of the existence of any vacancies or defect in the constitution of the Authority.  
38C. Functions of the Authority .—The Authority shall perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) specify the minimum  standards for housing, upkeep and veterinary care of the animals kept in 
a zoo;  
(b) evaluate and assess the functioning of zoos with respect to the standards or the norms as may 
be prescribed;  
(c) recognise or derecognise zoos;  
(d) identify endangered species of wild animals for purposes of captive breeding and assigning 
responsibility in this regard to a zoo;  
(e) co-ordinate the acquisition, exchange and loaning of animals for breeding purposes;  
(f) ensure maintenance of stud -books of endangered specie s of wild animals bred in captivity;  
(g) identify priorities and themes with regard to display of captive animals in a zoo;  
(h) co-ordinate training of zoo personnel in India and outside India;  
(i) co-ordinate research in captive breeding and educational p rogrammes for the purposes of zoos;  
(j) provide technical and other assistance to zoos for their proper management and development 
on scientific lines;  
(k) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act with 
regard to zoos.  
38D. Procedure to be regulated by the Authority .—(1) The Authority shall meet as and when 
necessary and shall meet at such time and place as the chairperson may think fit.  
(2) The Authority shall regulate its own procedure.  
(3) All orders and deci sions of the Authority shall be authenticated by the Member -Secretary or any 
other officer of the Authority duly authorised by the Member -Secretary in this behalf.  
38E. Grants and loans to Authority and Constitution of Fund .—(1) The Central Government may, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans 
of such sums of money as that Government may consider necessary.  
(2) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Central Zoo Authority Fund and there shall be 
credited thereto any grants and loans made to the Authority by the Central Government, all fees and 
charges received by the Authority under this Act and all sums received by the Authority from such other 
sources as may be decided upon by the  Central Government.  
(3) The Fund referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be applied for meeting salary, allowances and other 
remuneration of the members, officers and other employees of the Authority and the expenses of the 
Authority in the discharge of its functions under this Chapter and expenses on objects and for purposes 
authorised by this Act.  26 
 (4) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual 
statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the C entral Government in consultation with 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(5) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General at such 
intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in conn ection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(6) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have  the same rights and privileges and the 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production o f books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Authority.  
(7) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General or any other 
person appointed by him in this beh alf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government by the Authority.  
38F. Annual report .—The Authority shall prepare in such form and at such time, for each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
38G. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government 
shall cause the annual report together with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations 
contained therein, in so far as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non -
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after 
the reports are received before each House of Parliament.  
38H. Recognition of zoos .—(1) No zoo shall be operated without being recognised by the Authority:  
Provided that a zoo being operated immediately before the date of commencement of the Wild Life 
(Protection) (Amendment) Act, 1991 (44 of 1991) may continue to operate without being recognised for a 
period of  1[eighteen months from the date of such commencement] and if the application seeking 
recognition is made within that period, the z oo may continue to be operated until the said application is 
finally decided or withdrawn and in case of refusal for a further period of six months from the date of 
such refusal.  
 2[(1A) On and after the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment  Act, 2002  (16 of 
2003) a zoo shall not be established without obtaining the prior approval of the Authority.]  
(2) Every application for recognition of a zoo shall be made to the Authority in such form and on 
payment of such fee as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every recognition shall specify the conditions, if any, subject to which the applicant shall operate 
the zoo.  
(4) No recognition to a zoo shall be granted unless the Authority, having due regard to the interests of 
protection and conservation of wild life, and such standards, norms and other matters as may be 
prescribed, is satisfied that recognition should be granted.  
(5) No application for recognition of a zoo shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(6) The Authority may, for reasons to be recorded by it, suspend or cancel any recognition granted 
under sub -section ( 4): 
Provided that no such suspension or cancellation shall be made except after giving the person 
operating the zoo a reasonable opportunity  of being heard.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1993, s. 2, for “six mont hs from the date of such commencement” (w.e.f. 4 -8-1992).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  27 
 (7) An appeal from an order refusing to recognise a zoo under sub -section ( 5) or an order suspending 
or cancelling a recognition under sub -section ( 6) shall lie to the Central Government.  
(8) An appeal under sub -section ( 7) shall be prefer red within thirty days from the date of 
communication to the applicant of the order appealed against:  
Provided that the Central Government may admit any appeal preferred after the expiry of the period 
aforesaid if it is satisfied that the appellant had suf ficient cause for not  preferring the appeal in time.  
1[38-I. Acquisition of animals by a zoo .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no zoo shall 
acquire, sell or transfer any wild animal or captive animal specified in Schedules I and II except with the 
previous permission of the Authority.  
(2) No zoo shall acquire, sell or transfer any wild or captive animal except from or to a recognised 
zoo.]  
38J. Prohibition of teasing, etc., in a zoo .—No person shall tease, molest, injure or feed any animal 
or cause disturbance to the animals by noise or otherwise , or litter the grounds in a zoo.]  
2[CHAPTER IV B 
NATION AL TIGER  CONSERVATION  AUTHORITY  
38K. Definitions .—In this Chapter, — 
(a) “National Tiger Conservation Authority ” means the Tiger Conservation Authority constituted 
under section 38L;  
(b) “Steering Committee ” means the Committee constituted under section 38U;  
(c) “Tiger Conservation Foundation ” means the foundation established under section 38X;  
(d) “tiger reserve State ” means a State having tiger reserve;  
(e) “tiger reserve ” means the areas noti fied as such under section 38V.  
38L. Constitution of National Tiger Conservation Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute a body to be known as the National Tiger Conservation Authority (hereinafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the Tiger Conservation Authority), to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The Tiger Conservation Authority shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Minist ry of Environment and Forests —Chairperson;  
(b) the Minister of State in the Minist ry of Environment and Forests —Vice -Chairperson;  
(c) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People and 
one by the Council of States;  
(d) eight experts or professionals having prescribed qualifications and experience in conservation 
of wild life and welfare of people living in tiger reserve out of which at least two shall be from the 
field of tribal development;  
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests;  
(f) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests;  
(g) Director, Wild Life Preservation, Ministry of Environment and  Forests;  
(h) six Chief Wild Life Wardens from the tiger reserve States in rotation for three years;  
(i) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel from the Ministry of 
Law and Justice;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 24, for section 38 -I (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 39 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2006).  28 
 (j) Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affair s; 
(k) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment;  
(l) Chairperson, National Commission for the Scheduled Tribes;  
(m) Chairperson, National Commission for the Scheduled Castes;  
(n) Secretary, Ministry of Panchayati Raj;  
(o) Inspector -General of Forests or an officer of the equivalent rank having at least ten years 
experience in a tiger reserve or wildlife management, who shall be the Member -Secretary,  
to be notified by the Central Government, in the Official Gazette.  
(3) It is hereby declared tha t the office of member of the Tiger Conservation Authority shall not 
disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a member  of either House of Parliament.  
38M. Term of office and conditions of service of members .—(1) A member nominated under 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 38L shall hold office for such period not exceeding three years:  
Provided that a member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign 
from his office.  
(2) The Central Government shall remove a member referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 3 8L, from office if he — 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent;  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude;  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;  
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Tiger Conservation Authority, absent from 
three consecutive meetings of the said Authority; or  
(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to render his 
continuation in office detrimental to the public interest:  
Provided that no member shall be removed under this sub -section unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(3) Any vacancy in the office of a member shall be filled by fresh appointment and such member 
shall continue for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is appointed.  
(4) The s alaries and allowances and other conditions of appointment of the members of the Tiger 
Conservation Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) No act or proceeding of the Tiger Conservation Authority shall be questioned or shall be invalid 
on the gr ound merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of th e Tiger 
Conservation Authority.  
38N. Officers and employees of Tiger Conservation Authority .—(1) The Tiger Conservation 
Authority may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, appoint such other officers and 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act:  
Provided that the officers and employees holding office under the Directorate of Project Tiger and 
dealing with Pro ject Tiger immediately before the date of constitution of the Tiger Conservation 
Authority shall continue to hold office in the said Authority by the same tenure and upon the same terms 
and conditions of service or until the expiry of the period of six mon ths from that date if such employee 
opts not to be ’ the employee of that Authority.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Tiger Conservation 
Authority shal l be such as may be prescribed.  29 
 38O. Powers and functions of Tiger Conservation Authority .—(1) The Tiger Conservation 
Authority shall have the following powers and perform th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) to approve the Tiger Conservation Plan prepared by the State Government under  
sub-section ( 5) of section 38V of this Act;  
(b) evaluate and assess various aspects of sustainable ecology and disallow any ecologically 
unsustainable land use such as, mining, industry and other projects within the tiger reserves;  
(c) lay down normative standards for to urism activities and guidelines for project tiger from time 
to time for tiger conservation in the buffer and core area of tiger reserves and ensure their due 
compliance;  
(d) provide for management focus and measures for addressing conflicts of men and wild  animals 
and to emphasise on co -existence in forest areas outside the National Parks, sanctuaries or tiger 
reserve, in the working plan code;  
(e) provide information on protection measures including future conservation plan, estimation of 
population of tig er and its natural prey species, status of habitats, disease surveillance, mortality 
survey, patrolling, reports on untoward happenings and such other management aspects as it may 
deem fit including future plan conservation;  
(f) approve, co -ordinate resear ch and monitoring on tiger, co -predators, prey, habitat, related 
ecological and socio -economic parameters and their evaluation;  
(g) ensure that the tiger reserves and areas linking one protected area or tiger reserve with another 
protected area or tiger re serve are not diverted for ecologically unsustainable uses, except in public 
interest and with the approval of the National Board for Wild Life and on the advice of the Tiger 
Conservation Authority;  
(h) facilitate and support the tiger reserve management i n the State for biodiversity conservation 
initiatives through eco -development and people ’s participation as per approved management plans 
and to support similar initiatives in adjoining areas consistent with the Central and State laws;  
(i) ensure critical support including scientific, information technology and legal support for better 
implementation of the tiger conservation plan;  
(j) facilitate ongoing capacity building programme for skill development of officers and staff of 
tiger reserves; and  
(k) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act with 
regard to conservation of tigers and their habitat.  
(2) The Tiger Conservation Authority may, in the exercise of its powers and performance of its 
functions under t his Chapter, issue directions in writing to any person, officer or authority for the 
protection of tiger or tiger reserves and such person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with 
the directions:  
Provided that no such direction shall interfere w ith or affect the rights of local people par ticularly the 
Scheduled Tribes.  
38P. Procedure to be regulated by Tiger Conservation Authority .—(1) The Tiger Conservation 
Authority shall meet at such time and at such place as the Chairperson may think fit.  
(2) The Chairperson or in his absence the Vice -Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the 
Tiger Conservation Authority.  
(3) The Tiger Conservation Authority shall regulate its own procedure.  
(4) All orders and decisions of the Tiger Conservation Autho rity shall be authenticated by the 
Member -Secretary or any other officer of the said Authority duly authorised by the M ember -Secretary in 
this behalf.  30 
 38Q. Grants and loans to Tiger Conservation Authority and Constitution of Fund .—(1) The 
Central Governmen t may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the 
Tiger Conservation Authority grants and loans of such sums of money as that Government may consider 
necessary.  
(2) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Tiger  Conservation Authority Fund and t here 
shall be credited thereto — 
(i) any grants and loans made to the Tiger Conservation Authority by the Central Government;  
(ii) all fees and charges received by the Tiger Conservation Authority under this Act; and  
(iii) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
(3) The Fund referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be applied for meeting salary, allowances and other 
remuneration of the members, officers and oth er employees of the Tiger Conservation Authority and the 
expenses of the Tiger Conservation Authority incurred in the discharge of it s functions under this 
Chapter.  
38R. Accounts and audit of Tiger Conservation Authority .—(1) The Tiger Conservation 
Authori ty shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of 
accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Tiger Conservation Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Tiger Conservation Authority to th e Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Tiger Conservation Authority shall have the same rights 
and privileges an d authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the 
right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect the office of the Tiger Conservation Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Tiger Conservation Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this beh alf together with the audit report 
thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Tiger Conservation Authority.  
38S. Annual report of Tiger Conservation Authority .—The Tiger Conservation Authority shall 
prepare in such form and at su ch time, for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, 
giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy the reof to the 
Central Government.  
38T. Annual report and audit report to be laid befor e Parliament .—The Central Government 
shall cause the annual report together with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations 
contained therein, insofar as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non -
acceptance, if any, of any  of such recommendations, and the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be 
after the reports are received, b efore each House of Parliament.  
38U. Constitution of Steering Committee .—(1) The State Government may constitute a Steering 
Committee for ensuring  co-ordination, monitoring, protection and conservation of tiger, co -predators and 
prey animals within the tiger range States.  
(2) The Steeri ng Committee shall consists of — 
(a) the Chief Minister —Chairperson;  
(b) the Min ister in -charge of Wild Life —Vice -Chairperson;  31 
 (c) such number of official members not exceeding five including at least two Field Directors of 
tiger reserve or Director of National Park and one from the State Government ’s Departments dealing 
with tribal affairs;  
(d) three experts or professionals having qualifications and experience in conservation of wild life 
of which at least one shall be from the field of tribal development,  
(e) two members from the State ’s Tribal Advisory Council;  
(f) one representative each from State Government ’s Departments dealing with Panchayati Raj 
and Social Justice and Empowerment;  
(g) Chief Wild Life Warden of the State shall be the Member -Secretary, ex officio , 
to be notified by the State Gover nment, in the Official Gazette.  
38V. Tiger Conservation Plan .—(1) The State Government shall, on the recommendation of the 
Tiger Conservation Authority, notify an area as a tiger reserve.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 18, sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 27, sections 
30, 32 and clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 33 of this Act shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to a tiger 
reserve as they apply in relation to a sanctuary.  
(3) The State Government shall prepare a Tiger Conservation Plan including staff development and 
deployment plan for the proper management of each area referred to in su b-section ( 1), so as to ensure — 
(a) protection of tiger reserve and providing site specific habitat inputs for a viable population of 
tigers, co -predators and prey animals without distorting the natural prey-predator ecological cycle in 
the habitat;  
(b) ecologically compatible land uses in the tiger reserves and areas linking one protected area or 
tiger reserve with another for addressing the livelihood concerns of local people, so as to provide 
dispersal  habitats and corridor for spill over population of wild animals from the designated core 
areas of tiger reserves or from tiger breeding habitats within other protected areas;  
(c) the forestry operations of regular forest divisions and those adjoining tige r reserves are not 
incompatible with the needs of tiger conservation.  
(4) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, the State Government shall, while preparing a 
Tiger Conservation Plan, ensure the agricultural, livelihood, developmental and other i nterests of the 
people living in tiger bearing forests or a tiger reserve,  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “tiger reserve ” includes — 
(i) core or critical tiger habitat areas of National Parks and sanctuaries, where it has been  
established, on the basis of scientific and objective criteria, that such areas are required to be kept as 
inviolate for the purposes of tiger conservation, without affecting the rights of the Scheduled Tribes 
or such other forest dwellers, and. notified as such by the State Government in consultation with an 
Expert Committee constituted for the purpose;  
(ii) buffer or peripheral area consisting of the area peripheral to critical tiger habitat or core area, 
identified and established in accordance with the  provisions contained in Explanation ( i) above, 
where a lesser degree of habitat protection is required to ensure the integrity of the critical tiger 
habitat with adequate dispersal for tiger species, and which aim at promoting co -existence between 
wildlif e and human activity with due recognition of the livelihood, developmental, social and cultural 
rights of the local people, wherein the limits of such areas are determined on the basis of scientific 
and objective criteria in consultation with the concerned  Gram Sabha and an Expert Committee 
constituted for the purpose.  
(5) Save as for voluntary relocation on mutually agreed terms and conditions, provided that such 
terms and conditions satisfy the requirements laid down in this sub -section, no Scheduled Tribes or other 
forest dwellers shall be resettled or have their rights adversely affected for the purpose of creating 
inviolate areas  for tiger conservation unless — 32 
 (i) the process of recognition and determination of rights and acquisition of land or forest rights of 
the Scheduled Tribes and such other forest dwelling persons is complete;  
(ii) the concerned agencies of the State Government, in exercise of their powers under this Act, 
establishes with the consent of the Scheduled Tribes and such other f orest dwellers in the area, and in 
consultation with an ecological and social scientist familiar with the area, that the activities of the 
Scheduled Tribes and other forest dwellers or the impact of their presence upon wild animals is 
sufficient to cause i rreversible damage and shall threaten the existence of tigers and their habitat;  
(iii) the State Government, after obtaining the consent of the Scheduled Tribes and other forest 
dwellers inhabiting the area, and in consultation with an independent ecologic al and social scientist 
familiar with the area, has come to a conclusion that other reasonable options of co -existence, are not 
available;  
(iv) resettlement or alternative package has been prepared providing for livelihood for the 
affected individuals and communities and fulfils the requirements given in the National Relief and 
Rehabilitation Policy;  
(v) the informed consent of the Gram Sabha concerned, and of the persons affected, to the 
resettlement programme has been obtained; and  
(vi) the facilities and  land allocation at the resettlement location are provided under the said 
programme, otherwise their existing right s shall not be interfered with.  
38W. Alteration and de -notification of tiger reserves .—(1) No alteration in the boundaries of a 
tiger reserve  shall be made except on a recommendation of the Tiger Conservation Authority and the 
approval of the National Board for Wild Life.  
(2) No State Government shall de -notify a tiger reserve, except in public interest with the approval of 
the Tiger Conservati on Authority and th e National Board for Wild Life.  
38X. Establishment of Tiger Conservation Foundation .—(1) The State Government shall establish 
a Tiger Conservation Foundation for tiger reserves within the State in order to facilitate and support their 
management for conservation of tiger and biodiversity and, to take initiatives in eco -development by 
involvement of people in such development process.  
(2) The Tiger Conservation Foundation shall, inter alia , have the following objectives: — 
(a) to facilitate ecological, economic, social and cultural development in the tiger reserves;  
(b) to promote eco -tourism with the involvement of local stake -holder communities and provide 
support to safeguard the natural environment in the tiger reserves;  
(c) to facilitate the creation of, and or maintenance of, such assets as may be necessary for 
fulfilling the above said objectives;  
(d) to solicit technical, financial, social, legal and other support required for the activities of the 
Foundation for achieving the above said objectives;  
(e) to augment and mobilise financial resources including recycling of entry and such other fees 
received in a tiger reserve, to foster stake -holder development and eco -tourism;  
(f) to support research, environmental education an d traini ng in the above related fields.  
CHAPTER  IVC 
TIGER AND OTHER ENDANGER ED SPECIES  CRIME  CONTROL  BUREAU  
38Y. Constitution of Tiger and other Endangered Species Crime Control Bureau .—The Central 
Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by order published in the Official Gazette, constitute a 
Tiger and other Endangered Species Crime Control Bureau to be known as the Wildlife Crim e Control 
Bureau consisting of — 
(a) the Dir ector of Wildlife Preservation —Director ex officio ; 33 
 (b) the Inspector -General  of Police —Additional Director;  
(c) the Depu ty Inspector -General of Police —Joint Director;  
(d) the Deputy  Inspector -General of Forests —Joint Director;  
(e) the Additional Commissione r (Customs and Central Excise) —Joint Director; and  
(f) such other officers as may be appointed from amongst the officers covered unde r sections 3 
and 4 of this Act.  
38Z. Powers and functions of the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau .—(1) Subject to the provisions 
of this Act, the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau shall  take measures with respect to — 
(i) collect and collate intelligence related to organized wildlife crime activities and to disseminate 
the same to State and other enforcement agencies for immediate action, so as to apprehend the 
criminals and to establish a centralised wildlife crime data bank;  
(ii) co-ordination of actions by various officers, State Governments and other authorities in 
connection with the enforcement of the provisions of this Act, either directly or through regional and 
border units set up  by the Bureau;  
(iii) implementation of obligations under the various international Conventions and protocols that 
are in force at present or which may be ratified or acceded to by India in future;  
(iv) assistance to concerned authorities in foreign countr ies and concerned international 
organisations to facilitate co -ordination and universal action for wildlife crime control;  
(v) develop infrastructure and capacity building for scientific and professional investigation into 
wildlife crimes and assist State Governments to ensure success in prosecutions related to wildlife 
crimes;  
(vi) advice the Government of India on issues relating to wildlife crimes having national and 
international ramifications, and suggest changes required in relevant policy and laws fr om time to 
time.  
(2) The Wildlife Crime  Control Bureau shall exercise — 
(i) such powers as may be delegated to it under sub -section ( 1) of section 5, sub -sections ( 1)  
and ( 8) of section 50 and section 55 of this Act; and  
(ii) such other powers as may be prescribed.]  
CHAPTER V  
TRADE OR COMMERCE IN WILD ANIMALS, ANIMAL ARTICLES AND TR OPHIES  
39. Wild animals, e tc., to be Government property .—(1) Every — 
(a) wild animal, other than vermin, which is hunted under section 11 or sub -section ( 1) of section 
29 or sub-section ( 6) of section 35 or kept or 1[bred in captivity  or hunted]  in contravention of any 
provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder or found dead, or killed 2*** or by 
mistake; and  
(b) animal article, trophy or uncured trophy or meat  derived from any wild animal referred to in 
clause ( a) in respect of which any offence against this Act or any rule or order made  thereunder has 
been committed,  
 3[(c) ivory imported into India and an article made from such ivory in respect of which any 
offence against this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been committed;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 27, for “bred in captivity” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. The words “without a licence or” omitted by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  34 
 (d) vehicle, vessel, weapon, trap or tool that has been used for committing an offence and has 
been seized under the provisions of this Act.]  
shall be the property of the Stat e Government, and, where  such animal is hunted in a sanctuary or 
National Park declared by the Central Gov ernment, such animal or any animal article, trophy, uncured 
trophy or meat 1[derived from such animal or any vehicle, vessel , weapon, trap or tool  used in such 
hunting] shall be the prop erty of the Central Government.  
(2) Amy person who obtains, by an y means, the possession of Gov ernment property, shall, within 
forty -eight hours from obtaining such possession, make a report as to the obtaining of such possession to 
the, nearest police station or the authorised officer and shall, if so required, hand over such property to the 
officer -in-charge of such police station or such authoris ed officer, as the case may be.  
(3) No person shall, without the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Wa rden or the 
authorised officer — 
(a) acquire or keep in his pos session, custody or control, or  
(b) transfer to any person, whether by way  of gift, sale or otherwise, or  
(c) destroy or da mage, such Gove rnment property.  
40. Declarations .—(1) Every person having at the commencement of this Act the control, custody or 
possession of any captive animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II, 2[or animal article , 
trophy or uncured trophy]  derived fr om such animal or salted or dried skins of such animal or the musk of 
a musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros, shall, within thirty days from the commencement of this Act, 
declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer the number and descr iption of the animal, 
or article of the foregoing description under his control, custody or possession and the place where such 
animal or article is kept.  
(2) No person shall, after the commencement of this Act, acquire, receive, keep in his control, custody 
or possession, sell, offer for sale or 420 otherwise transfer or transport any animal specified in Schedule I 
or Part II of Schedule II or any uncured trophy or meat derived from such animal, or the salted or dried 
skins of such animal or the musk of a musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros, except with the previous 
permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Wa rden or the authorised officer.  
3[(2A) No person other than a person having a certificate of ownership, shall, after the commencement 
of the  Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002  (16 of 2003)  acquire, receive, keep in his control, 
custody or possession any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy specified in Schedule I 
or Part II of Schedule II, except by way of inheritan ce. 
(2B) Every person inheriting any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy under  
sub-section ( 2A) shall, within ninety days of such inheritance make a declaration to the Chief Wild Life 
Warden or the authorised officer and the provision s of sections 41 and 42 shall apply as if the declaration 
had been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 40:  
Provided that nothing in sub -sections ( 2A) and ( 2B) shall apply to the live elephant.]  
4[(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall apply to a recognised zoo subject to the 
provisions of section 38 -I or to a public museum.]  
(4) The State Government may, by notification, require any person to declare to the Chief Wild Life 
Warden or the authorised officer 5[any animal  or animal  article ] or trophy (other than a musk of a musk 
deer or horn of a rhinoceros) or salted or dried skins derived from an animal specified in Schedule I or 
Part II of Schedule II in his control, custody or possession in such form, in such manner, and within s uch 
time, as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 27, for “derived from such animal” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 25, for “ or any uncured trophy” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 28, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 25, for “any animal article” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  35 
 1[40A. Immunity in certain cases .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 2) and 
(4) of section 40 of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification, require any person to declare 
to the Chief Wild Life Warden  or the authorised officer, any captive animal, animal article, trophy or 
uncured trophy derived from animals specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II in his control, 
custody or possession, in respect of which no declaration had been made under su b-section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 4) of section 40, in such form, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any action taken or purported to be taken for violation of section 40 of this Act at any time before 
the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002  (16 of 2003) shall not be 
proceeded with and all pending proceedings shall stand abated.  
(3) Any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy declared under sub -section ( 1), shall 
be dealt with in such mann er and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.]  
41. Inquiry and preparation of inventories .—(1) On receipt of a declaration made under section 
40, the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, after such notice, in such manner and at 
such time, as may be prescribed, — 
(a) enter upon the premises of a pe rson referred to in section 40;  
(b) make inquiries and prepare inventories of animal articles, trophies, uncured trophies, salted 
and dried skins and captive animals specified in Schedule I and Part II of Schedule II and found 
thereon; and  
(c) affix upon the animals, animal articles, troph ies or uncured trophies identification marks in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) No person shall obliterate or counterfeit any identification ma rk referred to in this Chapter.  
42. Certificate of ownership .—The Chief Wild Life Warden may, for the purpo ses of section 40, 
issue a certificate of ownership in such form, as may be prescribed to any person who, in his opinion, is in 
lawful possession of any wild animal or any animal article, trophy, uncured trophy and may, where 
possible, mark, in the prescri bed manner, such animal article, trophy or uncured trophy for purposes of 
identification.  
2[Provided that before issuing the certificate of ownership in respect of any captive animal, the Chief 
Wild Life Warden shall ensure that the applicant has adequate facilities for housing, maintenance and 
upkeep of the animal.]  
3[43. Regulation of transfer of animal, etc .—(1) No person having in his possession captive animal, 
animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in respect of which he has a certificate of ownershi p shall transfer 
by way of sale or offer for sale or by any other mode of consideration of commercial nature, such animal 
or article or trophy or uncured trophy.  
(2) Where a person transfers or transports from the State in which he resides to another State  or 
acquires by transfer from outside the State, any such animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in 
respect of which he has a certificate of ownership, he shall, within thirty days of the transfer or transport, 
report the transfer or transport to  the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer within whose 
jurisdiction the transfer or transport is effected.  
(3) Noth ing in this section shall apply — 
(a) to tail feather of peacock and the animal article or trophies made therefrom;  
(b) to transfer of captive animals between recognised zoos subject to the provisions of  
section 38 -I, and transfer amongst zoos and public museums.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
2. Added by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for section 43 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  36 
 44. Dealings in trophy and animal artic les without licence prohibited .—1[(1) Sub ject to the 
provisions of Chapter V A, no person shall, except under and in accordance with, a licence granted under  
sub-section ( 4)]—  
(a) commen ce or carry on the business as — 
 (i) a manufacturer of or de aler In, any animal article; or  
2*** 
(ii) a taxidermist; or  
(iii) a dealer in trophy or uncured trophy; or  
(iv) a dealer In captive animals; or  
 (v) a dealer In meat; or  
(b) cook or serve meat In any eating -house:  
3[(c) derive, collect or prepare or deal in snake venom;]  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent a person, who, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act was carrying on the business or occupation specified in this sub -section, from 
carrying on such business or occupation for a period of thirty days from such commencement, or where 
he has made an application within that period for the grant of a licence to him, until the licence is granted 
to him or he is informed In writing that a li cence cannot be granted to him:  
 4[Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the dealers in t ail feathers of peacock 
and articles made therefrom and the manufactures of such articles.]  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “eating -house ” includes a hotel, restaurant or any 
other place where any eatable is served on payment, whether or not such payment is separately made for 
such eatable or is included in the amount  charged for board and lodging.  
(2) Every manufacturer of, or dealer in, an imal article, or every dealer in captive animals, trophies or 
uncured trophies, or every taxidermist shall, within fifteen days from the commencement of this Act, 
declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden his stocks of animals articles, captive animals, trophi es and 
uncured trophies, as the case may be, as on the date of such declaration and the Chief Wild Life Warden 
or the Authorised officer may place an identification mark on every animal article, captive animal, trophy 
or uncu red trophy, as the case may be.  
(3) Every person referred to in sub -section ( 1) who intends to obtain a licence, shall  5*** make an 
application to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer for the grant of a licence.  
(4) (a) Every application referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall be made In such form and on payment of 
such fee as may be prescribed, to the Chief Wild Life Wa rden or the authorised officer.  
6[(b) No licence referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be granted unless the Chief Wild Life Warden or 
the authorised office r having regard to the antecedents and previous experience of the applicant, the 
implication which the grant of such licence would have on the status of wild life and to such other matters 
as may be prescribed in this behalf and after making such inquiry i n respect of those matters as he may 
think fit, is satisfied that the licence should be granted. ] 
(5) Every licence granted under this section shall specify the premises in which and the conditions, if 
any, subject to, which the licens ee shall carry on his  business.  
(6) Every licence gra nted under this section shall — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 1986, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 25 -11-1986).  
2. Sub -clause ( ia) omitted by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 30 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Ins. by s. 30,  ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for the second proviso (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Certain word omitted by Act 23 of 1982, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21-5-1982).  
6. Subs. by s.3, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 21 -5-1982).  37 
 (a) be valid for one y ear from the date of its grant;  
(b) not be transferable; and  
(c) be renewable for a period no t exceeding one year at a time.  
(7) No application for the renewal of a licence shall be rejected unless the holder of such licence has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of presenting his case and unless the Chief Wild Life Warden or the 
author ised officer is satisfied that — 
(i) the application for such renewal has been made  after the expiry of th e period specified 
therefor, or  
(ii) any statement made by the applicant at the time of the grant or renewal of the licence was 
incorrect or false in material particulars, or  
(iii) the applicant has contravened any term or condition  of the licence or any provision of this 
Act or any rule made thereunder, or  
(iv) the applicant does not fu lfil the prescribed conditions.  
(8) Every order granting or rejecting an application for the grant or renewal of a li cence shall be made 
in writing.  
(9) Nothing in the foregoing sub -sections sha ll apply in relation to vermin.  
45. Suspensi on or cancellation of licences .—Subject to any general or special order of the State 
Government, the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, for reasons to be recorded by 
him in writing, suspend or cancel any licence grant ed or renewed under section 44:  
Provided that no such suspension or cancellation shall be made except after giving the holder of the 
licence a reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  
46. P urchase .—(1) An appeal from an order refusing to grant or renew a licence under section 44 or 
an order suspending or cancelling a lic ence under section 45 shall lie — 
(a) if the order is made by the authorised officer, to  the Chief Wild Life Warden; or  
(b) if the order is made by the Chief Wild Life W arden, to the State Government.  
(2) In the case of an order passed in appeal by the Chief Wild Life Warden under clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1), a second appeal sha ll lie to the State Government.  
(3) Subject as aforesaid, every order passed in appeal und er this section shall be final.  
(4) An appeal under this section shall be preferred within thirty days from the date of the 
communication, to the applicant,  of the order appealed against:  
Provided tha t the appellate authority may admit any appeal preferred after the expiry of the period 
aforesaid if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the  appeal in time.  
47. Maintenance of records .—A lic ensee under this Chapter shall — 
(a) keep records, and submit such returns of his de alings, as may be prescribed, — 
(i) to the Director or any other officer authorised by him in t his behalf, and  
(ii) to the Chief Wild Life Warden  or the authorised officer; and  
(b) make such records available on demand f or inspection by such officers.  
48. Purchase  of animals, etc., by licensee .—No lice nsee under this Chapter shall — 
(a) keep in his co ntrol, custody or possession, — 
(i) any animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy in respect of which a declarati on 
under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 44 has to be made but has not be en made;  38 
 (ii) any animal or animal article, trophy, uncured trophy or meat which has not been law fully 
acquired under the provi sions of this Act or any r ule or order made thereunder;  
(b) (i) capture any wild animal, or  
(ii) acquire, receive keep in his control, custody or possession, or sell, offer for sale or transport, 
any captive animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Sc hedule II or any animal ar ticle trophy, 
uncured trophy or meat derived therefrom or serve such meat, or put under a process of taxidermy 
or make animal article containin g part or whole of such animal,  
except in accordance with such rules as may be made tinder this Act;  
Provided that where the acquisition or, possession, control or custody of such animal or animal 
article, trophy or uncured trophy entails the transfer or transport from one State to another, no such 
transfer or transport shall be effected except with the previous p ermission in writing of the Director or 
any other officer au thorised by him in this behalf:  
Provided further that no such permission under the foregoing proviso shall be granted unless the 
Director or the officer authorised by him is satisfied that the ani mal or article afores aid has been lawfully 
acquired.  
1[48A. Restrict ion on transportation of wild life .—No person shall accept any wild animal (other 
than vermin), or any animal article, or any specified plant or part or derivative thereof, for transportation 
except after exercising due  care to ascertain that permission from the Chief Wild Life Warden or any 
other officer authorised by the State Government in this behalf has been obtained for such transportation.]  
49. Purchase of captive animal, etc., by a person other than a licensee .—No person shall 
purchase, receive or acquire any captive animal, wild animal, other than vermin, or any animal article, 
trophy, uncured trophy or meat derived therefrom otherwise than from a dealer or from a person 
authorised to sell or otherwise tr ansfer the same under this Act:  
2[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a recognised zoo subject to  the provisions of 
section 38-1 or to a public museum.]  
3[CHAPTER  VA 
PROHIBITION OF TRADE OR COMMERC E IN TROPHIES, ANIMAL ARTICLES,  
ETC., DERIVED FROM CERTAIN ANIMALS  
49A. Definitions .—In this Chapter, — 
(a) “Scheduled animal ” means an animal specified for the time being in Schedule I or Part II of 
Schedule II;  
(b) “Scheduled animal article ” means an article made from any Scheduled animal and includes an 
article or object in which the whole or any part of such animal  4[has been used but does not include 
tail feather of peacook, an article or trophy made therefrom and snake venom or its deriva tive.]  
(c) “Specified date ” means — 
(i) in relation to a scheduled animal on the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) 
(Amendment) Act, 1986, the date of expiry of two months from such commencement;  5***  
(ii) in relation to any animal added or transfe rred to Scheduled I or Part II of Schedule II at 
any time after such commencement, the date of expiry of two months from such addition or 
transfer.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 31 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Ins. by Act 28 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -11-1986).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 33, for “has been used” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. The word “and” omitted by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  39 
  1[(iii) in relation ivory imported into India or an article made from such ivory, the date of 
expiry of six  months from the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act, 
1991  (44 of 1991) .] 
49B. Prohibition of dealings in trophies, animal articles, etc. , derived from scheduled  
animals .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Section, on and after the specif ied date, no person 
shall — 
(a) commen ce or carry on the business as — 
(i) a manufacturer of, or dealer in, scheduled animal articles; or  
2[ia) a dealer in ivory imported into India or articles made therefrom or a manufacturer of 
such article s; or] 
(ii) a taxidermist with respect to any scheduled animals or any parts of such animals; or  
(iii) a dealer in trophy or uncured trophy derived from any scheduled animal; or  
(iv) a dealer in any captive animals being scheduled animals; or  
(v) a dealer in meat derived from any scheduled animal; or  
(b) cook or serve meat derived from any scheduled animal in any eating -house.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “eating -house ” has the same meaning as 
in the Explanation  below sub -section ( 1) of Section 44.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this section, no licence granted or renewed under Section 44 
before the specified date shall entitle the holder thereof or any other person to commence or carry on the 
business referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of this section or the occupation referred to in  
clause ( b) of that sub -section after such date.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), where the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by general 
or special order published in the official Gazette, exempt, for purposes of export, any corporation owned 
or controlled by th e Central Government (including a Government company within the meaning of 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or any other law for the time being in force, wholly or substantially 
financed by the Central Government, from the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2). 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), but subject to any rules 
which may be made in this behalf, a person h olding a licence under Section 44 to carry on the business as 
a taxidermist may put under a process of taxidermy any schedu led animal or any part thereof — 
(a) for or on behalf of the Government or any corporation or society exempted under  
sub-section ( 3), or 
(b) with the previous authori sation in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden, for and on behalf of 
any person for educational or scientific purposes.  
49C. Declaration by dealers .—(1) Every person carrying on the business or occupation referred to 
in sub-section ( 1) of Section 49 B shall, within thirty days from the specified date declare to the Chief 
Wild Life Wa rden or the authorised officer — 
(a) his stocks, if any, as at th e end of the specified date of — 
(i) scheduled animal articles;  
(ii) scheduled animals and parts thereof;  
(iii) trophies and uncured trophies derived from scheduled animals;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 33 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Ins. by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  40 
 (iv) captive animals being scheduled animals;  
 1[(v) ivory imported into India or articles made therefrom;]  
(b) the place or places at which the stocks mentioned  in the declaration are kept; and  
(c) the description of such items, if any, the stocks mentioned in the declaration which he desires 
to retain with himself for his bona fide  personal use.  
(2) On receipt of a declaration under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised 
officer may take all or any of the measures specified in section 41 and for this purpose, the provisions of 
section 41 shall, so far  as may be, apply.  
(3) Where , in a declaration made under sub -section ( 1), the person making the declaration expresses 
his desire to retain with himself any of the items of the stocks specified in the declaration for his bona fide  
personal use, the Chief Wild Life Warden, with the prior approval of the Director, may, if he is sati sfied 
that the person is in lawful possession of such items, issue certificates of ownership in favour of such 
person with respect to all, or as the case may be, such of the items as in the opinion of the Chief Wild Life 
Warden, are required for the bona f ide personal use of such person and affix upon such items 
identification marks in s uch manner as may be prescribed : 
Provided that no such item shall be kept in any commercial premises.  
(4) No person shall obliterate or counterfeit any identification mark referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) An appeal shall lie against any refusal to grant certificate of ownership under sub -section ( 3) and 
the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 46 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to 
appeals unde r this sub -section.  
(6) Where a person who has been issued a certificate of ownership under sub -section ( 3) in respect of 
any item — 
(a) transfers such item to any person, whether by way of gift, sale or otherwise, or  
(b) transfers or transports from the State in which he resides to another State any such item,  
he shall, within thirty days of such transfer or transport, report the transfer or transport to the Chief Wild 
Life Warden or the authorised officer within whose j urisdiction the transfer or transport is effected.  
(7) No person, other than a person who has been issued a certificate of ownership under  
sub-section ( 3), shall on and after the specified date keep under his control, sell or offer for sale or 
transfer to  any person   2[any scheduled animal, a scheduled animal article, or ivory imported into India or 
any article made therefrom.]  
CHAPTER VI  
PREVE NTION AND DETECTION OF OFFENCES  
50. Power of entry , search, arrest and detention .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf or 
the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer or any forest officer or any police officer not below 
the rank of a sub - inspector, may, if he has reasonable grounds for believing that any person has 
committed  an offence against this Act, — 
(a) require any such person to produce for inspection any captive animal, wild animal, animal 
article, meat, trophy or 3[trophy, uncured trophy, specified plant or part or derivative thereof]  in his 
control, custody or possession, or any licence, permit or other document granted to him or required to 
be kept by him un der the provisions of this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 35 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Subs. by s. 35,  ibid., for “any scheduled animal or a scheduled animal article” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Subs. by s. 36, ibid., for “trophy or uncured trophy” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  41 
 (b) stop any vehicle or vessel in order to  conduct search or inquiry or enter upon and search any 
premises, land, vehicle or vessel, in the occupation of such person, and open and search any baggage 
or other things in his possession;  
 1[(c) seize any captive animal, wild animal, animal article, meat, trophy or uncured trophy, or 
any specified plant or part or derivative thereof, in respect of which an offence against this Act 
appears to have been committed, in the possession of any person together with any trap, tool, vehicle, 
vessel or weapon us ed for committing any such offence and, unless he is satisfied that such person 
will appear and answer any charge which may be preferred against him, arrest him without warrant, 
and detain him:  
Provided that where a fisherman, residing within ten kilometre s of a sanctuary or National Park, 
inadvertently enters on a boat, not used for commercial fishing, in the territorial waters in that 
sanctuary or National Park, a fishing tackle or net on such boat shall not be seized.]  
 2*   *   *   *   * 
(3) It shall be  lawful for any of the officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) to stop and detain any person, 
whom he sees doing any act for which a licence or permit is required under the provisions of this Act, for 
the purposes of requiring such person to produce the lic ence or permit and if such person fails to produce 
the licence or permit, as the case may be, he may be arrested without warrant, unless he furnishes his 
name and address, and otherwise satisfies the officer arresting him that he will duly answer any summo ns 
or other proceedings which may be taken aga inst him.  
 3[(3A) Any officer of a rank not inferior to that of an Assistant Director of Wild Life Preservation or 
4[an Assistant Conservator of Forests]  who, or whose subordinate, has seized any captive animal or wild 
animal under clause (c) of sub -section ( 1) may give the same for custody on the execution by any person 
of a bond for the production of such animal if and when so required, before the Magistrate having 
jurisdiction to try the offence on acco unt of which the seizure has been made.]  
(4) Any person detained, or things seized under the foregoing power, shall forthwith be taken before a 
Magistrate to be dealt with according to law 5[under intimation to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the 
officer authorised by him in this regard].  
(5) Any person who, without reasonable cause, fails to produce anything, which he is required to 
produce under this section, shall be guilty of an offence against this Act.  
6[(6) Where any meat, uncured trophy, specified plant or part or derivative thereof is seized under the 
provisions of this section, the Assistant Director of Wild Life Preservation or any other officer of a 
gazetted rank authorised by him in this behalf or the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised of ficer 
may arrange for the disposal of the same in such manner as may be prescribed.]   
(7) Whenever any person is approached by any of the officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) for 
assistance in the prevention or detection of an offence against this Act, or in apprehending persons 
charged with the violation of this Act, or for seizure in accordance with clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), it 
shall be the duty of such person or per sons to render such assistance.  
 7[(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in any o ther law for the time being in force, any officer not 
below the rank of an Assistant Director of Wild Life Preservation or 8[an officer not below the rank of 
Assistant Conservator of Forests authori sed by the State Government in this behalf ] shall have the 
powers, for purposes of making investigation into any offence against any provision of this Act — 
(a) to issue a search warrant;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 36, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 36, ibid (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4.  Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 29, for “ Wild Life Warden,” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
5. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
6. Subs.  by s. 29, ibid., for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
7. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991 s. 36 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
8.  Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 29, for “ Wild Life Warden” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  42 
 (b) to enforce  the attendance of witnesses;  
(c) to compel the discovery and production of documents and material  objects; and  
(d) to receive and record evidence.  
(9) Any evidence recorded under clause (d) of sub -section ( 8) shall be admissible in any subsequent 
trial before a Magistrate provided that it has been taken in the presence of the accused person.]  
51. Pena lties.—(1) Any person who 1[contravenes any provision  of this Act 2[(except Chapter VA  
and section 38J )]] or any rule or order made thereunder or who commits a breach of any of the conditions 
of any licence or permit granted under this Act, shall be guilty of an offence against this Act, and shall, on 
conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term whic h may extend to 3[three years], or with fine 
which may extend to   4[twenty -five thousand rupees], or with both:  
5[Provided that where the offence committed is in relation to any animal specified in Schedule I or 
Part II of Schedule II or meat of any such a nimal or animal article, trophy or uncured trophy derived from 
such animal or where the offence relates to hunting in a sanctuary or a National Park or altering the 
boundaries of a sanctuary or a National Park, such offence shall be punishable with impriso nment for a 
term which shall not be less than three years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall 
not be less than ten thousand rupees:  
Provided further that in the case of a second or subsequent offence of the nature mentioned in this  
sub-section, the term of the imprisonment shall not be less than three years but may extend to seven years 
and also with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five thousand rupees.]  
 6[(1A) Any person who contrave nes any provisions of Chapter V A, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 7[three  years] but which may extend to seven years 
and also with fine which shall not be less than 8[ten thousand rupees ].]  
9[(1B) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 38 J, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to tw o thousand 
rupees, or with both : 
Provided that in the case of a second or subseq uent offence the term of imprisonment may extend to 
one year or the fine may extend to five thousand rupees.]  
(2) When any person is convicted of an offence against this Act, the Court trying the offence may 
order that any captive animal, wild animal, animal article, trophy,  10[uncured trophy, meat, ivory imported 
into India or an article made from such ivory, any specified plant, or part or derivative thereof]  in respect 
of which the offence has been committed, and any trap, tool, vehicle, vessel or wea pon, used  in the 
commission of the said offence be forfeited to the State Government and that any licence or permit, held 
by such person under the provis ions of this Act, be cancelled.  
(3) Such cancellation of licence or permit or such forfeiture shall be in addition to any other 
punishment that m ay be awarded for such offence.  
(4) Where any person is convicted of an offence against this Act, the Court may direct that the 
licence, if any, granted to such p erson under the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959 ), for pos session of any arm 
with which an offence against this Act has been committed, shall be cancelled and that such person shall 
not be eligible for a licence under the Arms Act, 1959, for a period of five yea rs from the date of 
conviction.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 1986, s. 4, for “contravenes any provision of this Act” (w.e.f. 25 -11-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 37, ibid., for “(except Chapter VA)” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “two years” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 30, for the first and second provisos (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
6. Ins. by Act 28 of 198 6, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -11-1986).  
7. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 30, for “one year” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
8. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
9. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 37 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
10. Subs. by  s. 37,  ibid., for “uncured trophy or meat” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  43 
  1[(5) Nothing contained in section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or in the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), shall apply to a person convicted of an offence with 
respect to hunting in a sanctuary or a National Park or of  an offence aga inst any provision of Chapter V A 
unless such person is under eighteen years of age.]  
2[51A. Certain conditions to apply while granting bail .—When any person accused of, the 
commission of any offence relating to Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or offences relating to hunting 
inside the boundaries of National Park or wild life sanctuary or altering the boundaries of such parks and 
sanctuaries, is arrested under the provisions of the Act, then notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) no such person who had been previously convicted of an 
offence under this Act shall, b e released on bail unless — 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity of opposing the release on bail; and  
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to 
commit any offence while on bail.]  
52. Attempts and abetment .—Whoe ver attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of, any of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder shall be deemed to have contravened 
that provision or rul e or order, as the case may be.  
53. P unishment for wrongful seizure .—If any person, exercising powers under this Act, vexatiously 
and unnecessarily seizes the property of any other person on the pretence of seizing it for the r easons 
mentioned in section 50 he shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment f or a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
3[54. Power to compound offence .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, empower the 
Director of Wild Life Preservation or any other officer not below the rank of Assistant Director of Wild 
Life Preservation and in the case of a State Government in the similar manner, empower the Chief Wild 
Life Warden or any officer of a rank not below the rank of a Deputy Conservator of Forests, to ac cept 
from any person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed an offence against this 
Act, payment of a sum of money by way of composition of the offence which such person is suspected to 
have committed.  
(2) On payment of such sum o f money to such officer, the suspected person, if in custody, shall be 
discharged and no further proceedings in respect of the offence shall be taken against such person.  
(3) The officer compounding any offence may order the cancellation of any licence or permit granted 
under this Act to the offender, or if not empowered to do so, may approach an officer so empowered, for 
the cancellation of such licence or permit.  
(4) The sum of money accepted or agreed to be accepted as composition under sub -section ( 1) shall, 
in no case, exceed the sum of twenty -five thousand rupees:  
Provided that no offence, for which a minimum period of imprisonment has been prescribed in 
section 51, shall be compounded.]  
4[55. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of a ny offence against this Act on the 
complaint of any person other than — 
(a) the Director of Wild Life Preservation or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government; or  
5[(aa) the Member -Secretary, Central Zoo Authority in matters relating to violation of the 
provisions of Chapter IVA; or]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 37. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1-4-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for section 54 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 39, for section 55 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  44 
 1[(ab) Member -Secretary, Tiger Conservation Authority; or  
(ac) Director of the concerned tiger reserve; or]  
(b) the Chief Wild Life Warden, or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the State 
Government  2[subject to such conditions as may be specified by that Government] ; or 
2[(bb) the officer -in-charge of the zoo in respect of violation of provisions of section 38J; or]  
(c) any person who has given notice of not less than sixty days, in the manner prescribed, of the 
alleged offence and of his intention to make a complaint, to the Central Government or the State 
Government or the officer authorised as aforesaid.]  
56. Oper ation of other laws not barred .—Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prevent any 
person from being prosecuted under any other law for the time being in force, for any act or omission 
which constitutes an offence against this Act or from being liable under such other law to any higher 
punishment or penalty than that provi ded by this Act: Provided that no person shall be punis hed twice for 
the same offence.  
57. Presumption to be made in certain c ases.—Where, in any prosecution for an offence against 
this Act, it is established that a person is in possession, custody or cont rol of any captiv e animal, animal 
article, meat, 3[trophy, uncured trophy, specified plant, or part or derivative thereof ] it shall be presumed, 
until the contrary is proved, the burden of proving which shall lie on the accused, that such person is in 
unlawful possession, custody or control of such captive animal, animal article, meat, 3[trophy, uncured 
trophy, specified plant , or part or derivative thereof.]  
58. Offences by Companies .—(1) Where an offence against this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such perso n liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence agai nst this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such di rector, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and i ncludes a firm or ot her association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
4[CHAPTER VIA  
FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY DERIVED FROM ILLEGAL HUNTING AND TRADE  
58A. Application .—The provisions of this Chapter shall apply only to the following persons, 
namely: — 
(a) every person who has been convicted of an offence punishable under this Act with 
imprisonment for a term of three years or more;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2006, s. 4 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 33 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 40, for “trophy or uncured trophy” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  45 
 (b) every associate of a person referred to in clause ( a); 
(c) any holder (he reafter in this clause referred to as the present holder) of any property which 
was at any time previously held by a person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) unless the present 
holder or, as the case may be, any one who held such property after such person and before the 
present holder, is or was a transferee in good faith for adequate consideration.  
58B. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal for Forfeited Property constituted under 
section 58N;  
(b) “associate ” in relation to a person whose property is liable to be forfeited under this Chapter, 
includes — 
(i) any individual who had been or is managing the affairs or  keeping the accounts of such 
person;  
(ii) any association of persons, body of individuals, partnership firm or private company 
within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) of which such person had been or is a 
member, partner or director;  
(iii) any individual who had been or is a member, partner or director of an association of 
persons, body of individuals, partnership firm or private company referred to in sub -clause ( ii) at 
any time when such person had been or is a member, partner or dire ctor of such association, 
body, partnership firm or private company;  
(iv) any person, who had been or is managing the affairs, or keeping the accounts of any 
association of persons, body of individuals, partnership firm or private company referred to in 
sub-clause ( iii); 
(v) the trustee of any trust, where, — 
(1) the trust has been created by such person; or  
(2) the value of the assets contributed by such person (including the value of the assets, if 
any, contributed by him earlier) to the trust amounts on  the date on which contribution is 
made, to not less than twenty per cent . of the value of the assets of the trust on that date;  
(vi) where the competent authority, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers that any 
properties of such person are hel d on his behalf by any other person, such other person;  
(c) “competent authority ” means an officer authorised under section 58D;  
(d) “concealment ” means the concealment or disguise of the nature, source, disposition, 
movement or ownership of property and i ncludes the movement or conversion of such property by 
electronic transmission or by any other means;  
(e) “freezing ” means temporarily prohibiting the transfer, conversion, disposition or movement of 
property by an order issued under section 58F;  
(f) “identifying ” includes establishment of proof that the property was derived from, or used in, 
the illegal hunting and trade of wild life and its products;  
(g) “illegally acquired property ” in relation to any person to whom this Chapter applies, means, — 
(i) any property acquired by such person, wholly or partly out of or by means of any income, 
earnings or assets derived or obtained from or attributable to illegal hunting and trade of wild life 
and its products and derivatives;  
(ii) any property acquired by s uch person, for a consideration or by any means, wholly or 
partly traceable to any property referred to in sub -clause ( i) or the income or earning from such 
property,  
and includes — 46 
 (A) any property held by such person which would have been, in relation to any previous 
holder thereof, illegally acquired property under this clause if such previous holder had not 
ceased to hold it, unless such person or any other person who held the property at any time after 
such previous holder or, where there are two or mor e such previous holders, the last of such 
previous holders is or was a transferee in good faith for adequate consideration;  
(B) any property acquired by such person, for a consideration, or by any means, wholly or 
partly traceable to any property falling u nder item ( A), or the income or earnings therefrom;  
(h) “property ” means property and assets of every description, whether corporeal or incorporeal, 
movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and deeds and instruments evidencing title to, or 
interest in,  such property or assets, derived from the illegal hunting and trade of wild life and its 
products;  
(i) “relative ” means — 
(1) spouse of the person;  
(2) brother or sister of the person;  
(3) brother or sister of the spouse of the person;  
(4) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the person;  
(5) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the person;  
(6) spouse of a person referred to in sub -clause ( 2), sub -clause ( 3), sub -clause ( 4) or  
sub-clause ( 5); 
(7) any lineal descendant of a person referred to in sub -clause ( 2) or sub -clause ( 3); 
(j) “tracing ” means determining the nature, source, disposition, movement, title or ownership of 
property;  
(k) “trust” includes any other legal obligation.  
58C. Prohibition of holding illegally acquired property .—(1) From the date of commencement of 
this Chapter, it shall not be lawful for any person to whom this Chapter applies to hold any illegally 
acquired property either by himself or through any other person on his behalf.  
(2) Where any person holds such property in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such 
property shall be liable to be forfeited to the State Government concerned in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter:  
Provided that no property shall be forfeited under this Chapter if such property was acquired by a 
person to whom this Act applies before a period of six years from the date on which he was charged for 
an offence relating to illegal hunting and trade of wild life and its products.  
58D. Competent authority .—The State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
authorise any officer not below the rank of Chief Conservator of Forests to perform the functions of the 
competent authority under this Chapter in respect of such persons or classes of perso ns as the State 
Government may, direct.  
58E. Identifying illegally acquired property .—(1) An officer not below the rank of Deputy 
Inspector General of Police duly authorised by the Central Government or as the case may be, the State 
Government, shall, on r eceipt of a complaint from the competent authority about any person having 
illegally acquired property, proceed to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying any property 
illegally acquired by such person.  
(2) The steps referred to in sub -section  (1) may include any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect 
of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in any bank or financial institution or 
any other relevant step as may be necessary.   47 
 (3) Any inquiry, investigation or sur vey referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be carried out by an officer 
mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in accordance with such directions or guidelines as the competent authority 
may make or issue in this behalf.  
58F. Seizure or freezing of illegally acquired property .—(1) Where any officer conducting an 
inquiry or investigation under section 58E has reason to believe that any property in relation to which 
such inquiry or investigation is being conducted is an illegally acquired property and such property is 
likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt with in any manner which may result in frustrating any 
proceeding relating to forfeiture of such property under this Chapter, he may make an order for seizing 
such property and where it is not practicable to seize  such property, he may make an order that such 
property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the prior permission of the officer 
making such order, or of the competent authority and a copy of such order shall be served on the perso n 
concerned:  
Provided that a copy of such an order shall be sent to the competent authority within forty -eight hours 
of its being made.  
(2) Any order made under sub -section ( 1) shall have no effect unless the said order is confirmed by an 
order of the comp etent authority within a period of thirty days of its being made.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “transfer of property ” means any disposition, 
conveyance, assignment, settlement, delivery, payment or other alienation of property and, withou t 
limiting the generality of the foregoing, includes — 
(a) the creation of a trust in property;  
(b) the grant or creation of any lease, mortgage, charge, easement, licence, power, partnership or 
interest in property;  
(c) the exercise of a power of appointment, of property vested in any person not the owner of the 
property, to determine its disposition in favour of any person other than the donee of the power; and  
(d) any transaction entered into by any person with intent thereby to diminish directly  or 
indirectly the value of his own property and to increase the value of the property of any other person.  
58G. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter .—(1) The State 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, appo int as many of its officers (not below 
the rank of Conservator of Forests) as it thinks fit, to perform the functions of an Administrator.  
(2) The Administrator appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall receive and manage the property in 
relation to which an o rder has been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 58F or under section 58 -I in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures as the State Government may direct, to dispose 
of the prop erty which is forfeited to the State Government.  
58H. Notice of forfeiture of property .—(1) If having regard to the value of the properties held by 
any person to whom this Chapter applies, either by himself or through any other person on his behalf, his 
known sources of income, earnings or assets, and any other information or material available to it as a 
result of a report from any officer making an investigation under section 58E or otherwise, the competent 
authority for reasons to be recorded in writin g believes that all or any of such properties are illegally 
acquired properties, it may serve a notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to as the person affected) 
calling upon him within a period of thirty days specified in the notice to show cause w hy all or any of 
such properties, as the case may be, should not be declared to be illegally acquired properties and 
forfeited to the State Government under this Chapter and in support of his case indicate the sources of his 
income, earnings or assets, out  of which or by means of which he has acquired such property, the 
evidence on which he relies and other relevant information and particulars.  
(2) Where a notice under sub -section ( 1) to any person specifies any property as being held on behalf 
of such pers on by any other person, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such other person.  
  48 
 58-I. Forfeiture of property in certain cases .—(1) The competent authority may, after considering 
the explanation, if any, to the show cause notice issued under section 58H, and the materials available 
before it and after giving to the person affected and in a case where the person affected holds any property 
specified in the notice through any other person, to such other person, also a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question are illegally 
acquired properties:  
Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property 
specified in the notice through any other person, such other person also), does not appear before the 
competent authority or represent his case before it within a period of thirty days specified in the show 
cause notice, the competent authority may proceed to record a finding under this sub -section ex parte  on 
the basis of evidence available before it.  
(2) Where the competent authority is satisfied that some of the properties referred to in the show 
cause notice are illegally acquired properties but is not able to identify specifically such p roperties, then, 
it shall be lawful for the competent authority to specify the properties which, to the best of its judgment, 
are illegally acquired properties and record a finding accordingly under sub -section ( 1) within a period of 
ninety days.  
(3) Where  the competent authority records a finding under this section to the effect that any property 
is illegally acquired property, it shall declare that such property shall, subject to the provisions of this 
Chapter stand forfeited to the State Government free from all encumbrances.  
(4) In case the person affected establishes that the property specified in the notice issued under 
section 58H is not an illegally acquired property and therefore not liable to be forfeited under the Act, the 
said notice shall be wit hdrawn and the property shall be released forthwith.  
(5) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the State Government under this Chapter, the 
company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or the article 
of association of the company, forthwith register the State Government as the transferee of such shares.  
58J. Burden of proof .—In any proceedings under this Chapter, the burden of proving that any 
property specified in the notice served under section 58H is  not illegally acquired property shall be on the 
person affected.  
58K. Fine in lieu of forfeiture .—(1) Where the competent authority makes a declaration that any 
property stands forfeited to the State Government under section 58 -I and it is a case where th e source of 
only a part of the illegally acquired property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the competent 
authority, it shall make an order giving option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine 
equal to the market value of su ch part.  
(2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub -section ( 1), the person affected shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Where the person affected pays the fine due under sub -section ( 1), within such time as may be 
allowed  in that behalf, the competent authority may, by order revoke the declaration of forfeiture under 
section 58 -I and thereupon such property shall stand released.  
58L. Procedure in relation to certain trust properties .—In the case of any person referred to in 
sub-clause ( vi) of clause ( b) of section 58B, if the competent authority, on the basis of the information and 
materials available to it, for reasons to be recorded in writing believes that any property held in trust is 
illegally acquired property, it ma y serve a notice upon the author of the trust , or as the case may be, the 
contributor of the assets out of or by means of which such property was acquired by the trust and the 
trustees, calling upon them within a period of thirty days specified in the noti ce, to explain the source of 
money or other assets out of or by means of which such property was acquired or, as the case may be, the 
source of money or other assets which were contributed to the trust for acquiring such property and 
thereupon such notice shall be deemed to be a notice served under section 58H and all the other 
provisions of this Chapter shall apply accordingly.  49 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section “illegally acquired property ” in relation to any 
property held in trust, includes — 
(i) any property which if it had continued to be held by the author of the trust or the contributor of 
such property to the trust would have been illegally acquired property in relation to such author or 
contributor ; 
(ii) any property acquired by the trust out of any contributions made by any person which would 
have been illegally acquired property in relation to such person had such person acquired such 
property out of such contributions.  
58M. Certain transfers to be null and void .—Where after the making of an order under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 58F or the issue of a notice under section 58H or under section 58L, any 
property referred to in the said order or notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever, such transfer shall, 
for the purposes of the proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored and if such property is subsequently 
forfeited to the State Government under section 58 -I, then, the transfer of such property shall be deemed 
to be null and void.  
58N. Constitution of Appellate  Tribunal .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute an Appellate Tribunal to be called the Appellate Tribunal for Forfeited 
Property consisting of a Chairman, and such number of other members (being officers of the State 
Government not below the rank of a Principal Secretary to the Government), as the State Government 
thinks fit, to be appointed by that Government for hearing appeals against the orders made under section 
58F, section 58 -I, sub -section ( 1) of section 58K or section 58L.  
(2) The Chairman of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a person who is or has been or is qualified to be a 
Judge of a High Court.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
58-O. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the competent authority made under 
section 58F, section 58 -I, sub -section ( 1) of section 58K or section 58L may, within forty -five days from 
the date on which the order is served on him prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the said period of forty -five days, 
but not after sixty days, from the date aforesaid if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cau se from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving an 
opportunity of being heard to the appellant, if he so desires, and after making such further inquiry as it 
deems fit, confirm,  modify or set aside the order appealed against.  
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.  
(4) On application to the Appellate Tribunal and on payment of the prescribed fee, the Appellate 
Tribunal may allow a party to any appeal or any per son authorised in this behalf by such party to inspect 
at any time during office hours, any relevant records and registers of the Appellate Tribunal and obtain a 
certified copy or any part thereof.  
58P. Notice or order not to be invalid for error in description .—No notice issued or served, no 
declaration made, and no order passed under this Chapter shall be deemed to be invalid by reason of any 
error in the description of the property or person mentioned therein if such property or person is 
identifia ble from the description so mentioned.  
58Q. Bar of jurisdiction .—No order passed or declaration made under this Chapter shall be 
appealable except as provided therein and no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter 
which the Appellate T ribunal or any competent authority is empowered by or under this Chapter to 
determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action 
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Cha pter.  50 
 58R. Competent Authority and Appellate Tribunal to have powers of civil court .—The 
competent authority and the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a 
suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in r espect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
58S. Information to competent authority .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, the competent authority shall have power to require any officer or 
authority of the Central Government or a State Government or a local authority to furnish information in 
relation to such persons, on points or matters as i n the opinion of the competent authority will be useful 
for, or relevant to, the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) Every officer referred to in section 58T may furnish suo motu  any information available with him 
to the competent authority if in the opinion of the officer such information will be useful to the competent 
authority for the purposes of this Chapter.  
58T. Certain officers to assist Administrator, competent authority and Appellate Tribunal .—
For the purposes of any proceedings under this Chapter, the following officers shall render such 
assistance as may be necessary to the Administrator appointed under section 58G, competent authority 
and the Appellate Tribunal, namely: — 
(a) officers of Police;  
(b) officers of the State Forest Departments;  
(c) officer s of the Central Economic Intelligence Bureau;  
(d) officers of the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence;  
(e) such other officers as specified by the State Government in this behalf by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
58U. Power to take possession .—(1) Where any property has been declared to be forfeited to the 
State Government under this Chapter, or where the person affected has failed to pay the fine due under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 58K within the time allowed therefor under sub -section ( 3) of that  section, the 
competent authority may order the person affected as well as any other person who may be in possession 
of the property to surrender or deliver possession thereof to the Administrator appointed under section 
58G or to any person duly authorise d by him in this behalf within thirty days of the service of the order.  
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with an order made under sub -section ( 1), the 
Administrator may take possession of the property and may for that purpose use such force as may be 
necessary.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Administrator may, for the purpose of 
taking possession of any property referred to in sub -section ( 1) requisition the services of any police 
officer to assist him and it shal l be the duty of such officer to comply with such requisition.  
58V. Rectification of mistakes .—With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from record, the 
competent authority or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, may amend any order made by it  
within a period of one year from the date of the order:  
Provided that if any such amendment is likely to affect any person prejudicially and the mistake is not 
of a clerical nature, it shall not be made without giving to such person a reasonable opportuni ty of being 
heard.   51 
 58W. Findings under other laws not conclusive for proceedings under this Chapter .—No finding 
of any officer or authority under any other law shall be conclusive for the purposes of any proceedings 
under this Chapter.  
58X. Service of not ices and orders .—Any notice or order issued or made under this Chapter shall be 
served, — 
(a) by tendering the notice or order or sending it by registered post to the person for whom it is 
intended or to his agent;  
(b) if the notice or order cannot be served in the manner provided in clause ( a), then, by affixing 
it on a conspicuous place in the property in relation to which the notice or order is issued or made or 
on some conspicuous part of the premises in which the person for whom it is intended is k nown to 
have last resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain.  
58Y. Punishment for acquiring property in relation to which proceedings have been taken under 
this Chapter .—Any person who knowingly acquires, by any mode whatsoever, any proper ty in relation 
to which proceedings are pending under this Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.]  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
59. Officers to be public  servants .—Every officer referred to 1[in Chapter II and the chairperson, 
members, member -secretary and other officers and empl oyees referred to in Chapter IV A], 2[Chapter 
IVB]  and every other officer exercising any of the powers conferred by this Act shall be deemed to be a 
public servant within the meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
60. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—(1) No -suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any officer or other employee of the Central Government or the State Government for 
anything which is in good faith done or inte nded to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the State 
Government or any of its officers or other employees for any damage caused or likely to be caused by 
anything which is in good faith done or inte nded to be done under  this Act.  
3[(3) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Auth ority referred to in Chapter IV A 
4[Chapter IVB]  and its chairperson, members, member -secretary, officers and other employees for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.]  
5[60A. Reward to persons .—(1) When a court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence of which fine  
forms a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order that the reward be paid to a person who 
renders assistance in the detection of the offence or the apprehension of the offenders out of the proceeds 
of fine not exceeding 6[fifty per cent. of such fine]. 
(2) Where a case is compounded under Sec. 54, the officer compounding may order reward to be paid 
to a person who renders assistance in the detection of the offence or the apprehension of the offenders out 
of the sum of money accepted by way of comp osition not exceeding 7[fifty per cent . of such money ].] 
8[60B. Reward by State Government .—The State Government may empower the Chief Wild Life 
Warden to order payment of reward not exceeding ten thousand rupees to be paid to a person who renders 
assistan ce in the detection of the offence or the apprehension of the offender, from such fund and in such 
manner as may be prescribed.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 41, for “in Chapter II and” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991) . 
2. Ins. by Act 39 of 2006, s. 5 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2006).  
3. Ins. by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 42 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. Ins. by Act 39 of 2006, s. 6 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2006).  
5. Ins. by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 43 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
6. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 35, for “twenty  per cent. of such fine” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
7. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for “twenty per cent. of such money” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
8. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  52 
  
61. Power  to alter entries in Schedules .—(1) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it 
is expedient so to do, by notification, 1[add or delete any entry to or from any Schedule ] or transfer any 
entry from one Part of a Schedule to another Part of the same Schedule o r from one Schedule to another.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
 (3) On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1) 3***, the relevant Schedule shall be deemed to 
be altered accordingly, provided that every such alteration shall be without prejudice to anything done or 
omitted to be done before such alteration.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
Provided that any such alteration made by the State Government, if it has been made with the 
previous consent of the Central Government , shall prevail in that State:  
Provided further that nothing in the foregoing proviso shall prevent the Central Governmen t from 
modifying or cancelling, at any time, the alteratio n made by the State Government.  
62. Declaration of cer tain wild animals to be vermin .—5[The Central Government]  may, by 
notification, declare any wild animal other than those specified in Schedule I  and Part II of Schedule II to 
be vermin for any area and for such period as may be specified therein and so long as such notification is 
in force, such wild animal shall be deemed to ha ve been included in Schedule V.  
63. Power of Ce ntral Government to mak e rules .—6[(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) conditions and other matters subject to which a licensee may keep any specified plant in his 
custody or possession under section 17F; 
7[(ai) the term of office of members other than those who are members ex officio ; the manner of 
filling vacancies, the procedure to be followed by the National Board under sub -section ( 2) and 
allowances of those members under sub -section ( 3) of section 5A;] 
8[(aa) the matters to be prescribed under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4) of section 44;]  
(b) the salaries, allowances and other conditions of appointment of chairperson, members and 
member -secretary under sub -section ( 5) of section 38 B; 
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Central Zoo 
Authority under sub -section ( 7) of section 38 B; 
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts of the Central Zoo Authority shall be 
prepared under sub -section ( 4) of section 38 E; 
(e) the form in which and the time at which the annual report of the Central Zoo Aut hority shall 
be prepared under s ection 38 F; 
(f) the form in which and the fee required to be paid with the application for recognition of a zoo 
under sub -section (2) of s ection 38 H; 
(g) the standards, norms and other matters to be considered for granting recognition under  
sub-section ( 4) of s ection 38 H; 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 44, for “add any entry to any Schedule” (w.e.f. 2-10-1991).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 44, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. The words brackets and figure “or sub -section ( 2)” omitted by  Act 44 of 1991, s. 44 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
4. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by s. 44, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
5. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
6. Subs. by s. 46,  ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
7. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 37 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
8. Ins. by Act 23 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -5-1982).  53 
 1[(gi) qualifications and experience of experts or professionals under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 38 -1; 
(gii) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of appointment of the members under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 38M;  
(giii) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Tiger 
Conservation Authority und er sub -section ( 2) of section 38N;  
(giv) the form in which the annual statement of accounts of Tiger Conservation Authority shall be 
prepared under sub -section ( 1) of section 38R;  
(gv) the form in which and the time at which the annual report of Tiger Cons ervation Authority 
shall be prepared under section 38S;  
(gvi) other powers of the Wild Life Crime Control Bureau under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 38Z.]  
(h) the form in which declaration shall be made under sub -section ( 2) of section 44; 
(i) the matters to be prescribed under Cl. ( b) of sub -section ( 4) of s ection 44; 
(j) the terms and conditions which shall govern transaction referred to in clause ( b) of section 48; 
(k) the manner in which notice may be given by a person under c lause (c) of se ction 55; 
(1) the matters specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 64 in so far as they relate to sanctuaries and 
National Parks declared by the Central Government.]  
 (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the success ive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, th at any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule.  
64. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules for carrying out the provis ions of this Act in respect of matters which do not fall wi thin the 
purview of section 63.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
2[(a) the term of office of members other than those who are members, ex officio , the manner of 
filling vacancies and the procedure to be followed by the Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
(b) allowances referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 6;]  
 (c) the forms to be used for any application, certificate, claim,  declaration, licence, permit, 
registration, return, or other document, made, granted, or submitted under the provisions of this Act 
and the fees, if any, therefor;  
(d) the conditions subject t o which any licence or permit  may be granted under this Act;  
3[(dd) the conditions subject to which the officers will be authorised to file cases in the court;]  
(e) the particulars of the record of wild animals (captured or killed) to be kept and submitted by 
the licensee;  
4[(ee) the manner in which measures for immunisatio n of live -stock shall be taken;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2 006, s. 7 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 38, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  
4. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 47 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  54 
 (f) regulation of the possession, transfer and the sale of captive animals, meat, animal articles,  
trophies and uncured trophies;  
(g) regulation of taxidermy;  
1[(ga) the manner and conditions subject to which the Administrator shall receive and manage the 
property under sub -section ( 2) of section 58G;  
(gb) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 58N;  
(gc) the fund from which and the manner in which payment of reward under section 60B shall be 
made;]  
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may  be, prescribed under this Act.  
65. Rights of Sc heduled Tribes to be protected .—Nothing in this Act shall affect the hunting rights 
conferred on the Scheduled Tribes of the Nicobar Islands in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands by notification of tile Andaman and Nicobar Administration, No. 40,/67/F, No. G635, Vol. III, 
dated the 28th April, 1967, published at pages 1 to 5 of the Extraordinary issue of the Andaman and 
Nicobar Gazet te, dated the 28th April, 1967.  
66. Repeal and savin gs.—(1) As from the commencement of this Act, every other Act relating to any 
matter contained in this Act and in force in a State shall, to the extent to which that Act or any provision 
contained therein corresponds, or is repugnant, to this Act or any pr ovision contain ed in this Act, stand 
repealed:  
Provide d that such repeal shall not, — 
(i) affect the previous operation of the Act so repealed, or anything du ly done or suffered 
thereunder;  
(ii) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability, acquired , accrued or incu rred under the Act 
so repealed;  
(iii) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed 
against the Act so repealed; or  
(iv) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeitu re, or punishment as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty, forfeiture and. Punishment may be imposed,  as if the aforesaid Act had not been repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) anything done or any ac tion taken under the Act so re pealed, (including any notification, 
order, certificate, notice or receipt issued, application made, or permit grante d) which is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act as, if this Act were in force at the time such thing was done or 
action was taken, and shall continue to be in  force, unless and until superseded by anything done or 
any action taken under this Act;  
(b) every licence granted under any Act so repealed and in force immediately before the 
commencement of th is Act shall be deemed to have been granted under the corresp onding provisions 
of this Act and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force for the unexpired 
portion. of the period for which  such licence had been granted.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any sanctuary or National Park declared by a 
State Government under any Act repealed under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a sanctuary or 
National Park, as, the case may be, declared by the State Government under this Act and where any right  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2003, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2003).  55 
 in or over any land in any such National Park which had not been extinguished under the said Act, at or 
before the commencement of this Act, the extinguishment of such rights shall be made in accordance w ith 
the provisions of this Act.  
1[(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby further declared that where any proceeding under any 
provision of section  19 to 25 (both inclusive) is pending on the date of commencement of the Wild Life 
(Protection) Amendment Act, 1991  (44 of 1991) , any reserve  forest or a part of territorial waters 
comprised within a sanctuary declared under section 18 to be a sanctuary before the date of such 
commencement shall be deemed to be a s anctuary declared under section. 26 A.] 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 48 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  56 
 SCHEDULE 1  
(See Section s 2, 8, 9, 11,  40, 41, 43, 48, 51, 61 and 62)  
PART I   : MAMMALS  
 1[1.  Andaman Wild  pig (Sus andamanensis )] 
 2[1-A.  Bharal ( Ovis nahura )] 
2[1-B. Binturong ( Arctictis binturong )]  
2.   Blackb uck ( Antilope cervicapra ) 
2[2-A. * * *] 
3.   Brow -antlered deer or Thamin ( Cervus e ldi) 
3[3-A.  Himalayan Brown bear ( Ursus arctos )] 
4[ 5[3-B.] Capped langur ( Presbyx  pileatus )]] 
4.   Caracal ( Felils caracal )] 
6[4A.  Catacean sp p.] 
5.   Cheetah ( Acinonyx jubatus ) 
 7[5-A.  Chinese  Pangolin ( Manis pentadactyla )] 
8[5-B.  Chinkara or Indian gazelle ( Gazella gazella bennetti )] 
6.   Clou ded leopard ( Neofe lis nebulosa ) 
9[6-A.  Crab -eating macaque ( Macaca irus umbrosa )] 
10[ 11[6-B.]  Desert cat (Felis libyca )] 
 12[6-C.  Desert fox ( Vulpes bucopus )] 
7.   Dugong ( Dugong dugon ) 
13[7-A.  Ermine ( Mustela erminea )] 
8.   Fishing Cat ( Felis viverrina ) 
14[8-A.  Four -horned antelope (Tetraceros quadricornis )] 
15[8-B. * * *] 
 15[ 16[8-C.  * * *]   
  
                                                           
1. Entry 1 from Schedule III transferred as entry 1 of Part I of Schedule I  by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -
10-1977.  
2. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980 , published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October,1980.  
3. Entry 2 of Part II of Schedule II transferred as entry 3A by notification No. S.O. 859(E) dated 24 -11-1986  
4. Entry 4 in Part I of Schedule II transferred  as entry 3A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
5. Entry 3A renumbered as Entry 3B by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
6. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October,1980.  
7. Ins. by notification No. J 11012/31/76 -FRY (WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
8. Entry 4 of Schedule III transferred as entry 5B by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
9. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October,1980.  
10. Entry 1 of Schedule IVtransferred as entry 6A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5-10-1977.  
11. Entry 6A renumbered as entry 6B by Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the 
Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October,1980.  
12. Entry 2 of Schedule IV transferred as entry  6C by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
13. Entry 3 from Schedule IV as entry 7A by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
14. Entry 6 of Schedule III transferred as entry 8A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
15. Entry 6 and 8 of Schedule II transferred as entry 8B and 8C by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24th November, 1986, 
published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 3(i), dated 24th November, 1986.  
16. Entry 8C transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 1C by notification No. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  57 
  1[8-D.  Gangetic dolphin ( Platanista gangetica )] 
 2[8-E.  Bison or Gaur ( Bos gaurus )] 
9.   Golden  cat (Felis temmincki ) 
10.   Golden Langur (Presbytis geei)  
3[10-A.  Giant squirrel ( Ratufa macroura )] 
4[ 5[10-B.]  Himalayan  ibex ( Capra ibex )] 
 6[ 7[10-C.] Himalayan tahr ( Hemitragus jemlahicus )] 
11.   Hispid hare (Caprolagui hispidus ) 
 8[11-A.  Hog badger ( Arctonyx collaris )] 
12.   Hoolock  gibbon ( Hylobates hoolock )] 
9[12-A.  10[* * *] 
11[12-B.  Indian Elephant ( Elephas maximus )] 
13.   Indian lion ( panthera leo persica ) 
14.   Indian wild Ass ( Equus homionus khur ) 
12[15.  Indian wolf (Canis lup us pallipes )] 
16.   Kashmir Stag ( Cervus elaphus hanglu ) 
13[16-A.  Leaf monkey ( Presbytis phayrei )] 
14[16B.  Leopard  or Panther ( Panthera pardus )] 
17.   Leopard cat ( Felis be ngalensis ) 
18.   Lesser or red panda ( Ailurus fulgens ) 
19.   Lion t ailed macaque ( Macaca silenus ) 
20.   Loris ( Loris tardigradus ) 
15[20-A.  Little Indian porpoise ( Neomeris phocaenoides )] 
21.   Lynx (Felis lynx isabellinus ) 
22.   Malabar civet ( Viverra megaspila ) 
16[22-A.  Malay or sun bea r (Helarctos malayanus )] 
                                                           
1. Entry 8D ins by notification No. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
2. Entry 3 of Schedule II of Part I transferred as entry 8E by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
3. Entry 1A o f Part II of Schedule II transferred as entry 10A by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
4. Entry 9 of Schedule III transferred as entry 10B by ??  
5. Entry 10A renumbered as entry 10B by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
6. Entry 10 of Schedule III transferred as entry 10A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
7. Entry 10B renumbered as entry 10C by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
8. Entry 12 of Part I of Schedule II transferred as entry 11A by n otification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986 .?? 
9. Entry 12A ins. by by notification No. J 11012/31/76 -FRY (WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
10. Entry 12 A omitted ?? or transferred??  
11. Entry 13 of Part I of Schedule II  transferred as entry 12B by by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
12. Entry 15 subs. by notification No. J 11012/31/76 -FRY (WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
13. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October,1980.  
14. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431 , dated 2nd October,1980.  
15. Entry 4C of Schedule IV transferred as entry 20A by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986  
16. Entry 15 of Part I of Schedule II transferred as entry 22A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
 58 
 23.   Marb led c at (Felis marmorata ) 
24.   Markhor (Capra falconeri ) 
1[24-A.  Mouse deer ( Tragulus meminna ) 
25.   Musk deer ( Moschus moschiferus ) 
2[25-A.  Nilgiri langur ( Presbytis johni ) 
3[25-B.  Niggi ri Tahr (Homitragus hylccrius ) 
26.   Nayan or great Tibetan sheep  ??? (Ovis ammon hodgsoni ) 
27.   Pallas ’s Cat (Felis manul ) 
28.   Pangolin ( Manis crassicaudata ) 
29.   Pygmy hog ( Sus salvanius)  
4[29-A.  Ratel ( Mellivora capansis ) 
30.   Rhincer os (Rhinoceros unicornis ) 
31.   Rusty  Spotted Cat ( Felis rubiginosa ) 
5[31-A.  Serow ( Capricornis sumatraensis )] 
 6[31-B.  Otter ( Aonyx cinerea )] 
 7[ 8[31-C.] Sloth bear ( Melursus ursinus )] 
32.   Slow l oris ( Nycticebus coveang ) 
9[32-A.  Small Travancore f lying Squirrel ( Petinom ys fuscopapillus )] 
33.   Snow leopard ( Panthera uncia ) 
10[33-A.  Snubfin d olphin ( Orcaella brevirostris )] 
34.   Spotted linsang ( Prionodon pardicolor ) 
35.   Swamp d eer (All su b-species of Cervus duvauceli ) 
36.   Takin or Mis hmi takin ( Budoroas taxicolor ) 
11[36-A.  Tibetan Antelope or Chiru ( Panthelops hodgsoni )] 
 12[36-B.  Tibetan fox ( Vulpes ferrilatus )] 
37.   Tibetan gazelle ( Procapra picticaudata ) 
38.   Tibetan wild a ss (Equus hemionus kiang ) 
39.   Tiger ( Panthera tigris ) 
40.   Urial or Shapu ( Ovis vignei ) 
                                                           
1. Entry 13 of Schedule III transferred as entry 24A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
2. Entry 3 from Part II of Schedule II as entry 25A by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
3. Entry 25A renumbered as Entry 25B by noti fication No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
4. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October,1980 . 
5. Entry 18 of Part I of Schedule II transfer red as entry 31A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
6. Entry 4 of Part II of Schedule II transferred as entry 31B by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
7. Entry 17 of Schedule III transferred as entry 31B by notification  No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
8. Entry 31B renumbered as entry 31C by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
9. ??  
10. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
11. Entry 20 of Part I of Schedule II transferred as entry 36A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
12. Entry 9 of Schedule IV transferred as entry 36B by Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
 59 
 41.   Wild buffalo ( Bubalus bubalis ) 
1[41-A.  Wild y ak (Bos grunnie ns)] 
 2[41-B. Tibetan wolf ( Canis lupus chanco )] 
 3[42. Wroughton ’s free tailed bat ( Otomops wroughtoni ) 
43. Salim Ali ’s fruit bat ( Latidens salimalii )] 
 4[44. Hog Deer ( Axis porcinus )] 
PART II    : AMPHIBIANS AND REPTILES  
5[1.  Agra Monitor Lizard [Varanus griseus (Daudin) ]] 
6[1-A. 7* * * * *] 
 8[1-B.  Audithia turtle ( Pelochelys bibroni )] 
 9[ 10[1-C].  Barred, oval or Yellow Monit or Lizard ( Varanus f lavescens )] 
 11[1-D].  Crocodiles (Including the estuarine or salt water crocodile ) (Crocodilus po rusus  and 
Crocodilus palustris ) 
12[1-E.  Batagur Terrapin ( Batagur baska ) 
1-F.  Eastern hill terra pin (Melanochelys triearinata )] 
2.   Gharial ( Gavialis gange ticus ) 
13[3.  Ganges soft -shell od turtle ( Trionyx gangetic us)] 
14[3-A.  Golden gecko ( Caloductyloides aureus )] 
4.   Green Sea turle ( Chelonia mydas ) 
5.   Hawksb ill Turtle ( Eratmochelys imbricata imbricata ) 
 15[6.  *  * * * *]   
7.   Indian egg eating snake ( Elachistodon west ermanni ) 
8.   Indian soft -shelled turtl e (Lissemys punctata ) 
9.   Indian ten t turtle (Kachuga tecta tecta ) 
16[9A.  Kerala F orest Terrapin ( Hoesemys sylratie a) 
10.  Large Bengal Monitor Lizard (Varanus bengalensis)  
11.   Leathery turtle ( Dermochelys coriacea ) 
                                                           
1. Entry 23 of Part I of Schedule II transferred as entry 41A by notification No. J11012/3 1/76-FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
2. Entry 6 of Part II of Schedule II transferred as entry 41B by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1085(E), dated 30 -9-2002.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3653(E), dated 6-12-2013.  
5. Entry 1 of Part I of Schedule II transferred as entry 1 by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
6. Entry 1A ins by notification No. notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
7.  
8. Entry 1B ins. by notification  No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
9. Ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
10. Entry IB renumbered as entry IC by Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated (24 -11-1986).  
11. Entry IC renumbered as entry 1D by Notification No. S.O. 859 (E), dated (24 -11-1986).  
12. Entries 1E and 1F ins. by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated (24 -11-1986).  
13. Entries 3 to 17 Ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
14. Entry 3A ins. by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24-11-1986.  
15. Vide Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24th November, 1986, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 3(i) , 
dated 24th November, 1986.  Transferred to Part I of Schedule II as entry 11A by notification No. 859(E), dated 2 4-11-1986.  
16. Entry 9A ins. by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated (24 -11-1986).  60 
 12.   Loggerh ead turtle ( Caretta caretta ) 
13.   Oliveb ack l oggerh ead turtle ( Lepidochelys olivacea ) 
14.   Peacock -marked solf -shelled turtle ( Trionyx hurum ) 
1[14-A.  Pythons ( Genus python )] 
2[14B.  Sail terrapin ( Kachuga kachuga )] 
14C.  Spotted black terrapin ( Geoclemys hamiltoni )] 
3[15.  **** *] 
[16.  * * *] 
17.  * * *]  
4[17-A.  Water Lizard (Varanus salvator). ] 
5[PART IIA  
Fishes  
1. Whate shark ( Rhincodon typus )] 
 6[ 7[2. Shark and Ray  
(i) Anoxypristis cuspidate  
(ii) Carcharhinus hemiodon  
(iii) Glyphis gangeticus  
(iv) Glyphis glyphis  
(v) Himantura fluviatilis  
(vi) Pristis microdon  
(vii) Pristis zijsron  
(viii) Rhybchobatus djiddensis  
(ix) Urogymnus asperrimus ] 
3. Sea Horse (All sygnathidians).  
4. Giant Grouper (Ephinephelus lanceolatus)]  
PART III    :  BIRDS 
8[1.  Andaman Teal ( Anas gibberifo ons allogularis ) 
1-A.  Assam bamboo pa rtridge ( Bambusicola fyt chii)] 
9[1-B.  Bazas ( Aviceda j erdoni and Aviceda leuphotes )] 
                                                           
1. Entry 17 of Part I of Schedule II  transferred as entry 14A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
2. Entries 14B and 14C ins. by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated (24 -11-1986).  
3. Vide Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24th November, 1986, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 3( i), 
dated 24th November, 1986.  
4. Entry 21 in Part I of Schedule II transferred as entry 17A  by notif ication No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
5. Added by notification No. S.O. 474(E), dated 28 -5-2001.  
6. Ins. by S.O. 665(E) dated 11 -07-2001.  
7. Subs by notification No. S.O. 1197(E), dated 5 -12-2001, for serial number 2 and the entry relating thereto.  
8. Entries 1 and 1A ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
9. Entry 1 renumbered as entry 1B by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  61 
 1[1-C.  Bengal fl orican ( Eupodotis bengalensis )] 
1-D.  Black -necked crane (Grus nigriocollis ) 
1-E.  Blood pheasants ( Ithaginis cruentus tibetan us, l.c. kuseri ) 
2[1-F.  * * *] 
2.   Chee r pheasant ( Catreus wallichi ) 
3[2-A.  Eastern white stock (Ciconia ciconia boyciana )]?? 
2-B. Forest s potted owlet ( Athene blewitti )] 
 4[2-C.  Frogmouth s (Genus batrachostomus ) 
3.   Great Indian  bustard ( Choriotis nigrice ps) 
4.   Great Indian ho rnbill ( Buceros bicornis ) 
5[4-A.  Hawks ( fam. Accipitridae )?? 
6[4-B.  Hooded crane (Grus monacha )] 
[4-C.  Hornibills ( Ptiloaemus tickelli austeni, Aceros nipalensis, Rh ytice ros undulatus                                                                                                                                                
ticehursti )] 
[4-D.  Houbara b ustard ( Chlamydotis undulata )] 
[4-E.  Hume ’s bar -backed p heasant (Syrmaticus humiae )] 
[4-F.  Indian pied hornbill ( Anthracocer so malabaricus )] 
5.   Jerdon ’s courser (Cursorius bitorquatus ) 
6.   Lammergeier ( Gypaetus barbatus ) 
7.   Large f alcons ( Falco peregrinus, Falco  biarmicus and Falco chic quera )] 
7[7-A.  Large Whistling  teal (Dendrocygna bicolor )] 
 8[7-B.  Lesser florican ( Sypheotides indica )] 
 9[7-C].  Monal Pheasants ( Lopho phorus i mpejanus, L. sclateri )] 
8.   Mountain  quail ( Ophrysia superciliosa ) 
9.   Narcondom h ornbill (Rhyti ceros ( undulatus ) marcondami ) 
10[9-A. ***] 
10.   Nicobar megapode ( Megapodins freycinet ) 
11[10-A.  Nicobar pigeon ( Caloenas ni cobar ica pelewensis ) 
12[10-B.  Ospre y or Fish eati ng eag le (Pandion haliaetus )] 
13[10-C.  Peacock pheasan t (Polyplectron bicalcaratum) ] 
                                                           
1. Entries 1C to 1F inserted by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
2. Vide Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24th November, 1986, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 3(i) , 
dated 24th November, 1986.  
3. Entries 2A and 2B ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977. 
4. Entry 2C Ins. by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
5.  
6. Entries 4A to 4E ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
7. Entries 7A and 7B ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
8. Entry 7B  ins. by Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
9. Entry 7B renumbered as entry 7C Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
10. Vide Notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24th November, 1986, published in the Gazette of India, Extra.,  Pt. II, Section 3(i), 
dated 24th November, 1986.  
11. Entries 10A and 10B ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
12. 
13. 62 
 11. `Peafowl ( Pavo cristatus ) 
12.  Pink-headed  duck (Rhodonessa caryophyllacea ) 
13.  Scalater ’s Monal (Lophophorus solateri ). 
14.  Siberian white crane (Grus leucogeranus)  
1[14-A.2****]  
14B. Tibetan Snow -cock ( Tetraogallus tibetanus )] 
15. Tragopan Pheasants (Tragopan melanocephalus, Tragopan blythii, Tragop an satyra, Tragopan 
temmincki ) 
16.  White -bellied sea eagle ( Haliaetus le ucogaster ) 
17.  White -eared p heasa nt (Crossoptilon crossoptilon ) 
3[17-A. White s poonbill ( Platalea leucorodia )] 
18.  White -winged  wood duck ( Cairina scutalata ) 
 4[19. Swiftlets (Collocaliaunicolor and  5***) 
20. Hill myna (Gracula religiosa intermedia,  Gracula religiosa peninsularis, Gracula religiosa indica 
and Gracula religiosaand andamanensis)  
21. Tibetan ear pheasant (Crossoptilon harmani)  
22. Kalij pheasant (Lophurs leucomela na) 
23. Lord Derby ’s parakeet (Psittacula derbyana)  
24. Vultures (Gyps indicus, Gyps bengalensis, Gypstenuirostris)  
25. White bellied hereon (Ardea insignis)]  
6[PART IV :   CRUSTACEA AND INSECTS ] 
 7[1. Butterflies and Moths  
Family Amathusildae  Common English name  
Discophora deo deo  Duffer, banded  
Discophora sondaica muscina  Duffer, common  
Faunis faunula faunuloides  Pallid fauna  
Family Danaidae    
Danaus gautama gautamoides  Tigers  
Euploea crameri nicevillei  Crow, spotted Black  
Euploea midamus roepstorfti  Crow, Blue -spotted  
  
                                                           
1. Entries 14A and 14B ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
2. Vide Notification No . S.O. 859(E), dated 24th November, 1986, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 3(i), 
dated 24th November, 1986.  
3. Entry 17A ins. by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1085(E), dat ed 30 -9-2002.  
5. The word “ Collocalia fusiphaga ” in entry 19 omitted by S.O. 3653 (E), dated 6 -12-2013.  
6. Part IV ins.by by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
7. Entry 1 subs. by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24th November, 1986, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), dated 24th November, 1986 . 63 
 Family Lycaenidae    
Allotinus drumila  Darkie, crenulate/Great  
Allotinus fabius penormis  Angled darkie  
Amblopala avidiena  Hairstreak, Chinese  
Amblypodia ace arata  Leaf Blue  
Amblypodia alea constanceae  Rosy Oakblue  
Amblypodia ammonariel  Malayan Bush blue  
Amblypodia arvina ardea  Purple Brown tailless Oakblue  
Amblypodia asopia  Plain tailles Oakblue  
Amblypodia comica  Comic Oakblue  
Amblypodia opalima  Opal Oakblue  
Amblypodia zeta  Andaman tailless Oakblue  
Biduanda melisa cyar a Blue posy  
Callophyrs leechii  Hairstreak, Ferruginous  
Catalius rosimon alarbus  Pierrot, common  
Charana cepheis  Mandar in Blue, Cachar  
Chiloria othona  Tit, orchid  
Deudoryx epijarbas amatius  Cornelian, scarce  
Everes moorei  Cupid, Moore ’s 
Gerydus biggsii  Bigg ’s Brownie  
Gerydus symethus diopeithes  Great Brownie  
Helipohorus hybrida  Sapphires  
Horaga albimacual  Onyxes  
Jamides ferrari  Caeruleans  
Liphyra brassolis  Butterfly, Moth  
Listeria dudgeni  Lister ’s hairstreak  
Logania Watsoniana subfasciata  Mottle, Watsen ’s 
Lycaenopsis binghami  Hedge Blue  
Lycaenopsis haraldus ananga  Hedge Blue, Felder ’s 
Lycaenopsis puspa prominens  Common hedge Blue  
Lycaenopsis quadriplaga dohertyi  Naga hedge Blue  
Nacaduba noriea hampsoni  Lineblue, White -tipped  
Polymmatus oritulus leela  Greenish mountain Blue  
Pratapa lcetas mishmia  Royal, dark Blue  64 
 Simiskina phalena harterti  Brilliant, Broadlanded  
Sinthusa Virgo  Spark, Pale  
Spindasis elwesi  Silverline, Elwes ’s 
Spindasis rukmini  Silverline, Khaki  
Strymoni mackwoodi  Hairstreak, Mackwood ’s 
Tajuria ister  Royal, uncertain  
Tajuria luculentus nela  Royal, Chinese  
Tajuria yajna yajna  Royal, Chestnut and Black  
Thecla ataxus zulla  Wonderful hairstreak  
Thecla bleti mendera  Indian Purple hairstreak  
Thecla letha  Watson ’s hairstreak  
Thecla paona  Paona hairstreak  
Thecla pavo  Peacock hairstreak  
Virachola smilis  Guava Blues  
Family Nymphalidae    
Apatura ulupi ulupi  Emperor, Tawny  
Argynnis hegemone  Silver -washed fritillary  
Callnaga buddha  Freak  
Chraxes durnfordi nicholi  Rajah, chestnut  
Cirrochora fasciate  Yeomen  
Diagora nicevillei  Siren, Scarce  
Dillpa morgina  Emperor, Golden  
Doleschallia bisaltide andamana  Autuman lea t 
Eriboea moori sandakanas  Malyan Nawab  
Eriboea schreiberi  Blue Nawab  
Eulaceura manipurensis  Emperor, Tytler ’s 
Euthaila durga sp lendens  Barons/Connis/Duchesses  
Euthalia iva  Duke, Grand  
Euthalia Khama Curvifascia  Duke, Naga  
Euthalia tellehinia  Baron, Blue  
Helcyra hemina  Emperor, White  
Hypolimnas missipus  Eggfly, Danaid  
Limenitis austenia purpurascens  Commodore, Grey  
Limenitis zulema  Admirals  65 
 Melitaea shandura  Fritillaries/Silverstripes  
Neptis antilope  Sailer, variegated  
Neptis aspasia  Sailer, Great Hockeystick  
Neptis columella kankena  Sailer, Short -banded  
Neptis cydippe kirbariensis  Sailer, Chinese yellow  
Neptis ebusa  Sailer/ Lascar  
Neptis jumbah binghami  Sailer, chestnut -streaked  
Neptis manasa  Sailer, Pale Hockeystick  
Neptis nycteus  Sailer, Hockeystick  
Neptis poona  Lascar, tytler ’s 
Neptis sankara  Sailer, Board -banded  
Panthoporia jina jina  Bhutan sergeant  
Panthorpria reta moorei  Malay staff sergeant  
Prothoc franckii regalis  Begum, Blue  
Sasakia funebris  Empress  
Seophisa chandra  Courtier, Eastern  
Symbrenthia silana  Jester, Scarce  
Vanessa antipoa yedunula  Admirable  
Family Papilionidae    
Chilasa clytea clytea f. commixtus  Common mime  
Papilio elephenor  Spangle, yellow -crested  
Papilio liomedon  Swallowtail, Malabar Banded  
Parnassius aeco geminifer  Apollo  
Parnassius delphius  Banded apollo  
Parnassius hannyngtoni  Hannyngton ’s apollo  
Parnassius imperator augustus  Imperial apollo  
Parnassium stoliezkanus  Ladakh Banded Apollo  
Polydorus coon sambilanga  Common clubtail  
Polydorus cerassipes  Black windmill  
Polydorus hector  Crimson rose  
Polydorus nevilli  Nevill ’s windmill  
Polydorus plutonius pembertoni  Chinese windmill  
Polydorus polla  Denicevi le’s windmill . 
  66 
 Family Pleridae    
Aporia harrietae harrietae  Black veins  
Baltia butleri sikkima  White butterfly  
Colias colians thrasibulus  Clouded yellows  
Colias dubi  Dwarf clouded yellow  
Delias samaca  Jexebel, pale  
Pieris krueperi devta  Butterfly cabbage/White II  
Family Satyriidae    
Coelitis monthis adamsoni  Cat’s eye, Scarce  
Cyllogenes janetae  Evening Brown, Scarce  
Elymnias peali  Palmfly, Peal ’s 
Elymnias penanga philasis  Palmfly, Painted  
Erebia annada annada  Argus, ringed  
Erebia nara singha nara singha  Argus, Mottled  
Lethe, distans  Forester, Scarce Red  
Lethe dura gammiee  Lilacfork, Scarce  
Lethe europa tamuna  Bamboo tree brown  
Lethe gemina gafuri  Tayler ’s tree brown  
Lethe guluihal guluihal  Forester, Dull  
Lethe margaritae  Tree brown, Bhutan  
Lethe ocellata lyncus  Mystic, dismal  
Lethe ramadeva  Silverstripe, Single  
Lethe satyabati  Forester, pallid  
Mycalesis orseis nautilus  Bushbrown, Purple  
Pararge menava maerodies  Wall dark  
Yathima dohertyi persimisis  Five ring, Great ] 
[1-A. Coconut or Robber C arb (Bigrus latro)]  
1[2. Dragon Fly (Epioplebia laidlawi)]  
 2[PART IVA  
Coelenterates  
1. Reef Building coral (All Scleractinians).  
                                                           
1. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd Octob er,1980.  
2. Part IV A, Part IV B and Par t IV C ins. by notification No. S.O. 665(E), dated 11 -7-2001.  67 
 2. Black coral (All Antipatharians).  
3. Organ Pipe Coral (Tubipora musica).  
4. Fire Coral (All Millipora Species).  
5. Sea Fan (All Gorgonians).  
1[PART IVB  
Mollusca  
1. Cassis cornuta  
2. Charonia tritonis  
3. Conus milneed wardsi  
4. Cypraecassis rufa  
5. Hippopus hippopus  
6. Nautilus pompilicis  
7. Tridacna maxima  
8. Tridacna squamosa  
9. Tudicla spirillus.]  
PART IV -C 
Echinodermata  
Sea Cucumber (All Holothurians).]  
   
                                                           
1. Part IV B and the entries relating thereto subs. by notification No. S.O. 1197(E),  dated 5 -12-2001.  68 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See sections. 2, 8, 9,  1***, 11, 40, 41, 43, 48, 51, 61, and 62]  
2[***] 
PART I 
3[1.   ***] 
4[1-A.  Assamese macaque ( Macaca assamensis )] 
 [2.   Bengal Porcupine ( Atherurus mecrourus assamensis )] 
 5[3.  ***]  
 6[3-A.  Bonnet macaque ( Macaca radiata )] 
 7[3-B.  *** 
 8[3-C.  Cetacean species (other than those listed in Sch. I and Sch.II, Part II)]  
9[4.  ******* *] 
10[4-A.  Common langur ( Presbytis entellus )] 
11[5.  ***] 
12[6.  ******** ] 
7.   Ferret b adgers ( Melogale moschata,  Melogale personata ) 
13[8.  ******** ] 
 14[9.  ***** ***] 
 15[10.  ******] 
11.   Himalayan Crestless p orcupine  (Hystrix hodgsoni ) 
16[11-A.  Himalayan newt or salamander ( Tyletotriton verrucosus ) 
17[12.  ****] 
18[13.  ******* ] 
19[14.  ******] 
  
                                                           
1. The figures “10” omitted by Act 44 of 1991, s. 49 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. The words “SPECIAL GAME” omitted by s. 49, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Entry 1 transferred to Part II of Schedule I by by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
4. Entry 1A ins. by Notification No. FJ 11012/13/76 FRY(WL), dated 29th August, 1977.  
5. Entry 3 transferred to Part I of Schedule I as entry 8E by notification No. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
6. Entry 3A ins. by Notification No. FJ 11012/13/76 FRY(WL), dated 29th August, 1977.  
7. Entry 8 of Schedule III transferred as entry 3B by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
8. Entry 3C I ns. by notification No. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
9. Entry 4 of Part I of Schedule II transferred as entry 3A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977  
10. Entry 4A Ins. by Notification No. FJ 11012/13/76 FRY(WL), dated 29th August, 1977  
11. Vide Notification No. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3i), p. 431, dated 2nd October, 19 80. 
12.  
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. Entry 6 of Part II of Schedule I as entry 11A by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986 . 
17. 
18. 
19. 69 
 1[15.  ******* ] 
16.   Pig-tailed macaque  (Macaca nemestrina ) 
2[17.  ******] 
3[17-A.  Rhesus macaque  (Macaca mulatta ) 
4[18.  ******] 
19.   Stump -tailed macaque ( Macaca speciosa ) 
5[20.  ******** ] 
21.   *** 
22.   Wild dog or dhole ( Cuon alpinus ) 
6[23.  ******] 
7[24.  Chameleon ( Chameleon calcaratus )] 
25.   Spiny -tailed lizard or s anda (Ur omastix hardwickii) ] 
PART II  
8[1.   Beetles  
Family Carabidae    
Agonotrechus andrewesi  Callistominus belli  
Amara brucei  Chlaenius championi  
Amara eleganfula  Chlaenius kanarae  
Brachinus atripennis  Chlaenius masoni  
Broscosoma gracile  Chlaenius nilgiricus  
Brosous bipillifer  Family Chrysomelidae  
Broter ovicollis  Acrocrypta rotundata  
Calatlius amaroides  Bimala indica  
Clitea indica  Family Erycinidae  
Gopala pita  Abisara kausambi  
Griva cyanipennis  Dodona adonira  
Nisotra cardoni  Dodona dipoea  
Nisotra madurensis  Dodona egeon  
Nisotra nigripennis  Libythea lepita  
  
                                                           
1. 
2. 
3. Ins. by Vide notification No. FJ 11012/ 31/76 FRY(WL), dated 29th August, 1977.  
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 119. Vide Notification No. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3i), p. 431, dated 2nd October, 1980 . 70 
 Nisotra semicoerulea    
Nisotra striatipennis  Family Hesperiidae  
Nonarthra patkaia  Baoris phidippina  
Psylliodes plana  Bebasa sena  
Psylliodes shira  Halpe homolea  
Sebaethe cervina    
Sebaethe patkaia  Family Lycaenidae  
Sphaeroderma brevicorne  Ailotinus subviolaceus manychus  
  Amblypodia aberrans  
Family Cucujidae  Amblypodia aenea  
Carinophlocus raffrayi  Amblypodia agaba aurelia  
Cucujus bicolor  Amblypodia agrata  
Cucujus grouvelle  Amblypodia alesia  
Cucujus imperialis  Amblypodia apidanus ahamus  
Heterojinus semilaetaneus  Amblypodia areste areste  
Laemophloeus belli  Amblypodia bazaloides  
Laemophloeus incertus  Amblypodia camdeo  
Pediacus rufipes  Amblypodia ellisi  
  Amblypodia fulla ignara  
Family Inopeplidae  Amblypodia genesa watsoni  
Inopeplus aIbonn Bus  Amblypodia paraganesa zephyreeta  
  Amblypodia paralea  
Family Amathusidae  Amblypodia silhetensis  
Aemona amathusia amathusia  Amblypodia suffusa suffusa  
Amathusia phildippus 
andamanicus  Amblypodia yendava  
Amathusia amythaonam  Apharitis lilacinus  
Discophora deo deodoides  Araotes lapithis  
Discophora lepida lepida  Artipe eryx  
Discophora timora andamanehsi  Bindahara phocides  
Enispe cycnus  Bothrinia chennellial  
Faurds sumeus assama  Castalius roxus manluena  
Sticopthalma nourmahal  Catapoecilma delicatum  
Thauria aliris amplifascia  Catapoecilma elegans myositina  71 
   Charana jalindra  
Family Danaidae  Cheritrella truncipennis  
Euploea melanaleuca  Chliaria kina  
Euploea midamus rogenhofer    
Deudoryx hypargyria gaetulia  Pratapa blanka  
Enchrysops onejus  Pratapa deva  
Everes kalaroi  Pratapa icetas  
Helipphorus androcles moorei  Rapala buxaria  
Horage onyx  Rapala chandrana chandrana  
Horage viola  Rapala nasaka  
Hypolycaena nilgirica  Rapala refalgens  
Hypolycaena thecloides 
nicobarica  Rapala rubida  
Iraota rochana boswelliana  Rapala scintilla  
Jamides alectokandulana  Rapala ophinx ophinx  
Jamides celeodus pura  Rapala varuna  
Jamides kankena  Spindasis elima elima  
Lampides boeticus  Spindasis lohita  
Lilacea albocaerulea  Spindasis nipalicus .  
Lilacea atroguttata  Suasa lisides  
Lilacea lilacea  Surendra todara  
Lilacea melaena  Tajuria albiplaga  
Lilacea minima  Tajuria cippus cippus  
Logania massalia  Tajuria culta  
Lycaenesthes lycaenina  Tajuria diaeus  
Mahathala ameria  Tajuria illurgoodes  
Mahathala atkinsoni  Tajuria illurgis  
Magisba malaya presbyter  Tajuria jangala andamamca  
Nacaduba aluta coelestis  Tajuria melastigma  
Nacaduba ancyra aberrans  Tajuria sebonga  
Nacaduba dubiosa fulva  Tajuria thydia  
Nacaduba helicon  Tajuria yajna istroides  
Nacaduba hermus majoi  Tarucus callinara  
Nacaduba pactolus  Tarucus dharta  72 
 Neucheritra febronia  Thaduka malticaudata malkarnda  
Niphanda cymbia  Thecla ataxus ataxus  
Orthomiella pontis  Thecla bitel  
Pithecops fulgens  Thecla icana  
Polyminatus devanica devanica  Thecla jakamensis  
Polymmatus metallica metallica  Thecla kabrea - .. 
Polymmatus orbitulus jaloka  Thecla khasia  
Polymmatus yeonghusbandi  Thecla kirbariensis  
Poritia erycinoides elsiei  Thecla suroia  
Poritia hewitsoni  Thecla syla assamica  
Poritia plusrata geta  Thecla vittata  
Pratapa bhotes    
Thecla zoa  Euthalia merta eriphyle  
Thecla usta  Euthalia nara nara  
Una usta  Euthalia patala taocana  
Yasoda tripunctata  Euthalia teuta  
  Herona marathus andamana  
Family Nymphalidae  Hypolimnas missipus  
Adolias cyanipardus  Hypolimnas polynice birmana  
Adolias dirtea  Kallima albofasciata  
Adolias khasiana  KaIIima alompra  
Apatura chevana  Kallima philarchus horsfieldii  
Apatura parvata  Limenitis austenia austenia  
Apatura sordida  Limenitis damava  
Apatura ulupi florenciae  Limenitis dudu  
Argyrmis adippe pallida  Melitaea robertsi lutko  
Argynnis altissima  Neptis anjana nashona  
Argynnis clara clara  Neptis aurelia  
Argynnis pales horla  Neptis magadh khasiana  
Atella Iscippe  Neptis nandina hamsoni  
Calinaga buddha brahaman  Neptis narayana  
Charaxes aristogiton  Neptis radha radha  
Charaxes fabius sulphureus  Neptis soma  73 
 Charaxes nabruba  Neptis zaida  
Cliaraxes marmax  Neurosigma doublodayi doubledayi  
Charaxes polyxena herman  Pantoporia asura asura  
Chersonesia rahria arahrioides  Pantoporia kanwa phorkys  
Cyrestis cocles  Pantoporia larymna siamensis  
Diagora persimilis  Pantoporia pravara a cutipennis  
Doleschallia bisaltide 
malabarica  Pantoporia ranga  
Eriboea athames andamanicus  Parthenos sylvia  
Eriboea delphis  Penthema lisarda  
Eriboea dolon  Symbrenthia niphanda  
Eriboea harcoea lissainei  Vanesa egea agnicula  
Euripus consimilis  Vanesa lalbum  
Euripus halitherses  Vanesa polychloros fervida  
Euthalia anosia  Vanesa prarsoides dohertyi  
Euthalia cocytus  Vanesa urticoe rizama  
Euthalia duda    
Euthalia durga durga  Family Papilionidae  
Futhalia evalina landabilis  Bhutanitis liderdalii  
Euthalia franciae  Chilasa epycides epycides  
Euthalia garuda acontius  Chilasa paradoxa telearchus  
Euthalia lepidea    
Chilasa slateri slateri  Family Satyridae  
Graphium aristeus anticrates  Aulocera brahminus  
Graphium arycies arycles  Cyllogenes suradeva  
Graphium Graphium macronius  Elymnias melilas milamba  
Graphium evemon aibociliates  Elymnias vasudeva  
Graphium gyas gyas  Erebia annada suroia  
Graphium megarus megaras  Erebia hygriva  
Papilio bootes  Erebia kalinda kalinda  
Papilio buddba  Erebia manii manii  
Papilio fuscus andamanicus  Erebia seanda opima  
Papilio machaon verityi  Erites falcipennis  
Papilio mayo  Hipparchis heydenreichi shandura  74 
 Parnassius charltonius 
charltonius  Lethe atkinsoni  
Parnassius epaphus hillensis  Lethe baladeva  
Parnassius jacquemonti 
jacquemonti  Lethe brisanda  
Polydorus latreillei kabrua  Lethe  goalpara goalpara  
Polydorus plutonius tytleri  Lethe insana insana  
Teinopalpus imperialis 
imperialis  Lethe jalaurida  
  Lethe kaubra  
Family Pieridae  Lethe Iatiaris latiaris  
Aporia nabellica  Lethe moelleri moelleri  
Appias albina darada  Lethe naga naga  
Appias indra shiva  Lethe nicetella  
Appias lyncida latifasciata  Lethe pulaha  
Appias wardi  Lethe scanda  
Baltia butleri butleri  Lethe serbonis  
Cepora nadian remba  Lethe siderca  
Cepora nerissa dapha  Lethe sinorix  
Colias eocandica hinducucica  Lethe tristigmata  
Colias eogene  Lethe violaceudicta kanjupkula  
Colias ladakensis  Lethe visrava  
Colias stoliczkana miranda  Lethe yama  
Delias lativitta  Maniola davendra davendra  
Dercas lycorias  Melanitis zitanius  
Euchloe charlonia Iucilla  Mycalesis adamsoni  
Eurema andersoni ormistoni  Mycalesis anaxias  
Metaporia agathon  Mycalesis botama chamka  
Pieris deota  Mycalesis heri  
Pontia chloridice alipina  Mycalesis lepcha bethami  
Saletara panda Chrysaea  Mycalesia maisarida  
Valeria avatar avatar    
Mycalesis misenus  Pararge macrula maefula  
Mycalesis mestra  Ragadia crislda crito  75 
 Mycalesis mystes  Rhapicera sitricus kabrua  
Mycalesis suavolens  Ypthima bolanica  
Neorina hilda  Ypthima lycus lycus  
Neorina patria westwoodii  Ypthima mathora mathora  
Oeneis buddha gurhwalica  Ypthima similis affectata  
Parantirrhoea marshali  Zipotis saitis]  
1[1- A. Civets ( all species of Viverridae except Malabar civet )] 
2[1-B. Common fo x (Vulpes ibeugalensis )] 
3[1-C. Flying squirrels (all species of the genera Bulopetes, Petaurista,  Pelomys and Eupetaurus)]  
 4[1-D. Giant squirrels (Ratufa indica, and R . bicolor)]  
 5[2. ******]   
 6[2-A. Himalayan black bear ( Selenarctos thibetanus )] 
 7[2-B. Jackal ( Canis a ureus )] 
 8[2-C. Jungle cat ( Felis chaus )] 
 9[2-D. Marmots ( Marmota bo bak himalayana, M . caudata )] 
 10[2-E. Martens ( Martes foria intermedia, Martes flovigule, Martes gwatkinsii )] 
 11[(3.*****]  
4.  Otters (Luthroa, L. perspicillate)  
 12[4-A. Pole cats (Vormela peregusna, Mustila potutius)  
 13[4-B. Red fox (Vulpes vulpes, vulpes Montana, vulpes griffithi, vulpes pusilla) ] 
14*** 
15[5A. Sperm whale (Physeter marcrocephalus) .] 
16[6. ***]  
 17[7. Weasels (Mustela Sibirica, Mustela Kathian, Mustela Altaica)]  
 18[8. Checkered keelback (Xenochrophis piscator)  
                                                           
1. Entry 1 from Schedule IV as entry 1A by notification No. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
2. Entry 1A  from Schedule IV as entry 1B by notification No. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
3. Entry 8C Part I of Schedule I as entry IC by notification No. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
4. Entry 1A renumbered as entry 1D by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
5. Entry 2 transferred to Part I of Schedule I as entry 3A by notification No. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
6. Vide Notification No. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 
3i), p. 431, dated 2nd October, 1980.  
7. Entry 4B from Schedule IV transferred as entry 2B by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
8. Entry 4D from Schedule IV transferred as entry 2C by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
9. Entry 5 from Schedule IV tra nsferred as entry 2D by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
10. Entry 6 from Schedule IV transferred as entry 2E by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
11. Entry 3 transferred to Part 1 of Schedule II as entry 25A by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
12. Entry 7A from Schedule IV transferred as entry 4A by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
13. Entry 8 and 8A from Schedule IV as entry 4B transferred by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
14. Entry 5 omitted by Notification No. S.O. 3653(E), dated 6 -12-2013.  
15. Ins. by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
16. 
17. Entry 10 from Schedule IV transferred as entry 7 by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  
18. Ins. by notification No. S. O. 859 (E) dated 24 -11-1986.  76 
 9. Dhaman or rat snak (Plyas muscosus)  
10. Dog -faced water snake (Carbrus rhynchops)  
11. Indian cobras (all sub -species belonging to genus Naja)  
12. King cobra (Ophiophagus hannah)  
13. Oliveceous keel back (Artaetium schistosum)  
14. Russel ’s viper (Vipera ruselli)  
15. Varanus species (excluding yellow monitor lizard) ] 
 1[16. Mongooses (All species of genus Herpestes):  
17. Grey jungle fowl (Gallus sonnerati)]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S. O. 1085 (E) dated 30 -9-2002 . 77 
 SCHEDULE III  
[See secs. 2, 8,  1*** 9, 11, and 61]  
2*** 
3 [1.***]  
2. Barking deer or muntjac (Muntiacus muntjak)  
4[3. Bharal (Ovis nahura) ] 
5[4. ***]  
5. Chital (Axix axis)  
6[6. ***]  
7. Gorals (Nemorheadus goral, Nemorhaedus hodgsoni)  
7[8. ***]  
8[9. ***]  
9[10. ***]  
 10*** 
12. Hyanena (Hyaena hyaena)  
11[13. ***]  
14. Nilgai (Boselaphus tragocamelus)  
12[15. ***]  
16. Sambar (Cervus unicolor)  
13[17. ***]  
14[18. ***]  
19. Wild pig (Sus scrofa)  
 15[20. Sponges (All Calcareans). ]  
                                                           
1. The figures “10” omitted by 44 of 1991, s. 50 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. The words “BIG GAME” omitted by s. 50, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
3. Entry 1  from Schedule III transferred as e ntry 1 of Part I of Schedule I by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -
10-1977.  
4. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October,1980.  
5. Entry 4 of Schedule III transferred as entry 5B of Part I of Schedule I  by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-
1977.  
6. Entry 6 of Schedule III transferred as entry 8A of Part I of Schedule I by notifi cation No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-
1977.  
7. Entry 8 of Schedule III transferred as entry 3B of Part I of Schedule II by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-
1977. See entry 2A of Part II of Schedule II  Vide Notification No. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published 
in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 3i), p. 431, dated 2nd October, 1980.  
8. Vide Notification NO. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gaze tte of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October,1980.  
9. Entry 10 of Schedule III transferred as entry 10A of Part I of Schedule I by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -
10-1977.  
10. Entry 11 omitted by Notification No. S.O.  3653(E), dated 6 -12-2013.  
11. Entry 13 by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
12. Entry 15 by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 5 -10-1977.  
13.  
14. 
15. Entry 20 ins. by notification No. S.O. 665(E), dated 11 -7-2001  78 
 SCHEDULE IV  
[See secs. 2, 8, 9, 11 and 61]  
1*** 
2[1. ***]  
3[1-A. ***]  
4[2. ***]   
5[3. *** ]  
6[3-A Five -striped palm squirrel (Fouambulus pennanti)]  
4. Hares (Black Naped, Common Indian, Desert, Himalayan mouse hare)  
7[4-A. Hedge hog (Hemiechinus auritus)]  
8[4-B. ***]   
 [4-C. ***]  
9[4-D. ***]   
5[4-E. Indian porcupine (Hystrix indica)]  
10[5. ***]   
11[6. ***]   
12*** 
7[6-B. ***]  
7[7. ***]  
13[7-A. ***]  
7[7-B ***]  
14[8. *** ]  
12[8-A. ***]   
15[9. ***]   
5[9-A. ***]  
16[10. ***]  
  
                                                           
1. The word  “SMALL GAME” omitted by Act 44 of 1991, s. 51 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
2. Transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 1A by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
3. Transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 1B by notification No. S.O. 859(E),  dated 24 -11-1986.  
4. Transferred to Part I of Schedule I as entry 6C by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
5. Transferred to Part I of Schedule I as entry 7A by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
6. Entry 3A vide Notification No.  F1-28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. 
II, Section 3i), p. 431, dated 2nd October, 1980 . 
7. Entry 4A by notification No. J11012/31/76 -FRY(WL) dated 29 -08-1977.  
8. Transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 2B by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
9. Transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 2C by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
10. Transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 2D by notification No. S.O. 859(E), da ted 24 -11-1986.  
11. Transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 2E by notification No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
12. Entry 6A omitted by Notification No. S. O. 1085 (E) dated 30 -9-2002.  
13. Transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 4A by notif ication No. S.O. 859(E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
14. Transferred to Part II of Schedule II as entry 4B by Notification No. 859 (E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
15. Transferred to Part I of Schedule I as entry 36B by Notification No. 859 (E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
16. Transfer red to Part II of Schedule II as entry 37 by Notification No. 859 (E), dated 24 -11-1986.  79 
 8[11. Birds 1[(other than those which appear in other Schedules)]]:  
1. Avadavat (Estrildinae)  
2. Avocet (Recurvirostridae)  
3. Babblers (Timaliinae)  
4. Barbets (Capitonidae)  
5. Barnowls (Tytonknae)  
6. Bitterns (ardecdae)  
7. Brown -headed gull (Larus brunnicephalus)  
8. Bulbuls (Pycnonotidae)  
9. Buntings (Emberizidae)  
10. Bustorda (Otididae)  
11. Bustard -Qualis (Turnicidae)  
12. Chloropsis (Irendae)  
13. Comb duck (Sarkidornis melanotes)  
14. Coots (Rallidae)  
15. Cormorants (Phalacrocoracidie)  
16. Cranes (Gruidae)  
17. Cuckoos (Cuculidae)  
17-A Curlevs (Seoalopacinae)  
18. Darters (Phalacrocoracidae)  
19. Doves including the Emerald Dove (Columbidae)  
20. Drongos (Di cruridae)  
21. Duck (Anatidae)  
22. Egrets (Ardeidae)  
23. Fairy Blue Bird (Irenidae)  
24. Falcons (Falconidae), excepting the Shaheen and Peregrine falcons (Falco peregrinus), the 
shaker or churrug, shankghar and lagger falcons (F.biarmicus), and the refheade d merlin 
(F.chicquera)  
25. Finches including the chaffinch (Fringillidae)  
26. Falmingos (Phoenicopteridae)  
27. Flowerpeckers (Dicaedae)  
28. Flcatchers (Muscicapidae)  
29. Geese (Anatidae)  
30. Goldfinch and allies (Carduelinae)  
31. Grebes (Pooicipididae)  
32. Gerons (Ardeidae)  
33. Ibises (Thereskironithidae)  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S. O. 859 (E), dated 24 -11-1986.  80 
 34. Iorars (Irenidae)  
35. Jays (Corvidae)  
36. Jacanas (Jacanidae)  
36-A. Junglefowl (Phasianidae)  
37. Kingfishers (Alcedinidae)  
38. Larks (Alaudidae)  
39. Lorikeets (Psittacidae)  
40. Magpies including the Hu nting agpie (Corvidae)  
41. Mannikins (Estrildinae)  
42. Megapodes (Megapodidae)  
43. Minivets (Campephagidae)  
44. Munias (Estrildinae)  
45. Mynas (Sturnidae)  
46. Nightjara (Caprimalgidae)  
47. Orioles (Oriolidae)  
48. Owls (Strigidae)  
49. Oysteractchers (Haemat opodidae)  
50. Parakeets (Psittacidae)  
51. Partridges (Phasianidae)  
52. Pelicans (Pelecandae)  
53. Pheasants (Phasianidae)  
54. Pigeons (Columbidage)except the Blue Rock Pigon (Columbia livia)  
55. Pipts (Motoacillidae)  
55-A. Pittas (Pittidae)  
56. Plovers (Charadriniae)  
1[57. Quails ( Phasinidae )-except Coturnix japonica  (Japanese Quails) of farm bred variety]  
58. Rails (Rallidae)  
59. Rollers or Blue Jays (Coraciidae)  
60. Sandgrouses (Pteroclididae)  
61. Sandpipes (Scolopacinae)  
62. Snipes (Scolopacinae)  
63. Spurfowls (Phasianidae)  
64. Starlings (Sturnidae)  
65. Stone Curlew (Burhinidae)  
66. Storks (Ciconiidae)  
67. Stilts (Recurvirostridae)  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Notification No. S.O. 3653(E), dated 6 -12-2013, for item 57.  81 
 68. Sunbirds (Nectariniidae)  
69. Swans (Anatidae)  
70. Teals (Anatidae)  
71. Thurushes (Turadinae)  
72. Tits (Pardae)  
73. Tre e pies (Corvidae)  
74. Trongons (trogonidae)  
75. Vultures (Accipitridae)  
76. Waxbills (Extrildinae)  
77. Weaver Birds or Bayas (Ploceidae)  
78. White -eyes (Zosteropidesa)  
79. Woodpeckers (Picidae)  
80. Wrens (Troglodytidae)  
9[12. Snakes 1[other than those species listed in Sch.I,Pt.II; and Sch.II, Pt.II]:  
(i) Amblycaphalidae  
(ii) Amilidae  
(iii) Boidae  
(iv) Colubridae  
(v) Dasypeptidae (Egg -eating snakes)  
(vi) Elapidae (Cobras, Kraits, and Coral Snakes)  
(vii) Glauconndae  
(viii) Hydrophidae (Fresh water and sea snakes)  
(ix) Tlysiidae  
(x) Leptotyphlopidae  
(xi) Typhlopidae  
(xii) Urepedltidae  
(xiii) Viperidae  
(xiv) Xenopeltidae]  
1[13. Fresh Water Frogs (Rana spp.)]  
1[14. Three -keeled Turtle (Geoemydas tricarinata)]  
1[15. Tortoise (Testudinidae, Tryonychidae)]  
2[15A. Tokay gecko ( Gekko gecko ).] 
1[16. Vivipaous tods (Nectophyrynodes sp.)]  
1[17. Volvs]  
11[18. Butterflies and Moths]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  notification No. S.O. 859 (E), dated 24 -11-1986.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 3653(E), dated 6 -12-2013.  82 
 Family Danaidae  
Eupl oca core simulatrix  
Euploca crassa  
Euploca dioclctianus ramsayi  
Euploca muleiber  
Family Hesperlidae  
Boaris farri  
Harora vitta  
Hyarotis adrastus  
Oriens concinna  
Pelopidas assasmensis  
Pelopidas sinensis  
Polytrema discreta  
Polytrema rubricans  
Thoressa horiorei  
Family Lycaenidae  
Tarucus ananda  
Family Nymphalidae  
Euthalia lubentina  
Family Peeridae  
Aporia agethon ariaca  
Appias libythea  
Appiad nero galba  
Prioneris sita  
1[19. Mollusca  
(i) Cypraea lamacina  
(ii) Cypraea mappa  
(iii) Cypraea talpa  
(iv) Fasciolaria trapezium  
(v) Harpulina arausiaca  
(vi) Lambis chiragra  
(vii) Lambis chiragra arthritica  
(viii) Lambis crocea  
(ix) Lambis millepeda  
(x) Lambis scorpius  
(xi) Lambis truncate  
(xii) Placenta placenta  
                                                           
1. Added by notification No. S.O. 1197(E), dated 5 -12-2001.  83 
 (xiii) Strombus plicatus sibbaldi  
(xiv) Trochus niloticus  
(xv) Turbo marmoratus.]  
1[(20) Horeshoe Crabs ( Tachypleaus gigas and Carcinoscopius rotundicauda ).]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2293 (E), dated 4 -9-2009.  84 
 SCHEDULE V  
[See section 2, 8, 61, and 62]  
1. Common crow  
 1[2. ***]  
3. Fruit bats  
1[4. ***]  
5. Mice  
6. Rats  
2[7. ***]   
                                                           
1. Vide Notification No. FJ 11012/31/76 FRY(WL), dated 5th October, 1977, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3(i), p.385, dated 5th October, 1977.  
2. Vide Notification No. F1 -28/78 FRY(WL), dated 9th September, 1980, Published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 
3(i), p. 431, dated 2nd October, 1980.  85 
  1[SCHEDULE VI  
[See section 2]  
1. Beddomes ’ cycad (Cycas beddomei)  
2. Blue Vanda (Vanda soerulec)  
3. Kuth (Saussurea lappa)  
4. Ladies slipper orchids (Paphiopedilum spp.)  
5. Pitcher plant (Nepenthes khasiana)  
6. Red Vanda (Rananthera imschootiana)]  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1991, s. 52 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1991).  
