--------------------------The Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of Undertakings) Act, 1973--------------------------
1 
 THE ALCOCK ASHDOWN COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION OF  
UNDERTAKINGS) A CT, 1973  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1973  
[14th December, 1973 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition of the undertakings of the Alcock  Ashdown Company 
Limited for the purpose of ensuring rational and co -ordinated development and production of 
goods essential to the needs of the country in general, and defence department in particular 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental ther eto. 
WHEREAS  Alcock Ashdown Company Limited were engaged in boat building, ship repairs and the 
production of marine diesel engines, and were also engaged in the production of goods which are 
essential to the needs of the country, such as, light and heavy structurals, transmission line towers, 
railway points and crossings, grey iron castings and also other goods needed by the maritime and other 
industries ; 
AND WHEREAS as a result of heavy losses suffered by the company, an order has been made by the 
High Co urt at Bombay for the winding up of the company;  
AND WHEREAS there has been a complete closure of the work of the undertakings owned by the 
company from after January, 1971;  
AND WHEREAS it is urgently necessary to bring the undertakings owned by the compan y into 
operation so that the interests of the country in general, and the defence department in particular, may not 
be adversely affected by reason of the stoppage of production and supply of goods produced by the 
company;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in th e Twenty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of 
Undertakings) Act, 1973.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “company” means the Alcock Ashdown Company Limited, being a company as defined in the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office in the State of Maharashtra;  
(c) “Court” means the High Court at Bombay;  
1[(ca) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(cd) “undertakings of the company ” means— 
(i) the industrial unit owned by the company and located at Bhavnagar in the State of Gujarat 
(hereinafter referred to as the Bhavnagar unit); and  
(ii) the industrial unit owned by the company and located at Bombay in the State of 
Maharashtra (hereinafter referre d to as the Bombay unit);]  
(d) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Undertakings of the company to vest in the Central Government .—On and from the appointed 
day, the undertakings of the company shall, by virtue of this Act, be transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Central Government.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1988).  2 
 4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the company shall be deem ed to include all 
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, cash balances, 
reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as        
were immediately befor e the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the 
company,  1[in relation to the undertakings] whether within or outside India, and all books of account, 
registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto.  
2[Explanation .—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression “undertakings 
of the company ” does not include — 
(a) any debts due to the company; and  
(b) any amounts recoverable by the company from its shareholders or directors.]  
(2) Al l property included as aforesaid in the undertakings which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trusts, 
obligations, mortgages, charges, liens and other incumbrances affecti ng it, and any attachment, injunction 
or any decree or order of any court restricting the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to 
have been withdrawn.  
(3) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in re lation to any 
business of the undertakings of the company is pending by or against the company, the same shall not 
abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the 
undertakings of the company or of anything contained in this Act but the suit, appeal or other proceeding 
may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the company.  
5. Duty to deliver possession of the undertakings and documents relating                       
thereto .—(1) Notwithstanding any decree, judgment or order of any court or anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, the Receiver, Official Liquidator of the company or any other 
person, in whose possession or custody or under whose control the undertakings of t he company or any 
part thereof may be, shall deliver possession of the undertakings of the company or such part thereof as 
may be in his possession, custody or control to the Central Government forthwith.  
(2) The Receiver, Official Liquidator or any other person who has, on the appointed day, in his 
possession or under his custody or control any books, documents or other papers relating to the 
undertakings of the company which have vested, under section 3, in the Central Government, shall be 
liable to accou nt for the said books, document or other papers to the Central Government or to such 
person as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.  
(3) The Central Government may take, or cause to be taken, all necessary steps for securing 
possession of the undertakings which have vested in it under section 3.  
6. Duty to furnish particulars .—(1) The company shall, within such period as the Central 
Government may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all the 
properties and assets of the company, as on the appointed day, pertaining to the undertakings which have 
vested in the Central Government under section 3.  
(2) So much of the obligation of the company under sub -section ( 1) as relates to the properties and 
assets of the co mpany in the possession, custody or control of the Receiver shall be discharged by him 
and so much of that obligation as relates to the properties and assets in the possession, custody or control 
of the Official Liquidator shall be discharged by the Offici al Liquidator.  
7. Payment of amount .—(1) The Central Government shall deposit, in cash, in Court, to the credit of 
the company, an amount equal to the sum of rupees one crore for the transfer to, and vesting in, the 
Central Government, under section 3, of the undertakings of the company.  
(2) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the company in relation to 
the undertakings which have vested in the C entral Government under section 3, shall be met from the 
amount referred t o in sub -section ( 1). 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1973).  
2. Explanation added by s.  2, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -12-1973).  3 
 (3) In meeting the liabilities of the company in relation to the undertakings which have vested in the 
Central Government under section 3, the Court shall distribute the amount referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
amongst the creditors of the company, whether secured or unsecured, in accordance with their rights and 
interests, and if there is any surplus left after such distribution, amongst the contributories of the company 
in accordance with the rights and interests of such contributories . 
8. Management and administration of the undertakings .—The undertakings, which have vested in 
the Central Government under section 3, shall be managed on behalf of the Central Government by such 
person or body of persons (including one or more Government companies, whether in existence at the 
commencement of this Act or incorporated thereafter) as may be nominated by the Central Government in 
this behalf, and such person or body of persons shall carry on the management in accordance with such 
regulations a s may be made by the Central Government in this behalf.  
1[8A. Vesting of the Bhavnagar unit in the State Government .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central Government shall direct by notification that all assets, rights, 
powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve 
funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property of the Bhavnagar 
unit which have vested in the Central Government un der section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in 
the Central Government, vest in the State Government of Gujarat (hereinafter referred to as the State 
Government), either on the date of publication of the notification or on such later date as may be specified 
in the notification.  
(2) Where the assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and 
immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out 
of, such property of th e Bhavnagar unit vest, under sub -section ( 1), in the State Government, that 
Government shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner of such 
unit and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to that  unit shall, on and from the 
date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the State Government.  
8B. Vesting of Bombay unit in Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sections 3 and 4, the Central Govern ment shall direct by notification that all assets, rights, powers, 
authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, 
investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property of the Bombay unit which 
have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central 
Government, vest in the Mazagon Dock Limited, a Government company having its registered office in 
the State of Maharashtra (herein after referred to as the Government company), either on the date of 
publication of the notification or on such later date as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable an d 
immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out 
of, such property of the Bombay unit vest, under sub -section (1), in the Government company, that 
company shall, on and from the date of such vesti ng, be deemed to have become the owner of such unit 
and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to that unit shall, on and from the date 
of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the Government company . 
8C. Employment of certain employees to continue when Bhavnagar unit vests under         
section 8A .—(1) Where the assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable 
and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising 
out of, such property of the Bhavnagar unit vest, under section 8A in the State Government, every person 
who has been, immediately before the date of such vesting, employed in that unit shall become, on and 
from the date of such vesting, an employee of the State Government, and shall hold office or service 
under that State Government with the same rights and privileges a s to pension, gratuity and other matters 
as would have been admissible to him if there had be en no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless 
and until his employment under the State Government is duly terminated or until his remuneration and 
other conditions of service are duly altered by the State Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1988).  4 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in the Bhavnagar unit to the State Government, shall not entitle such officer or  other employee to any 
compensation under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
(3) Where under the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, any p erson, whose services 
become transferred to the State Government by reason of the provisions of this Act, is entitled to any 
arrears of salary or wages or any payments for any leave not availed of or any other payment, not being 
payment by way of gratuity or pension, such person may enforce his claim against the Central 
Government, but not against the State Government.  
8D. Transfer of provident fund and other fund when undertakings vest under                    
section 8A .—(1) Where a provident fund, supera nnuation fund, welfare fund or any other fund has been 
established for the benefit of the persons employed in the Bhavnagar unit, the monies relatable to the 
officers or other employees, whose services have become transferred by or under this Act to the St ate 
Government shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the State Government.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the State Government shall be dealt 
with by that Government for the benefit of the officers and employees so transferred in such manner as 
the State Government may decide from time to time.  
8E. Saving of contracts , etc .—All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements and other instruments of 
whatever nature to which the Central Government is a party in relation to the Bh avnagar unit vested in the 
State Government under section 8A subsisting or having effect immediately before th e date of vesting of 
the said unit in the State Government shall, as from that day, be of full force and effect against, or in 
favour of the State  Government and may be enforced fully and effectually, as if, instead of the Central 
Government, the State Government had been a party thereto.  
8F. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
sections 8A , 8B, 8C, 8D and 8F, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the coming 
into force of the Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of Undertakings) Amendment         
Act, 1988.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall  be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
9. Penalties .—(1) Any person who — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of any property forming part of the undertakings of the 
company which have vested in the Central Government under this Act; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government as required by sub -section  (2) 
of section 5 any document which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
(d) wilfully fails to furnish an inventory as required under section 6; or  
(e) when  required to furnish such inventory, furnishes any particulars therein which are false and 
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with  fine, or with 
both:  
Provided that the court trying any offence under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of this           
sub-section may, at the time of convicting the accused person, order him to deliver up or refund within a 
time to be fixed by the  court any property wrongfully withheld or wrongfully obtained or any document 
wilfully withheld or not furnished.  5 
 (2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this section except with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government o r of an officer authorised by that Government in this 
behalf.  
10. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall r ender any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
11. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against  the Central Government or an officer or other employee serving in connection with the affairs 
of the undertakings of the company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act.  
12. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Central  Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make regulations with regard to the matters specified in section 8.  
(2) Every regulation made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive session s aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, 
the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, howe ver, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that regulation.  
--------------------------The Authoritative Texts (Central Laws) Act, 1973--------------------------
1 
 THE 2[AUTHORITATIVE TEXTS ] (CENTRAL LAWS) ACT, 1973  
ACT NO. 50 OF 1973  
 [5th December, 1973.]  
An Act to provide for 1[authoritative texts] of Central laws in certain languages.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India  as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the 2[Authoritative Texts] (Central 
Laws) Act, 1973.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. 4[Authoritative texts ] of Central laws in certain languages. —A translation in any language 
(other than Hindi) specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, published under the authority of 
the Presi dent in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) of any Central Act or of any Ordinance promulgated by the President, or  
(b) of any order, rule, regulation or bye -law issued under the Constitution or under any Central 
Act, 
shall be deemed to be the 4[authoritative text] thereof in such language.  
3. Power t o make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parl iament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification  or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1988, s. 2, for “authorised  translations”  (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “Authorised Translations” (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
3. 1st July, 1981 , vide notification No. S.O. 482 (E), dated 15 th June, 1981, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,       
sec. 3(ii). 
4. Subs. by Act 18 of 1988, s. 4, for “authorised translation” (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
--------------------------The Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) (Chandigarh Amendment) Act, 1973--------------------------
1  
THE CAPITAL OF PUNJAB (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) (CHANDIGARH 
AMENDMENT) ACT,  1973  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.   
2. [Repealed. ] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. Validation.  
  
  2 THE CAPITAL OF PUNJAB (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) (CHANDIGARH 
AMENDMENT) ACT,  1973  
ACT NO. 17 OF 1973  
[9th April , 1973.] 
An Act further to amend the Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act,  1952, as in 
force in the Union territory of Chandigarh.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Capital of Punjab (Development 
and Regulation) (Chandigarh Amendment) Act,  1973.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the1st day of November,  1966 except section7 
which shall come into force at once.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
7. Validation .—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, anything done or any 
action taken (including a ny notice issued, any order made for resumption of any site or building, or both, 
as the case may be, or any such resumption effected, or any order made for the forfeiture of any money or 
any money forfeited, or any order made for the recovery of any arrea rs or any arrears recovered, or any 
penalty imposed or recovered) or purported to have been done or taken under the principal Act shall, in so 
far as it is consistent with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, be deemed to be as 
valid  and effective as if such thing or action was done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this 
Act, and accordingly no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintai ned or continued in any court, — 
(i) for the recovery of any site or building, or both, as the case may be, which has or have been 
resumed; or  
(ii) for the cancellation of any order made for the resumption of any site or building, or both, as 
the case may be; or  
(iii) for the recovery of any mon ey forfeited; or  
(iv) for the cancellation of any order made for the forfeiture of any money; or  
(v) for the refund of any arrears recovered; or  
(vi) for the cancellation of any order made for the recovery of any arrears; or  
(vii) for the refund of any pen alty recovered; or  
(viii) for the cancellation of any order imposing any penalty.  
                                                           
1. Section s 2 to 6  rep. by Act 38 of 1978 , s. 2 and the First Schedule   (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
--------------------------The Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973--------------------------
THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1973  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. Repeal and saving . 
 
  THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1973  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1973  
[28th May , 1973 .] 
An Act further  to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short  title.—This Act may be called the  Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
5. Repeal and saving .—(1) On and from the date on which the provisions of Parts I and II of the 
principal Act come into force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the provisions of the Jammu and 
Kashmir Cinematograph Act, 1989  [Jammu and Kashmir Act 24 of 1989 (1933 A.D.) ], in so far  as they 
relate to the sanctioning of cinematograph films, for exhibition, shall stand repealed.  
(2) The repeal by sub -section  (1) of the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Cinematograph Act, 
1989, in so far as they relate to the sanctioning of cinematogr aph films for exhibition, shall not af fect— 
(a) the previous operation of the provisions so repealed or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder; or  
(b) any  right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the provisions 
so repealed; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment, incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
the provisions so repealed; or  
(d) any investigati on, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty , forfeiture or punishment as af oresaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,  and any 
such pen alty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the said provisions had not been repealed:  
Provided that anything done or any action taken (including any appointment made, notification issued 
or rule made) under the provisions so repealed shall be deem ed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act and now extended to the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything 
done or an y action taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act.  
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 4 r ep. by Act 38 of 1978, s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
--------------------------The Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973--------------------------
1 
 THE COAL MINES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1973  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
1A. Declaration as to expediency of Union control . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF COAL MINES  
3. Acquisition of rights of owners in respect of coal mines . 
3A. Mining operation by company and others . 
4. Central Government to be the lessee of the State Government . 
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of rights in a G overnment company . 
6. Properties vested in the Central Government to be freed from mortgages, etc . 
7. Central Government or Government company not to be liable for prior liabilities.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
8. Payment of amount to owners of coal mines . 
9. Payment of further amount . 
10. Income derived by the owners of coal mines after the appointed day to be refunded to the Central 
Government . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF COAL MINES  
11. Management, etc., of coal mines . 
12. Duty of persons in charge of management of coal mines to deliver all assets, etc . 
13. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF COAL MINES  
14. Liability of officer or other employee of a coal mine for transfer to any other coal mine . 
15. Provident and other funds . 
16. Superannuation fund, etc., to be distributed to employees whose employment becomes terminated 
under this Act . 
 2 
 CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
SECTIONS  
17. Commissioner of Payments to be appointed . 
18. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner . 
19. Statement of accounts in  respect of the period of management by the Central Government, etc . 
19A. Validation of certain collections . 
20. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
21. Priority of claims in relation to arrears of provident fund, etc . 
22. Priority in relation to other claims . 
23. Admi ssion or rejection of claims . 
23A. Application of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act . 
24. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants . 
24A. Interest on admitted claims . 
25. Recovery of excess payments made by Central Government or Custodian . 
25A. N otice to owners of coal mines and managing contractors, etc . 
26. Disbursement of amounts to the owners of coal mines . 
27. Undisbursed of unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general revenue account . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Effect of this Act on other laws . 
29. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Government . 
30. Penalties . 
31. Offences by companies . 
32. Mining companies not to be wound up by the court . 
33. Delegation of powers . 
34. Power to make rules . 
35. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE COAL MINES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1973  
ACT NO. 26 OF 1973  
[30th May , 1973.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest of the owners 
in respect of the coal mines specified in the Schedule with a view to re -organising and 
reconstructing such coal mines so as to ensure the rational, co -ordinated and scientific 
development and utilisation of coal resources consistent with the growing requirements of the 
country, in order that the ownership and control of such resources are ve sted in the State and 
thereby so distributed as best to subserve the common good, and for matters connected t herewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) 
Act, 1973.  
(2) The provisions of sections 30 and 31 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of May, 1973.  
1[1A. Declaration as to expediency of Union control .—(1) It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation and development of coal 
mines to the extent hereinafter provided in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 3 2[, section 3A]  and  
sub-section ( 2) of section 30.  
(2) The declaration contained in sub -section ( 1) is in addi tion to, and not in derogation of, the 
declaration contained in section 2 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 
(67 of 1957).]  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of May, 1973;  
(b) “coal mine ” means a mine in which there ex ists one or more seams of coal;  
(c) “company ” means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), 
and includes a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of that Act;  
(d) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payme nts appointed under section 17;  
(e) “Custodian ” means the  Custodian appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 11, to take over, 
or carry on,  the management of a coal mine;  
(f) “Government company ” has the meaning assigned to it by section 617 of the C ompanies Act, 
1956  (1 of 1956);  
(g) “managing contractor ” means the person, or body of persons, who, with the previous consent, 
in writing, of the State Government, has entered into an arrangement, contract or understanding, with 
the owner of a coal mine under which the ope rations of the coal mine are substantially controlled by 
such person or body of persons;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -4-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 11 of 2015, s. 28 and Schedule IV (w.e.f. 21 -10-2014).  4 
 (h) “mine ” means any excavation where any operation for the purpose of searching for or 
obtaining minerals has been or is b eing carried on, and includes — 
(i) all borings and bore holes;  
(ii) all shafts, whether in t he course of being sunk or not;  
(iii) all levels and inclined planes  in the course of being driven;  
(iv) all open cast workings;  
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for bringing into or remova l from a mine of 
minerals or other articles or for t he removal of refuse therefrom;  
(vi) all lands, buildings, works, adits, levels, planes, machinery and equipments, instruments, 
stores, vehicles, railways, tramways and sidings in, or adjacent to, a mine and use d for the 
purposes of the mine;  
(vii) all workshops (including buildings, machinery, instruments, stores, equipment of such 
workshops and the lands on which such workshops stand) in, or adjacent to, a mine and used 
substantially for the purposes of the mine or a number of mines under the same management;  
(viii) all coal belonging to the owner of the mine, whether in stock or in transit, and all co al 
under production in a mine;  
(ix) all power stations in a mine or operated primarily for supplying electricity for the purpose 
of working the mine or a number of m ines under the same management;  
(x) all lands, buildings and equipments belonging to the owner of the mine, and in, adjacent to 
or situated on the surface of, the mine where the washing of coa l obtained from the mine or 
manufacture, th erefrom, of coke is carried on;  
(xi) all lands and buildings [other than those referred to in sub -clause ( x)], wherever situated, 
if solely used for the location of the management, sale or liaison offices, or for the residence of 
officers and staff, of the mine;  
1[(xii) all other fixed assets, movable and immovable, belonging to the owner of a mine, 
wherever situated, and current assets, belonging to a mine, whether within its premises or outside.  
 Explanation .—The expression “current assets ” does not include, — 
(a) dues representing the sale of coal and coal products effected at any time before the 
appointed day and outstanding immediately be fore the said day;  
(b) dues from the Coal Board, established under section 4 of the Coal Mines 
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), prior to the repeal of the 
said Act, with respect to any p eriod before the appointed day;  
(c) dues from sundry debtors, loans and advances to other parties and investments, not 
being investments in the coal mine;  
(d) security deposits made by the owners with the Coal Controller appointed by the 
Central Government or with the Railways for the fulfilment of contracts or with a State 
Electricity Board for the payment of bills;  
(e) earnest money deposited by the owners with the Rai lways for obtaining contracts;]  
(i) “Mineral Concession Rules ” means the rules, for the time being in force, made under the 
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Devel opment) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957);  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 10, for sub -clause ( xii) (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973). 5 
 (j) “mining company ” means a company owning a coal mine, and in relation to a foreign 
company within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the undert aking 
of that company in India;  
(k) “notification ” means a notification pub lished i n the Official Gazette;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any 
provision of this Act , by notification, specify; and different dates may be s pecified for different 
provisions of this Act;  
(n) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Coal Mines 
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), have the meanings, respectively , 
assigned to them in that Act;  
(o) words  and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act or in the Coal Mines 
(Conservation, Safety and Development) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), but defined in the Mines Act, 1952 
(35 of 1952), have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in the Mines Act , 1952.  
CHAPTE R II 
ACQUISITION OF THE RIGHTS OF OWNERS OF COAL MINES  
3. Acquisition of rights of o wners in respect of coal mines .—(1) On the appointed day, the right, 
title and interest of the owners in relation to the coal mines specified in the Schedule shall stand 
transferred to, and shall vest absolutely in , the Central Government free from all incumbrances.  
1*    *    *    *    *  
2[(3) On and from the commencement of section 3 of the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Amen dment 
Act, 1976 (67 of 1976) ,— 
(a) no person, other than — 
(i) the Central Government or a Government, company or a corporation owned, managed or 
controlled by the Central Gove rnment, or  
(ii) a person to whom a sub -lease, referred to in the proviso to clause ( c), has been granted by 
any su ch Governm ent, company or corporation, or  
3[(iii) a company engaged in — 
(1) the production of iron and steel,  
(2) generation of power,  
(3) washing o f coal obtained from a mine, or  
(4) such other end use as the Central Government may, by notification, speci fy,] 
shall carry on coal mining op eration, in India, in any form;  
(b) excepting the mining leases granted before such commencement in favour of the Government, 
company or corporation, referred to in clause ( a), and any sub -lease granted by any such Government, 
company or corporation, all other mining leases and sub -leases in force immediately before such 
commencement, shall, in so far as they relate to the winning or mining of coal, stand terminated;  
  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 57 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1973).  
2. Ins. by Act 67 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29 -4-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 47 of 1993, s. 2, for sub-clause (iii) (w.e.f. 9 -6-1993).  6 
 (c) no lease for winn ing or mining coal shall be granted in favour of any person other than the 
Government, company or corporat ion, referred to in clause ( a): 
Provided that the Government, company or corporation to whom a lease for winning or mining 
coal has been granted may g rant a sub -lease to any person in any area on such terms and conditions as 
may be specified in the instrument granting the sub -lease, if the Government, company or corporation  
is satisfied that — 
(i) the reserves of coal in the area are in isolated small po ckets or are not sufficient for 
scientific and economical development in a co -ordin ated and integrated manner, and  
(ii) the coal produced by the sub -lessee will not be requ ired to be transported by rail.  
(4) Where a mining lease stands terminated under sub -section ( 3), it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government or a Government, company or corporation owned or controlled by the Cen tral Government 
to obtain, 1*** a prospecting licence or a mining lease in respect of the whole or part of the land covered 
by the mining lea se which stands so terminated.]  
2[(5) If, after the appointed day, the Central Government is satisfied, whether from any information 
received by it or otherwise, that there has been any error, omission or misdescription in relation to the 
particulars of a coal mine included in the Schedule or the name and address of the owner of any such coal 
mine, it may, by notification, correct such error, omission or misdescription and on the issue of such 
notification, the relevant entries in the Schedul e shall be, and shall be deemed always to ha ve been, 
corrected accordingly:  
Provided that no such correction in relation to the ownership of a coal mine shall be made where such 
ownership is in dispute.]  
3[3A. Mining op eration by company and others .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained  in this 
Act, any person being — 
(a) a Government company or corporation or a joint venture company formed by such company 
or corporation or between the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or 
any other company incorporated in India; or  
(b) a company or a joint venture company formed by two or more companies,  
may carry on coal mining operations in India, in any form either for own consumption, sale or for any 
other purpose in accordance with the p rospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be.  
(2) The Central Government may, with a view to rationalise such coal mines so as to ensure the 
coordinated and scientific development and utilisation of coal resources consistent with the growing 
requirements of the country , from time to time, prescribe — 
(i) the coal mines or coal bearing areas and their location;  
(ii) the minimum size of the coal mine or coal bearing areas;  
(iii) such other conditions,  
which  in the opinion of that Government may be necessary for the purpose of coal mining operations 
or mining for sale by a company.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “company ” means a company as defined in clause 
(20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013).]  
 
                                                           
1. Certain  words, brackets and figures omitt ed by 57 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 11 of 2015, s. 28 and Schedule IV (w.e.f. 21 -10-2014).  7 
 4. Central Government to be the lessee of the  State Government .—(1) Where the rights of an 
owner under any mining lease granted, or deemed to have been granted, in relation to a coal mine, by a 
State Government or any other person, vest in the Central Government under section 3, the Central 
Government shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee of the State 
Government or such other person, as the case may be, in relation to such coal mine 1[as if a fresh mining 
lease] in relation to such coal mine had been granted to the Central Govern ment and the period of such 
lease shall be 2[the maximum period] for which such lease could have been granted by the State 
Government or such other person under the Mineral Concession Rules, and thereupon all the rights under 
such mining lease, including s urface, underground and other rights granted to the lessee shall be deemed 
to have been transferred to, and ves ted in, the Central Government.  
(2) On the expiry of the term of  any lease, referred to in sub -section ( 1), such lease shall, if so desired 
by th e Centra l Government, be renewed, 3*** by the lessor, for the maximum period for which such lease 
can be renewed under the Mineral Concession Rules.  
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of rights in a Government compan y.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied 
that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that 
Government may think fit to impose, direct, by an order in writin g, that the right, title and interest of an 
owner in relation to a coal mine referred to in section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central 
Government, vest in the Government company either on the date of publication of the direction or on s uch 
earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day), as may be specified in the direction.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of an owner in relation to a coal mine vest in a Government 
company under sub -section ( 1), the Govern ment company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
deemed to have become the lessee in relation to such coal mine as if a mining lease in relation to the coal 
mine had been granted to the Government company and the period of such lease shall be t he entire period 
for which such lease could have been granted under the Mineral Concession Rules; and all the rights and 
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such coal mine shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to have beco me the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 shall apply to a lease which vests in a Government 
company as they apply to a lease vested in the Central Government and references t herein to the “Central 
Government ” shall be construed as references to the Government company.  
6. Properties vested in the Central Government t o be freed from mortgages, etc .—(1) All 
property which vests in the Central Government or in a Government company  under this Chapter shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting it and any attachment, injunction or decree or order of any court restricting 
the use of su ch property in any manner shall be  deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(2) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government or a 
Government company, and every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in or in re lation to any 
such property shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of  any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to any, such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or o ther dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount specified in relation to such property in the   
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 57 of 1986, s. 12, for “as if a mining lease” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
2. Subs. by s.12, ibid., for “the entire period” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
3. Certain words  omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  8 
 Schedule, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property 
which has vested in the Central Government or the Gov ernment company.  
7. Central Government or Government company not to be liable for prior liabilites .—(1) Every 
liability of the owner, agent, manager or managing contractor of a coal mine, in respect of any period 
prior to the appointed day, shall be the l iability of such owner, agent, manager or managing contractor, as 
the case may be, and shall be enforceable against him and not against the Central Govern ment or the 
Government company.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereb y declared that — 
(a) save as  otherwise provided elsewhere in this Act, no claim for wages, bonus, royalty, rate, 
rent, taxes, provident fund, pension, gratuity or any other dues in relation to a coal mine in respect of 
any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable again st the Central Govern ment or the 
Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to any coal mine 
passed after the appointed day, but in relation to any matter, claim or dispute which arose before tha t 
day, shall be enforceable against the Central Govern ment or the Government company;  
(c) no liability for the contravention, before the appointed day, of any provision of law for the 
time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government  or the Government 
company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
8. Payment of amount to owners of coal mines .—1[(1)] The owner of every coal mine or group of 
coal mines specified in the second column of the Schedule, shall be given by the Central Government, in 
cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, for the vesting in it, under section 3, of the right, title and 
interest of the owner in relation to such coal mine or group of coal mines, an amount equal to the amount 
specified against it in the correspond ing entry in th e fifth column of the Schedule.  
2[(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the amount specified in the fifth column of 
the Schedule against any coal mine or group of coal mines specified in the second column of the said 
Sche dule and required to be given by the Central Government to its owner under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
deemed to include, and deemed always to have included, the amount required to be paid to such owner in 
respect of all coal in stock or other assets referred  to in clause ( h) of section 2 on the date immediately 
before the appointed day and no further amount shall be payable to the owner in respect of such coal or 
other assets.]  
9. Payment of further amount .—(1) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions 
of sections 3, 4 and 5, there shall be given by the Central Government, in cash, to the owner of every coal 
mine or group of coal mines specified in the Schedule, an amount equal to the amount which would have 
been, but for the provisions  of the said sections 3 , 4 and 5, payable to such owner under the Coal Mines 
(Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), for the period commencing on the 1st day of May, 
1973, and ending on the date on which this Act receiv es the assent of the Pres ident.  
(2) In addition to the amount referred to in sub -section ( 1), there shall be given by the Central 
Government, in cash, to the owner of every coal mine or group of coal mines specified in the Schedule, 
simple interest at the rate of four per cent. pe r annum on the amount specified against such owner in the 
corresponding entry in the fifth column of the Schedule for the period commencing on the date on which   
                                                           
1. Section 8 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 57 of 1986, s. 13 (w.e.f.1 -5-1973).  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  9 
 this Act receives the assent of the President and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is 
made by the Central Government to the C ommissioner.  
(3) The amounts referred to in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall be in addition to the amount 
specified in the Schedule.  
10. Income derived by the owners of coal mines after the appointed day to be refu nded to the 
Central Government .—(1) Where, in pursuance of any decree, order or injunction of a court or 
otherwise, the Central Government or the Cust odian appointed under the Coal Mines (Taking Over of 
Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), was prevented from taking over the management of any coal mine, 
the owner of such coal mine shall render, within sixty days from the date on which management of the 
coal mine is delivered to the Central Government or Government company, as the case may be, accounts 
in relation to the period commencing on the date of commencement of the said Act and ending on the date 
of delivery of such management to the Central Governm ent or the Government company, as the ca se may 
be, with regard to the — 
(a) assets and stores of the coal mine acquired or sold by him dur ing the said period;  
(b) coal sold or des patched during the said period;  
(c) income derived by him from the co al mine during the said period.  
(2) If, on examination of the accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1), any income is found to have been 
derived by the owner from the coal mine during the period referred to in that sub -section, such income 
shall be recoverable by t he Central Government from the amount payable under section 8 to the owner of 
such coal mine, and, the debt due to the Central Government on this account s hall rank as an unsecured 
debt.  
(3) If no account is rendered by the owner of a coal mine within the period referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) or if the Central Government or the Government company has any reason to believe that 
the account rendered by such owner is incorrect or false in material particulars, the Central Government 
or the Government company may refer the matter to the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner 
shall determine the income derived by the owner from the coal mine during the period referred to in  
sub-section ( 1), and take steps to recover the said income from the amount payable to the owner of the 
coal mine under section 8, as if the debt due to the Central Government on this account were an unsecured 
debt.  
(4) No mortgage, charge, lien or other incumbrance in relation to a coal mine or any asset thereof 
shall be binding on the C entral Government or the Government company if such mortgage, charge, lien or 
other incumbrance was created, at any time during the period in which the Central Government or the 
Custodian was prevented, by any decree, order or injunction of a court or othe rwise, from taking over the 
management of the said coal mine.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF COAL MINES  
11. Management, etc., of coal  mines .—(1) The general superintendence, direction, control and 
management of the affairs and business of a coal mine, the  right, title and interest of an owner in relation 
to which have vested in the Central Gover nment under section 3, shall, — 
(a) in the case of a coal mine in relation to which a direction has been made by the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 5, vest in the Government company specified in such 
direction, or  
(b) in the case of a coal mine in relation to which no such direction has been made by the Central 
Government, vest in one or more Custodians appointed by the Central Government under  
sub-section ( 2), 10 
 and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian so appointed, as the case may be, 
shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as the owner of the coal mine is  
authorised to exercise and do.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint an individual or a Government company as the Custodian 
of a coal mine in relation to which no direction has been made by it under sub -section ( 1) of section 5.  
12. Duty of persons in charge of management of coal mi nes to deliver all assets, etc .—(1) On the 
vesting of the management of a coal mine in a Government company or on the appointment of a 
Custodian, all persons in charge of the management of such coal mine immediately before such vesting or 
appointment, shall be bound to deliver to the Government company or the Custodian, as the case may be, 
all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in their cus tody relating to the coal mine.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desi rable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Government company or Custodian as to its or his powers and duties and the 
Government company or Custodian may also, if it or he so desires, apply to the Central Government at 
any time for instructions as to th e manner in which the management of the coal mine shall be conducted 
by it or him or in relation to any other matter arising in the c ourse of such management.  
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the coal mine, in relation to which he or it is  the 
Custodian, such remuneration as the Central Government may fix and shall hold office during the 
pleasure of the Central Government.  
13. Accounts and audit .—The Custodian of every coal mine shall maintain the accounts of such 
mine in such manner and un der such conditions as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF COAL MINES  
1[14. Liability of officer or other employee of a coal mine for transfer to any other coal mine .— 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any other law 
for the time being in force, the services of any officer or other employee employed in a coal mine shall be 
liable to be transferred to any other coa l mine and such transfer shall not entitle such officer or other 
employee to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority .] 
15. Provident and o ther funds .—(1) Where a coal mine has established a provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of its employees, the monies relatable to the 
employees, whose services have become transferred by or under this Act to the Central Go vernment or a 
Government company shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such 
provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central 
Government or the Governme nt company, as t he case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred, under sub -section ( 1), to the Central Government or a 
Govern ment company shall be dealt with by that Government or company, as the case may be, in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
16. Superannuation fund, etc., to be distributed to employees whose employment bec omes 
terminated under this Act .—Where the employment of an employee stands terminated by reason of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 14 and such employee is not employed by the owner of the coal mine in any of 
his other establishments, such owner shall pay to such employee the amount standing at his credit in the 
provident fund and also pay him the amounts due to him as superannuation, welfare and other benefits 
admissible to him as if the employee had  superannuated or his service with the coal mine had terminated 
on the day immediately preceding the specified date.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 14, for section 14 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  11 
 CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
17. Commission er of Payments to be appointed .—(1) For the purpose of disbursing the amounts 
payable t o the owner of each coal mine or group of coal mines, the Central Government shall appoint 
such person as it may think fit to b e the Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commi ssioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons to also 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act, and different persons may be 
authorise d to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by  the Commissioner to exercise any powers may exercise those powers in 
the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been conferred on that person directly by this 
Act a nd not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commis sioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
18. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner for payment to the 
owner of a coal mine, an amount equal to the amount specified against the coal mine in the Schedule and 
shall also pay to the Commissioner such sums as may be due to the owner of a coal mine under section 9.  
(2) In addition to the sum referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall pay, in cash, to 
the Commissioner, such amount as may become due to the owner of a coal mine in relation to  
1[the period] during which the management of the coal mine remains ves ted in the Central Government  
2[, and simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum on such amount for the period commencing 
on the 1st day of July, 1975 and ending on the date of payment of su ch amount to the Commissioner].  
(3) A dep osit account shall be opened by the Central Government, in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account in the Publi c Account of India, and thereafter 
the said deposit account shall b e operated by the Commissioner.  
(4) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of each coal mine in relation 
to which payments have b een made to him under this Act.  
(5) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in  
sub-section ( 3) shall ensure to the benefi t of the owners of coal mines 2[and shall also be payable to the 
Commissioner in addition to the sum r eferred to i n sub -section ( 1)]. 
(6) References in this section to the owner of a coal mine shall, in relation to a group of coal mine s 
specified in the Schedule, be construed as references to the owner of that group of coal mines.  
19. Statement of accounts in respect of the period of management by the Central Government,  
etc.—(1) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, shall cause the books 
in relation to each coal mine, the management of which has vested in it under the Coal Mines (Taking  
Over of Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), to be closed and balanced as on the date immediately 
before the appointed day, and shall cause a statement of accounts, as on that day, to be prepared, within 
such time, in such form and in such manner as may be  prescribed, in relation to each such mine in respect 
of the transactions effected by it during the period for which the management of such c oal mine remained 
vested in it:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 11, for “any period, after the appointed day,” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 57 of 1986, s . 15 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  12 
 Provided that where two or more coal mines were owned, before the commencement of t his Act, by 
the same owner, a consolidated statement of accounts may be prepared for all the coal mines owned by 
such owner.  
(2) All amounts received by the Central Government or the Government company after the closure of 
such accounts shall, where such a ccounts relate to transactions effected before the appointed day, be 
included in the said statement of accounts in respect of the coal mine to which the said receipt relates.  
(3) The Central Government or the Government company in which the right, title an d interest of coal 
mine stand vested shall be entitled to receive, up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other 
persons, any money, due to the coal mine, realised after the appointed day notwithstanding that the 
realisations pertain to a per iod prior to the appointed day:  
Provided that where such realisations have not been included in the statement of accounts as on the 
day immediately before the appointed day, a supplementary statement of accounts shall be prepared and 
furnished, at such interva ls as may be prescribed, by the Central Government or the Government 
company  to the owner of the coal mine.  
1[(4) The liabilities of the coal mine (not being liabilities arising out of advances made by the Central 
Government or the Government company), whi ch could not be discharged by the appointed day, may be 
discharged by the Central Government or the Government company up to the specified date out of the 
realisations effected before or after the appointed day or out of advances or borrowings made up to t he 
specified date and every payment so made shall be included in the statement of accounts as on the date 
immediately before the appointed day indicating therein the period in relation to which the payments were 
made and the payments so made shall not be c alled in question in any court:  
Provided that the liabilities in relation to the period prior to the appointed day, which have not been 
discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities of the owner of the coal mine.]  
(5) A copy of each statement of accounts prepared under this section shall be delivered by the Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, to the Comm issioner and also to the 
owner:  
Provided that where the number of owners is more than one, only one cop y of the statement of 
accounts shall be given to the owners for the benefit of all of them.  
(6) The statement of accounts prepared under this section shall be audited by a person who is 
qualified to be appointed as an auditor of a company under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956), and the auditor so appointed shall receive from the f unds of the coal mine, such remuneration as 
the Central Government may fix.  
(7) The audit of the statement of accounts shall be conducted in such manner as the  Central 
Government may direct.  
2[(8) The statement of accounts audited under sub -section ( 6) sha ll, unless the contrary is proved, be 
conclusive proof in respect o f every matter entered therein.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “statement of accounts ” means a statement in the 
form of receipts and payments, and does not include any state ment that may be prepared as a result of the 
closing and balancing of the books for the preparation of the profit and loss account and balance -sheet or 
any statement prepared in accordance with the normal commercial practice.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 16, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
2. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  13 
 1[19A. Val idation of certain collections .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2, as 
amended by section 10 of the Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978 (22 of 1978), 
any money collected by the Central Government or the Government company during the  period 
commencing on the appointed day and ending with the date specified under sub -section ( 3) of section 19 
shall be deemed to have been validly collected by the Central Government or the Government company, 
as the case may be, and any such money shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of section 19.  
(2) Any money collected as aforesaid shall not be called in question in any court of law.]  
20. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—2[(1)] Every person having a claim against the owner 
of a coal  mine shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days but not thereafter.  
3[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), claims in relation to a provident fund, 
pension fund, gratuity fund or any other fund established for the welfare of the persons employed by the 
owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines may be file d on behalf of the persons so employed by the 
Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner appointed by the Central Government under section 3C of the 
Coal Mines Provident Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948 (46 of 1948);  4[and claims in 
relation to  any other matter may be filed on behalf of all or any of the persons so employed or any group 
of such persons, by any Trade Union, registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926), or, 
where no such claim has been filed by any Trade Union, by the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) 
appointed by the Central Government or any officer subordinate to him;] and the claims so made shall be 
deemed to have been made by the persons having a claim against the owner of a coal mine or group of 
coal mine s: 
Prov ided that no such claim shall be made by the Coal Mine s Provident Fund Commissioner 4[or the 
Trade Union or the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or any officer subordinate to him,] in relation 
to a person who has already made a claim under sub -section ( 1).]  
5[(3) Where any claim, not being a claim which was time -barred on the 31st day of January, 1973, 
was preferred under sub -section ( 1) within the period specified therefor and was rejected merely on the 
ground that such claim was time -barred, such clai m shall be deemed not to have been rejected and the 
Commissioner shall restore on his file such claim and shall deal with it in the manner specified in  
section 23.]  
21. Priority of claims in relation to arrears of provident fund, etc .—(1) Every person employed 
by the owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines may make a claim to the Commissioner to the effect 
that the sums deducted under sub -section ( 4) of section 7 of the Coal Mines (Taking Over of 
Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), are not sufficien t to meet fully the amount of arrears due to him, on 
the appointed day within the meaning of that Act, from the owner of such coal  mine or group of coal 
mines, — 
(a) in relation to a provident fund, pension fund, gratuity fund or any other fund established for 
the welfare of the persons employed by the owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines, or  
(b) as wages,  
and that a sum equal to the deficiency may be recovered from the amount specified in the Schedule 
against the owner of such coal mine or group of coal mines.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of  1978, s. 12 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
2. Section 20 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 41  of 1973, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
5. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1975).   14 
 (2) Where a claim is made under sub -section ( 1), the Commissioner shall determine the extent of the 
deficiency and shall, after such determination, deduct in the first instance, out of the amount paid to him 
under section 8, a sum equal to the extent of the deficiency determined  by him under this sub -section.  
(3) All sums deducted by the Commissioner under sub -section ( 2) shall, in accordance with such rules 
as may be made under this Act, be credited by the Commissioner to the relevant fund or b e paid to the 
persons to whom such sums are due, and on such credit or payment, the liability of the owner in respect of 
all the amounts of arrears due as af oresaid shall stand discharged.  
(4) The deductions made by the Commissioner under sub -section ( 2) shall have priority over all other 
debts, whether secured or unsecured.  
22. Priori ty in relation to other claims .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in section 21, every 
secured debt due from the owner of a coal mine or group of coal mines shall have priority over all other 
debts and shall be paid in accordance with the rights and inte rests of the secured creditors.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, there shall be 
paid in priority to all other unsecured debts, not being the amounts advanced by the Central Government 
or the Custodian appointed under the Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973), 
for the  management of the coal mine, — 
(a) all sums due to the State Government i ncluding royalty an d dead rent;  
(b) all amounts due in respect of any compensation or liability for compensation under the 
Workmen ‟s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), in respect of the death or disablement of any 
employee of the coal mine unless such mine has, under such c ontract with insurers as mentioned in 
1[section 14] of the said Act, rights capable of being transferred to and vested in, the workmen; and  
(c) all sums deducted by the employer from the salary or wages of any workman or other 
employee for credit to any provident fund, or any other fund established for the welfare of the 
employees of the coal mine but not deposited to the credit of the said fund . 
(3) The debts specified in sub -section ( 2) shall rank equally among themselves and be paid in full, 
unless the assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal propo rtions and be 
paid accordingly.  
23. Ad mission or rejection o f claims .—(1) The Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before 
which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be excluded from the benefit of the disburs ement 
made by the Commissioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ‟ notice of the date so  fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of the daily newspaper in the English language and one issue of the daily newspaper in the regional 
language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant 
to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disburse ments made by t he Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the owner of the coal mine an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a 
reasonable opportunity of being hear d, in writing, admit or reject  the claim in whole or in part.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “section 15” (w.e.f. 26-11-1978).  15 
 (5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of t he following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any wit ness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material  object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the recep tion of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the e xamination of witness.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall  be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Crimin al 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).  
1[(6A) The Commissione r may, on receipt of a claim, — 
(a) elect to settle the claim himself; or  
(b) transfer the claim for s ettlement to a person authorised in this behalf under su b-section ( 2) of 
section 17; or  
(c) withdraw the claim from the person referred to in clause ( b) and either settle the claim himself 
or transfer it for disposal to any other person who has been authorised in this behalf under  
sub-section (2) of section 17.]  
(7) 2[A claimant or owner who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may pref er an 
appeal, within a period of sixty days from the date of the decision,] to the principal civil court of original 
jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdic tion the coal mine is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High  Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court for the State in which the coal mine is situated, and such appeal 
shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Jud ges of that High Court:  
1[Provided further that any  appeal which has not been preferred before the date on which the Coal 
Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978 (22 of 1978), receives the assent of the President, 
shall be preferred within a period  of sixty days from such date.]  
3[23A. Application  of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act .—The provisions of sections 5 and 
12 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, so far as may be, appl y to appeals under section 23.]  
24. Disbursement of money by  the Commissioner to claimants .—Where, after meeting the claims 
admitted by him, of secured creditors , and unsecured creditors having priority under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 22, the total amount of claims of other unsecured creditors admitted by the Commissioner, does 
not exceed the to tal amount of the money credited to the account of a coal mine, every such admitted 
claim shall be paid in full and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner, but where such amount is 
insufficient to meet in full the total amount of the admitted clai ms, all such claims shall abate in equal 
propo rtions and be paid accordingly.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 14 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  
3. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  16 
 1[24A. Interest on admitted claims .—Notwithstanding any award, decree or order of any court, 
tribunal or other authority, passed before the appointed day, in relation to any coal  mine, where any 
amount is payable in respect of a claim admitted under this Act, the interest payable on such amount for 
any period after the appointed day shall be at such rate not exceeding the rate of interest accruing on any 
amount deposited by the Commissioner under section 18.]  
2[25. Recovery of excess payments made by C entral Government or Custodian .—Any amount in 
excess of payments over receipts in the statement of accounts prepared under section 19 shall be deemed 
to be an amount advanced by the Central Government or the Custodian, as the case may be, for the 
management of a coal mine during the period in which the management of such coal mine remained 
vested in the Central Government and the Central Government may make a claim to the Commissioner  
for such excess payment and such claim shall have priority over the claims of all other unsecured 
creditors of the coal mine, including those referred to in  sub-section ( 2) of section 22.  
Explanation .—In this section. “Custodian ” means the Custodian appoi nted under the Coal Mines 
(Taking Over of Manage ment) Act, 1973 (15 of 1973).]  
3[25A. Notice to owners of coal mines  and managing contractors, etc .—(1) After meeting the 
liabilities of persons whose claims have been admitted under this Act, the Commissione r shall notify, in 
such manner as he may think fit, the amount of money available with him and specify in such notification 
a date within which the owners of the coal mines, the managing contractors and the owners of any 
machinery, equipment or other prope rty which has vested in the Central Government or a Government 
company under this Act and which does not belong to the owners of the coal mines may apply to him f or 
payment.  
(2) Where any application is made under sub -section ( 1), the Commissioner shall, a fter satisfying 
himself as to the right of the applicant to receive the whole or any part of the amount, pay the amount to 
the person conc erned and in the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right of the person to 
receive the whole or any part of the amount, the Commissioner shall deal with the application in the 
manner specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 26.]  
26. Disbursement of amoun ts to the owners of coal mines .—(1) If out of the monies paid to him in 
relation to a coal mine or group of coal mines specified in the second column of the Schedule, there is a 
balance left after meeting the liabilities of all the secured and unsecured creditors, the Commiss ioner shall 
disburse such balance to the owner of such co al mine or group of coal mines.  
(2) Before making any payment to the owner of any coal mine or group of coal mines under  
sub-section ( 1), the Commissioner shall satisfy himself as to the right of su ch person to receive the whole 
or any part of such amount, and in the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right of the person 
to receive the whole or any part of the amount, referred to in sec tions 8 and 9, the Commissioner shall 
refer the ma tter to the court and make the disbursement in accordance with th e decision of the court.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the entries in the fourth column of the 
Schedule shall not be deemed to be conclusive as to the right, title  and interest of any person in relation to 
any coal mine specified in the corresponding entr ies in the second column of the Schedule and evidence 
shall be admissible to establish the right, title and interest of any person  in relation to such coal mine.  
(4) In relation to a coal mine the operations of which were, immediately before the taking over of the 
management of such coal mine under the Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973  
(15 of 1973), under the control of a managing contractor, the amou nt specified in the fifth column of the 
Schedule against such coal mine shall be apportioned between the owner of the coal mine and such 
managing contractor in such proportions as may be agreed upon by or between the owner and such 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978,  s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
2. Subs. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 17, for section 25 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 17 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  17 
 managing contra ctor, and  in the event of there being no such agreement, in such proportions as may be 
determined by the court on a reference made to it by the Commissioner.  
(5) Where any machinery, equipment or other property in a coal mine has vested in the Central 
Government or a Government company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property 
does not belong to the owner of such coal mine, the amount specified in the fifth column of the Schedule 
against such coal mine shall, on a reference made to it by the Com missioner, be apportioned by the court 
between the owner of such coal mine and the owner of such machinery, equipment or other property 
having due regard to the value of such machinery, equipment or other property on the appointed day.  
1[(6) Where the amou nt specified in the fifth column of the Schedule is relatable to a group of coal 
mines, the Commissioner shall have power to apportion such amount among the owners of such group, 
and in making such apportionment, the Commissioner shall have regard to the h ighest annual production 
in the coal mine during the three years immediatel y preceding the appointed day.]  
Explanation .—In this section, “court ”, in relation to a coal mine, means the principal civil court of 
original jurisdiction within the local limits o f whose jurisdic tion the coal mine is situated.  
27. Undisbursed o r unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed  or unclaimed for a period of 2[three years 
from the day on which the last order for disbursement was made], shall be transferred by the 
Commissioner to the general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money so 
transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the  person entitled to  such payment and shall 
be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being 
treated as an o rder for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. E ffect of this Act on other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything in  consistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any cour t, 
tribunal  or other authority.  
29. Contracts to cease to have effect  unless ratified by Government .—(1) Every contract entered 
into by the owner or occupier of any coal mine for any service, sale or supply and in force immediately 
before the appointed day shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and twenty days from the 
appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, in 
writing, by the Central Government and in ratifying such contract the Central Government  may make 
such alterations or modificatio ns therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government shall not omit to ratify a contract unless it is satisfied that such 
contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrim ental to the interests of the coal 
mine.  
(2) The Central Government shall not omit to ratify a contract or make any alteration or modification 
therein except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except aft er recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract.  
30. Penalties .—3[(1)] Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertaking of 
any coal mine referred to in the Schedule wrongfully withholds such property from the Central 
Government or the Government company, or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1986, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1973).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s.18, for “three years from the last day on which the disbursement was made” (w.e.f. 27-5-1978).  
3. Section 30 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 67 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  18 
 (b) wrongfully obtains po ssession of, or retains, any property forming part of the undertaking of 
any coal mine specified in the Schedule or wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central 
Government or any person specified by that Government, any document relating to such c oal mine 
which may be in his possession, custody or control or fails to deliver to the Custodian any assets, 
books of account, registers or other documents in his custody relating to the coal mine in respect of 
which a C ustodian has been appointed, or  
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property of any coal mine or prefers any claim under this 
Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false or grossly inaccurate,  
shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten  thousand rupees, or with both.  
1[(2) Any person who engages, or causes any other person to be engaged, in winning or mining coal 
from the whole or part of any land in respect of which no valid prospecting licence or mining lease or 
sub-lease is in force, shall be punishable  2[with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years 
and also with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees .]]  
31. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company  as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he prov es that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other  officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
32. Mining companies n ot to be wound up by the court .—No proceeding for the winding up of a 
mining co mpany, the right, title and interest in relation to the coal mine owned by which have vested in 
the Central Government or a Government company under this Act or for the appointment of a receiver in 
respect of the business of the company, shall lie in any c ourt except with the con sent of the Central 
Government.  
33. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act may also be exercised by any person or persons as may b e 
specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision o f the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1978, s. 19, for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -5-1978).  19 
 34. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely :— 
(a) the manner in which the coal mine shall be managed by a Gov ernment company or a 
Custodian;  
1[(aa) the coal mines or coal bearing areas and their location, the minimum size of the coal mine 
or coal bearing areas, and such other conditions which may b e necessary for the purpose of coal 
mining operations including mining for sale by a company under sub -section ( 2) of section 3A.]  
(b) the manner in which monies in any provident or other fund referred to in section 15 shall be 
dealt w ith; 
(c) the  form and manner in which the statement of accounts referred to i n section 19 shall be 
prepared;  
(d) any other matter which is required to  be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may b e; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under 
that rule.  
35. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the C entral Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of t his Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 2 015, s. 28 and Schedule IV (w.e.f. 21 -10-2014).  20 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 3, 8 and 18)  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
ASSAM  
Jeypore Coal field 
1. Bimalpore ... Post Office Sibsagar  Bimalpore Collieries Limited, Post Office, 
Sibsagar.  4,000  
2. Dilli …  Post Office Banhat, 
Sibasagar . Dilli Collieries Association Limited, Post 
Office Tinsukia.  4,000  
3. Jeypore ... Post Office Namrup  Jeypore Collieries (Private) Limited, Post 
Office Namrup.  75,000  
Makum Coalfield, Lakhimpur  
4. Barago lai ... Post Office Baragolai  Assam Railways and Trading Company 
Limited Margherita.  *48,84,000  
5. Ledo ...  Post Office Ledo  Assam Railways and Trading Company 
Limited, Margherita.  Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 4.  
6. Namdang ...  Post Office Baragolai  Assam Railways and Trading Company 
Limited Margherita.  4,000  
7. Tipong ...  Post Office Ledo  Assam Railways and Trading Company 
Limited, Margherita.  Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 4.  
Mikir Coalfield  
8. Koilajan ...  Post Office Koilajan  Koilajan Collieries Limited, Post Office 
Dimapur, Naga Hills.  38,000  
9. Seelvata ...  Post Office Diphu, 
District Mikir Hills . Hira Padda Dipali Dutta, Shillong.  4,000  
BIHAR  
Daltongani Hutar Coalfield, Palamau  
10. Hutar ...  Post Office Hutar 
Colliery . Sone Valley Portland Cement Company 
Limited, Post Office Japla, Palamau.  2,98,000  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. Nos. 5 and 7.  21 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
11. Jagaldaga ...  Post Office Latehar 
Palamau . Shri S.K. Dutta, 23 -P/1A, Mani cktola 
Main Road , Calcutta -54. 4,000  
12. Rajhara ...  Post Office Rajhara 
Colliery . Ram Saran Das & Brothers, 18, Netaji 
Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. 6,67,000  
East Bokaro Coalfield Ha zaribagh  
13. East Bokaro ...  Post Office Pichri  East Bokaro Collieries Company 
(Private) Limited, Post Office Pichri . 15,000  
14. New Selected 
Dhori ...  Post Office Bermo  Gopal N. Singh, Krishna N. Singh, 
Govind N. Singh, Shyam N. Singh, 
Girdher N. Singh.  4,80,000  
Nominated Owner:  
      Shri Bhuneshwar Goswami, Post Office 
Bermo , Hazaribagh.    
15. Pure Dhori ...  Post Office Tantri  Pure Dhori Collier y Company, Post 
Office Tantri, Hazaribagh.  29,200  
16. Selected Kargali 
... Post Office Pichri  Vaydanji J -Dave, Post Office Box 8, 
Jharia . 1,73, 000 
Hurrah Coalfield (Santhal Pargana)  
17. Hurrah  
Block 1A ...  Fulberia , Post  
Office Mahagama . Ideal Mining Combine, Post Office 
Mahagama , District Santhal Pargana.  5,000 
18. Hurrah  
Block 1B ...  Post Office 
Mahagama  Dwarka Prasad Marwari, Post Office 
Mahagama, District Santhal Pargana.  4,000  
19. Bergo ...  Post Office Denro 
(Santhal Pargana) . Khudiram Seal, Post Office Dhanro 
(Santhal Pargana).  4,000  
20. Churi J ilwari ...  Post Office Godda  Fulchand Ram, Post Office Godda 
(Santhal Pargana).  4,000  
21. Lalmatia ...  Post Office 
Mahagama  Messrs. S. P. Coal Enterprises, Post 
Office Mahagama , District Santhal 
Pargana . 18,000  
22. Paharpur ...  Post Office 
Mahagama  S. P. Coal Enterprises, Post Office 
Mahagama (Santhal Pargana).  7,000  
23. Paul‟s Chilgo ...  Post Office  
Amrapara (Santhal 
Pargana)  Paul Brothers, Post Office Jamtara  
(Santhal Pargana).  4,000  
  22 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount  (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
24. Simlong ...  Post Office Dhamni  H.N. Bhagar, Post Office Barhait (Santhal 
Pargana).  4,000  
Jainty Coolfield s (Santhal Pargana)  
25. Bhawanipur ...  Post Office Chitra  Sidheswari Prasad, N. Deo, Post Office 
Chitra.  13,000  
26. Central  
Saharpuri ...  Post Office Chitra  M.N. Singh and S.S. Singh, Post Office 
Chitra (Santhal Pargana).  15,000  
27. Chatkam ...  Post Office Dhamni 
(Santhal Pargana) . H.N. Bhagat, Post Office Barhait (Santhal 
Pargana).  4,000  
28. Chitra Central ...  Post Office Chitra  B.N. Mandal and Company, Post Office 
Chitra (Santhal Pargana).  7,000  
29. East Damagorah 
... Post Office Kukraha  R.N. Singh, Post Office Saroth . 15,000  
30. Gandharb ...   Shri Tibriwal, Post Office Deoghar.  4,000  
31. Girija ...  Post Office Chitra  Shri M.K. Singh, Post Office Chitra (San -
thal Pargana).  4,000  
32. Haripur ...  Post Office  
Mahagama  Purushottam Das, Post Office Mahagama 
(Santhal Pargana).  4,000  
33. Harinsingha 
(Coal Pit). ...  Village & Post Office 
Dumka (Santhal  
Pargana)  Biswanath Himathsingha, Village and 
Post Office Dumka (Santhal Pargana).  4,000  
34. Jayanti Central ...    Shri O.P. Santhalia, 16, India  Exchange 
Place, Calcutta -1. 54,000  
35. Jayanti Khas ...    Shri Saligram Prasad Singh, Post Office 
Madhupur.  4,000  
36. Jilwari No. 7 ...    Shri Jagannath Prasad Bhagat, Post Office 
Saraunri.  4,000  
37. Mondal ‟s 
Damgora East 
Sec. ...  Post Office Chitra 
(Santhal Pargana)  C.C. Mondal, Post Office Dishergarh, 
Burdwan.  15,000  
38. Mondal ‟s 
Damgora West ...  Post Office Chitra 
(Santhal Pargana)  A.K. Bhaduri, Post Office Chitra (Santhal 
Pargana).  4,000  
39. North Saharjuri ...    Shri A.P. Singh and others, Post  Office 
Kukraha.  7,000  
40. Patrika ...  Post Office Chitra  Shri N.K. Singh, Post Office Chitra 
(Santhal Pargana).  6,000  23 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
41. Phulberia ...    Shri M.P. Marwari, Post Office 
Mahajama.  5,000  
42. Saharjuri ...  Post Office Kukraha  M.G. Mishra, Post Office Kukraha.  17,000  
43. Tarabad  
Boothari ...  Post Office  
T.K. Gram  Shri Durga Jamjuri Coal Company 
(Private) Limited, Post Office Barakar, 
District Burdwan.  4,000  
44. Tulsi Dabor ...  Post Office Chitra  Nalini Kumar Singh, Post Office Chitra 
(Santhal Pargana).  19,000  
Jharia Coalfield  
45. Agarwal G odhur 
... Post Office Kusunda  Agarwalla Godhur Coal Company, Post 
Office Kusunda, Dhanbad.  95,000  
46. Baramessia 
Sikarichuck ...  Post Office Tundoo  Thakur Rama Avtar Singh, Post Office 
Tundoo Dhanbad.  49,000  
47. Baherabera 
Chuck ...  Post Office Tundoo  Thakur Gupteswar Prasad Singh, Post 
Office Tundoo, Dhanbad.  45,000  
48. Barwabera ...  Post Office Nawagarh  B. Trigunai and Brothers, Post Office 
Nawa garh, Dhanbad.  73,000  
49. Barora ...  Post office Nawagarh  Barora Coal Concern, Post Office 
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  4,26,000  
50. Bastacolla ...  Post Office Dhansar  Bastacolla Coal Company Limited, Post  
Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.  23,32,000  
51. Basudeva „A‟ 
(Narayan seam) 
... Post Office Khas 
Jinagora . A.B. Jugdutt and Company, Jharia.  9,000  
52. Bera Colliery ...  Post Office Jharia  Bera Colliery Company, Post Office 
Jharia.  12,28,000  
53. Bright Kusunda 
... Post Office Dhansar  Bright Kusunda Colliery Company, Post 
Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.  4,000  
54. Bright Tasra ...  Post Office Sindri  Seth Jharumal, Post Office Sindri, 
Dhanbad.  18,000  
55. Basudev „A‟ ... Post Office Khas 
Jeenagora  R.B. Jugdutt and Company, Jharia.  17,000  
56. Banerjee ‟s 
Dobary ...  Post Office Jharia  S.B. Banerjee and Sons, Post Office 
Jharia.  4,000  
57. Central 
Ganeshpur ...  Post Office Nawagarh  Shyamlal Sunda and Company, Post 
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  41,000  
  24 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the  mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
58. Central Kendwadih 
... Post Office  
Nawagarh  Narsingh Harji, Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhanbad.  2,88,000  
59. Central Kessurga rh 
... Post Office  
Nawagarh  Bhairobu x Agarwalla, Post Office 
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  80,000  
60. Central Baihardih ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  K.K. Chandra & Brothers, Post Office 
Katrasgarh.  76,000  
61. Central Sinidih ...  Post Office Tundoo  Srimati Manjul a Devi, Post Office 
Tundoo.  4,000  
62. Central Golukdih ...  Post Office Jharia  Srimati Jyotsna Devi, “Nilachal ”, Post 
Office Sitarampur, B urdwan.  44,000  
63. Central Dobary ...  Post Office Jharia  Srimati Jayanti Devi, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  42,000  
64. Central Keshalpur 
... Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Moolji N. Cholia, Post Office 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  1,01,000  
65. Central Godhur  ... Post Office Kusunda  Central Godhur Colliery Company, Post 
Office Kusunda, Dhanbad  42,000  
66. Central Jayramdih 
... Post Office  
Nawagarh  Paul Brothers, Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhan bad. 49,000  
67. Central Tasra ...  Post Office  Sindri  Central Tasra Coal Company Limited 
Post, Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  52,000  
68. Central  
Angarpathra ...  Post Office Sijua  Central Angarpathra Colliery Company, 
Post Office Sijua, Dhanbad.  99,000  
69. Central Bansjora. ...  Post Office Sijua  Khas Sijua Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  1,13,000  
70. Chandore ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  R.N. Singh and others, Post Office 
Katrasgarh.  67,00  
71. Chandore  Post Office Sijua  D.P. Agarwalla, Jharia, Dhanbad.  16,000  
72. Central Sulunga ...  Post Office Khas 
Jeenagora  Purushottampur Colliery Company 
(Private) Limited, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  4,98,000  
73. Central Chandore ...    Srimati Jyotsna Devi, Post Office Jharia 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
74. Damra Khas ...  Post Office  
Nawagarh  Sheikh Brothers and Company, Post 
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  56,000  
  25 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
75. Damra Pinalgoria ...  Post Office  
Nawagarh  Lala Mohinder Paul, Post Office 
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  35,000  
76. Diamond 
Phularitand ...  Post Office 
Kharkharee  Shyama Coal Company, Post Office 
Kharkharee.  63,000  
77. Dhansar ...  Post Office Dhansar  Pure Dhansar Coal Company, Post 
Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.  3,18,000  
78. Dhansar, NBH ...  Post Office Dhansar  Dhansar Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.  2,84,000  
79. East Benedih ...  Post Office  
Nawagarh  East Bengal Coal Concern (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhanbad.  1,09,000  
80. East Dharmaband ...  Post Office  
Nawagarh  East Dharmaband Colliery Company , 
Post Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  22,000  
81. East Khas Baihardih 
... Post Office Tundoo  East Khas Baihardih Coal Company, 
Post Office Tundoo  1,00,000  
82. East Mandra ...  Post Office  
Nawagarh  Bharat Coal Company, Post Office 
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  55,000  
83. East Bastacolla ...  Post Office Dhansar  East Bastacolla Colliery Company, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  1,32,000  
84. East Busseriya ...  Post Office Kusunda  East Busseriya Colliery Company 
(Private) Limited, Shanti Bhawan, 
Dhanbad.  10,08,000  
85. East Sinidih ...  Post Office Tundoo  P. Chanchani and Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Tundoo.  60,000  
86. East Kujama ...  Post Office Jharia  East Kujama Colliery Company, Post 
Office, Sijua, Dhanbad.  43,000  
87. East Keshalpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Shri Baijnath Chowdhury and others, 
Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  40,000  
88. East Kendwadih ...  Post Office Dhansar  East Kendwadih Coal Company Limited, 
Kusunda.  43,000  
89. East Lohabati ...  Post Office 
Ramnagargarh  East Murulidih Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  1,48,000  
90. East Tetulmari ...  Post Office Sijua  East Tetulmari Colliery Company 
Limited, Sijua.  4,000  
91. East Murulidih ...  Post Office Mohuda  P.K. Lalla, Post Office Kharkharee, 
District Dhanbad.  4,000  
  26 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
92. East Godhur ...  Post Office 
Kusunda  East Godhur Colliery Company 
(Private) Limited, Post Office 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
93. Golden Jeenagora ...  Post Office Khas 
Jeenagora.  Salunga Collieries (Private) Limited, 
Post Office Dhanbad. .  7,64,000  
94. Ghutway  ... Post Office 
Karmatand  Ghutway Colliery Company, Dugda, 
District Hazaribagh.  4,000  
95. Golden Sinidih ...  Post Office 
Tundoo  Hit Narayan Singh, Post Office 
Tundoo, Dhanbad.  9,000  
96. Ideal Keshalpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Ideal Keshalpur Colliery  Company, 
Post Office Katrasgarh.  39,000  
97. Jogidih ...  Post Office 
Tundoo  P.K. Lalla and Brothers, Post Office 
Tundoo, Dhanbad.  68,000  
98. Joyramdih ...  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  Joyramdih Coal Company, Post 
Office Nud khurkee, Dhanbad.  *2,42,000  
99. Kendwadih 
(Mondal) ...  Post Office  
Nawagarh  B.N. Mondal and Company, Post 
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  55,000  
100. Khas Muraidih ...  Post Office Tundoo  U.N. Lala, Post Office Tundoo,  
Dhanbad  4,000  
101. Khas Sinidih ...  Post Office 
Nawagarh.  Gyan Chand Sunda and Company, 
Jharia.  75,000  
102. Khodo Valley ...  Post Office 
Nawagarh  Jiwanlal Sunda, Jora Phatak, Dhanbad.  60,000  
103. Khas Bansjora ...  Post Office Bansjora  Khas Bansjora Colliery Company, Post 
Office Bansjora, Dhanbad.  1,70,000  
104. Khas Bahiardih 
... Post Office Tundoo  Khas Bahiardih Coal Company, Post 
Office Tundoo  33,000  
105. Katras New ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Shrimati Kashi bai, Post Office 
Katrasgarh  96,000  
106. Kuya  and Khas 
Kuya ...  Post Office Jharia  Kuya Colliery Company (Priv ate) 
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  4,33,000  
107. Khas Katrasgarh 
... Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Mustafi and Company, Post Office 
Katrasbazar, Dhanbad.  20,000  
108. Khas Godhur ...  Post Office Kusunda  Khas Godhur Coal Company, Post 
Office Kusunda.  48,000  
109. Khas Kusunda ...  Post Office Kusunda  Khas Kusunda Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 40, Strand Road, Calcutta - 1. 3,25,000  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 156 and 210.  27 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
110. Karmatand ...  Post Office 
Karmatand  Sri Ram Coal Company, Post Office 
Karmatand.  1,63,000  
111. Khas Joyramdih ...  Post Office 
Nawagarh  Khas Joyramdih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  *1,12,000  
112. Khas Matigora ...  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  Khas Matigora Colliery Company, Post 
Office Nudkhurkee, Dhanbad.  4,000  
113. Kalisthan 
Angarpathra ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Kalisthan Angarpathra Coal Company, 
Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  43,000  
114. Khas Sijua ...  Post Office Sijua  Khas  Sijua Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  5,42,000  
115. Khas Kandra ...  Post Office Sindri  Nasib Singh Constituted Attorney (Owner 
-Sukla Chandra Prava Debi and Sons, 
Post Office Sindri).  4,000  
116. Khas Pandedih ...  Post Office  Sijua  The Khas Pandedih Colliery Company, 
Post Office Sijua, Dhanbad.  4,000  
117. Keshalpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Seo Shankar Bole, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
118. Liberty ...  Post Office Jharia  Agarwal Mining Company (Private) 
Limited, Post  Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  1,18,000  
119. Laxmi Salanpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  L.B. Singh and Company, Post Office 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  4,000  
120. Mandra South 
Barora ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Bijoy Narain Singh and Jagdeo Prasad 
Singh, Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  35,000  
121. Model Muraidih... 
... Post Office 
Nawagarh  R.K. Pande y, Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhanbad.  6,000  
122. Manaitand ...  Post Office  
Dhanbad  Manaitand Colliery Company, Post Office 
Dhansar, Dhanbad.  1,11,000  
123. Majhlitand ...  Post Office Tundoo  Sri Pritish Lalla, Post Office Tundoo.  51,000  
124. Model Joyramdih 
... Post Office 
Nawagarh  Paul Brothers, Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
125. Model 
Angarpa thra ...  Post Office Sijua  B.L. Agarwalla, Post Office Govindpur, 
Dhanbad.  1,10,000  
126. Modern Sudamdih 
... Post Office  
Pathardih  Modern Sudamdih Colliery Company, 
Post Office Pathardih, Dhanbad.  4,000  
127. New Kendwadih 
... Post Office 
Nawagarh  K.P. Lall & Sons , Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhanbad.  49,000  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. No. 148.  28 
 Sl. 
No. Name of  the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
128. New Muraidih ...  Post Office 
Kharkharee  Messrs  Kamalendu & Subhendu 
Banerjee, 420, Shyampukur Street 
Calcutta.  4,000  
129. North & Khas 
Muraidih ...  Post Office 
Nawagarh  Kaluram Heliwal, Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
130. North Baramossia 
... Post Office  
Tundoo  North Baramossia Coal Company, Post 
Office Dhansar, Dhanbad.  60,000  
131. North Tundoo  
Khas  ... Post Office 
Katrasgarh  R.L. Aggarwala,  Post Office Katrasgarh  4,000  
132. North Bhuggatdih 
... Post Office  
Dhansar  Srimati Narmada Bala Gupta, Sri Dina 
Nath Agarwal and Bansdo Prasad 
Agarwala, Post Office Jharia Dhanbad.  1,29,000  
133. Nichitpur ...  Post Office  
Bansjora  Nichitpur Coal Company (Pvt.) Limited, 
7 Manoharpukar Road , Calcutta -26. 3,03,000  
134. North Sinidih ...  Post Office  
Tundoo  Sankarlall Kejarilall, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  1,65,000  
135. New Golakdih ...  Post Office 
Govindpur  Biswanath Agarwalla, Post Office 
Govindpur, Dhanbad.  14,000  
136. North Golukdih ...  Post Office  
Baliapur  Kishanlall Ranjelall, Post Office 
Baliapur, Dhanbad.  1,41,000  
137. Narayanpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Srimati Naraini Devi, Post Office 
Katrasgarh.  1,38,000  
138. North Akashkinari 
... Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Khimji Dossa and Company, Post Office 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  2,17,000  
139. North 
Dharmaband ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Kunverji Kalyanji, Post Office 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  44,000  
140. North Tentuliya ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Debram Ramji , Post Office Katrasgarh  3,26,000  
141. North Dobari ...  Post Office Jharia  Sahana Coal Company, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  1,44,000  
142. North & West 
Ghanuadih ...  Post Office Jharia  North & West Ghanuadih Colliery 
Company, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  6,64, 000 
143. New Katras ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  New Katras Coal Company, Post Office 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  41,000  
144. New Salanpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Madhu Lachman & Sons, Post Office 
Katrasgarh.  6,000  
145. North Keshalpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  North Keshalpur Colliery Company 
(Private) Limited, Post Office Katrasgarh, 
Dhanbad.  12,35,000  29 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
146. North Godhur ...  Post Office Kusunda  North Godhur Colliery Company, Post 
Office Kusunda, Dhanbad.  4,000  
147. North Loyabad ...  Post Office Bansjora  North Loyabad Coal Company, Post 
Office Bansjora, Dhanbad.  3,89,000  
148. North Kessurgarh 
... Post Office 
Nadkhurkee  Nandalall Shaha & others, Post Office 
Nawagarh.  Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 111.  
149. Nudkhurkee ...  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  M.B. Roy and Brothers, Post Office 
Nudkhurkee.  3,57,000  
150. National Tasra ...  Post Office  Sindri  Kailas hram Khanna, Post Office Sindri, 
Dhanbad.  13,000  
151. New Angarpathra 
... Post Office 
Katra sgarh New Angarpathra Colliery Company, 
Post Office Katrasgarh.  1,08,000  
152. New Pandedih ...  Post Office Sijua  New Pandedih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Jharia.  10,000  
153. North & North  
East Angarpathra  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  North Angarpathra Coal Company, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  72,000  
154. North Tetulmari...  Post Office Sijua  North Tetulmari Colliery Company, Post 
Office Sijua, Dhanbad.  8,89,000  
155. New Busserya  Post Office  
Bansjora  New Busserya Coal Company, Post 
Office Sijua, Dhanbad.  11,000  
156. New Joyramdih  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  Ajit Kumar Ch anda, Post Office 
Nudkhurkee.  Amount included 
in the amount 
speci fied against 
Sl. No. 98.  
157. North Gondudih. 
... Post Office  
Kusunda  North Gondudih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Kusunda.  4,000  
158. New Aukland 
Colliery ...  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  Sri Sankar Sen, Post Office Nudkhurkee, 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
159. New Dobary ...  Post Office Jharia  New Dobary Coal Company, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  4,000  
160. New Phularitand. 
... Post Office 
Nawagarh  New Phularitand Colliery Company, Post 
Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  4,000  
161. New Kunji ...  Post Office Mohuda  Mrs. B. Kaul, Tower House, Dhanbad.  4,000  
  30 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
162. New Tasra ...  Post Office Sindri  New Tasra Coal Company, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  4,000  
163. Pure Barora ...  Post Office Nawagarh  N. Sahai, Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhanbad.  1,60,000  
164. Pure Benedin ...  Post Office Nawagarh  Doaba Coal Company (Private) Limited, 
Sunda House, Joraphatak Road, Dhanbad.  11,000  
165. Pure Dharmaband 
... Post Office Katrasgarh  B.N. Jagdeo Prasad Singh , Post Office 
Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  17,000  
166. Pure Ganeshpur ...  Post Office Nawagarh  Pure Ganeshpur Colliery Company, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  1,14,000  
167. Pure Nichitpur ...  Post Office Bansjora  Pure Nichitpur Colliery Company,  Post 
Office Bansjora, Dhanbad.  58,000  
168. Pure Sinidih ...  Post Office Tundoo  Thakur Ram Avtar Singh, Post Office 
Tundoo, Dhanbad.  4,000  
169. Pure Suderaidih ...  Post Office Tundoo  Thakur G.P. Singh, Post Office Tundoo, 
Dhanbad.  30,000  
170. Pure Selected 
Golakdih ...  Post Office Jharia  Pure Selected Golakdih Colliery 
Company, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  93,000  
171. Pure Bhuggatdih 
... Post Office Jharia  Pure Bhuggatdih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  1,05,000  
172. Pure Salanpur ... Post Office  
Katrasgarh  G.V. Modi (Receiver) , Post Office Jharia.  44,000  
173. Pinalgoria ...  Post Office  
Nawagarh  East Kessurgarh Colliery Company, Post 
Office Nawagarh.  26,000  
174. Pure Damoda ...  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  Pandit Ram Bha ju Upadhya and 
Company, Post Office Nudkhurkee.  2,10,000  
175. Pure Joyramdih ...  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  Pure Joyramdih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Nudkhurkee, Dhanbad.  1,24,000  
176. Pure Selected 
Bansjora ...  Post Office Sijua  H.C. Bhutani, Post Office S ijua, Dhanbad.  4,56,000  
177. Pure Selected 
Tetulmari ...  Post Office Sijua  Pure Selected Tetulmari Colliery 
Company Limited, Post Office Sijua, 
Dhanbad.  45,000  
178. Pure Golakdih  ... Post Office Jharia  Pure Golakdih Coal Company, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  80,000  
179. Pathergoria ...  Post Office Mohuda  Bharat Mining Corporation, 9, Old Court 
House Street, Calcutta.  4,000  
  31 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
180. Pure Bansjora ...  Post Office Sijua  Madanlal Baswatia, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
181. Pure Chandore ...    The West Chandore Colliery Company, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  4,000  
182. Ramgarh Jharia ...  Post Office  
Karmatand  Ramgarh Jharia Colliery Company, Post 
Office Karmatand, Dhanbad.  1,64,000  
183. Royal Tisra ...  Post Office Jharia  Royal Tisra Colliery Company, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  50,000  
184. Real Suda mdih  ... Post Office Pathardih  Madhab Sinha, Post Office Pathardih.  4,000  
185. Selected Mandra 
... Post Office Nawagarh  Selected Mandra Colliery Company, Post 
Office Nawagarh.  18,000  
186. Selected Muraidih 
... Post Office Nawagarh  Selected Muraidih Colliery Company, Jiwan 
Sadan, Dhanbad.  22,000  
187. South Barora ...  Post Office Nawagarh  D.P. Lall & Sons, Post Office Nawagarh, 
Dhanbad.  2,97,000  
188. Selected 
Govindpur ...  Post Office Katrasgarh  Selected Govindpur Coal Concern, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  42,000  
189. Selected 
Keshalpur ...  Post Office Katrasgarh  Selected Kes halpur Colliery Company, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  4,000  
190. Selected Godhu r ... Post Office Kusunda  Selected Godhur Coal Company, Post 
Office Kusunda Dhanbad.  91,000  
191. Sri God hur ... Post Office Kusunda  Katasaria Coal Company (Private ) Limited, 
Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  35,000  
192. South Loyabad ...  Post Office Bansjora  South Loyabad Coal Company, Post Office 
Bansjora, Dhanbad.  21,000  
193. Selected 
Sudhamdih ...  Post Office Sindri 
Institute  Selected Sudamdih Colliery Company , Post 
Office Sindri Institute, Dhanbad.  41,000  
194. Selected Jogta ...  Post Office Jharia  Selected Jogta Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  4,000  
195. South Muraidih ...  Post Office Katrasgarh  South Muraidih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  6,00 
196. Sudreadih ...  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  Sunda Shamlal, Post Office Nawagarh  4,000  
197. Selected 
Ghanuadih ...  Post Office Jharia  Selected Ghanuadih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  4,000  
198. Selected 
Joyrampur ...  Post Office Jharia  Selected Joyrampur Colliery Company 
Ananda Bha van, Post Office Jharia.  4,000  
  32 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
199. South Jamdiha ...  Post Office 
Nudkhurkee  Natwar lal Shamaldas and Company, Post 
Office Nudkhurkee.  4,000  
200. Sree Jagannath ...  Post Office Tundoo  North Baramessia Colliery Company 
Limited, Ashok Bagan, Post Office 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
201. Upper Mandra ...  Post Office  
Nawagarh  Upper Mandra Colliery Company, Post 
Office Nawagarh, Dhanbad.  92,000  
202. Upper Jeenagor a ... Post Office  
Jeenagorah  G.S. Atwal 243, Sector 9 /C, Chandigarh.  4,000  
203. Upper Jharia ...  Post Office Jharia  Upper Jharia Colliery Company, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  4,000  
204. Victory ...  Post Office Dhansar  United Mining Company Limited, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  9,17,000  
205. West Phu laritand 
... Post Office  
Nawagarh  West Phularitand Colliery Company, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  55,000  
206. West Jogidi h ... Post Office  
Katrasgarh  Bihar National Coal Company, Post Office 
Katrasgarh.  39,000  
207. West Katras ...  Post Office  
Katrasgarh  N.K. Bose and Brothers, West Katras 
Colliery, Post Office Katrasgarh.  1,22,000  
208. West Koiludih ...  Post Office  
Katrasgarh  West Koiludih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Katrasgarh.  1,08,000  
209. West Ramkanali ...  Post Office  
Katrasgarh  West Ramkanali Colliery Company, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, District Dhanbad.  13,82,000  
210. West Joyramdih ...  Post Off ice 
Nudkhurkee  A.K. Chandra, Post Office Nudkhurkee, 
Dhanbad.  Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 98  
211. West Angarpathra 
... Post Office Katrasgarh  West Angarpathra Colliery Company  
Limited, Post Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  1,30,000  
212. West Chandore ...  Post Office Sijua  West Chandore Colliery Company, Post 
Office Jharia, Dhanbad.  85,000  
213. West Mudidih ...  Post Office Sijua  Waliram Taneja Mines (Private) Limited, 
Post Office Sijua, Dhanbad.  14,39,000  
214. West & Sowaria 
Salanpur ...  Post Office Katrasgarh  M.P. and D.D. Agarwalla, Dhanbad Bazar, 
Dhanbad.  55,000  
  33 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
215. West Bhurangya. 
... Post Office Mohuda  P.K. Lalla, Post Office Kharkharee  4,000  
216. West Gobindpur. 
... Post Office 
Katrasgarh  West Gobindpur Coal Company, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  4,000  
217. West Keshalpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  West Keshalpur Colliery Company, Post 
Office Katrasgarh, Dhanbad.  4,000  
218. West Maheshpur 
... Post Office Tundoo  Sri Agarwalla Coal Company, Post 
Office Tundoo, Dhanbad.  4,000  
219. West Salanpur ...  Post Office 
Katrasgarh  Ganga Bisha n Mohandra, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  4,000  
Bihar - Raniganj  (Mugma Coalfield)  
220. Badjna ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Oriental Coal Company Limited, 25, 
Brabourne Road, Calcutta.  28,59,000  
221. Basumata ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  D.N. Chandra and Brothers, Post Office 
Nirshachati Dhanbad.  4,000  
222. Bhogkat ... Post Office Mugma  Banga Laxmi Coal Company, Post Office 
Mugma, Dhanbad.  5,000  
223. Chapapur ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  B.N. Dutta and others, Post Office 
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  25,000  
224. Central Shampu r 
... Post Office 
Nirshachati  A.K. Chandra and others, Post Office 
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  28,000  
225. Central Laikdih ...  Post Office Mugma  Central Laikdih Colliery Company, Post 
Office Mugma, Dhanbad.  4,000  
226. Chattabar ...    Messrs. New Chattabar Coal Company 
Limited, Post Office C hirkunda , District 
Dhanbad.  18,000  
227. Dahibari ...  Post Office Mugma  Dahibari Coal Company, Post Office 
Mugma.  7,50,100  
228. East Badjna ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  S.N. Chanda and Brothers, Post Office 
Nirshachati.  1,09,000  
229. East Kap asara ...  Post Office Mugma  Banga Laxmi Coal Company, Post Office 
Mugma, Dhanbad.  37,000  
230. East Kumardhubi 
... Post Office 
Chirkunda  Sri Laxmi Narain Trust, Post Office 
Jharia, Dhanbad.  7,15,000  
231. East Rajpura ...  Post Office Mugma  Rajpura Coal Company, Post Office 
Mugm a. 10,400  
232. East Shampur ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  Oriental Coal Company, Post Office 
Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.  16,000  34 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
233. Edgarcoor 
(Durgamata) ...  Post Office 
Chirkunda  Durgamata Coal Company, Post Office 
Chirkunda.  5,200  
234. Edgarcoor ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  Srimati Sankarben Patel, Post Office 
Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.  14,400  
235. East Palasia ...  Post Office Mugma  Shri K.K. Goswami Post Office Mugma, 
Dhanbad.  32,300  
236. Edgarcoor 
(Agarwalla) ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  B.R. Agarwalla and Company , Post 
Office Kumardhubi Dhanbad.  31,000  
237. Jamdohi 
Basantimata ...  Post Office Mugma  Jamdohi Coal Company, Post Office 
Mugma, Dhanbad.  4,43,800  
238. Jamburya 
(Selected 
Jamburya) ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  East Indian Coal Company Limited, 4 
Clive Row, Calcutta.  1,24,000  
239. Kalimata ...  Post Office Mugma  G.L. Dubey, Post Office Mugma, 
Dhanbad.  1,24,300  
240. Kapasara ...  Post Office Mugma  Bihar Co al Syndicate (Private) Limited,  
Post Office Mugma, Dhanbad.  65,300  
241. Khas Kalimati ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  Khas Kalimat i Coal Company, Post 
Office Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.  1,00,000  
242. Khas Nirsha ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Mohatta Brothers, 19, British Indian 
Street Calcutta -1. 2,73,000  
243. Khoodia ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Khoodia Coal Company, Post Office 
Nirshachati, Receiver Onkarmal 
Agarwalla, Post Office Barakar, 
Burdwan.  2,18,000  
244. Khas Badj na ... Post Office 
Nirshachati  Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 
Administrtive Office, Post Office Mor ia 
Colliery, Burdwan.  11,12,000  
245. Khas 
Brindabanpur ...  Post Office Mugma  Bal Krishna Coal Company, Post Office 
Barakar.  7,000  
246. Khas Edgarcoor ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  B.N. Mondal and L.L. Agarwall a, Post 
Office Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.  4,000  
247. Kooardih ...  Post Office Barakar  Banerjee and Company, Post Office 
Barakar.  1,29,000  
248. Lower Badjna ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Associated Laikdih Colliery Limited,  
18,Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.  7,52,000  
249. Lower Begunia ...  Post Office Mugma  Associated Laikdih Colliery Limited, 18, 
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.  4,000  
  35 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount  (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
250. Merah ...  Post Office 
Chirkunda  Raghunath Agarwalla, Post Office 
Chirkunda.  1,28,000  
251. Nayadanga ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  K.G. Saiji & Sons, Post Office Searsole 
Rajbari, Burdwan.  1,02,000  
252. Nirsha Khas ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Nirsha Khas Colliery (Private) Limited, 
Post Office Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan.  1,37,800  
253. North Badjna ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  North Badjna Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Ranaghat, Nadia.  *8,27,000  
254. North Laikdih ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  North Laikdih Coal Company, 22, Strand 
Road Calcutta.  2,17,000  
255. Oriental ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  Oriental Coal Company, Post Office 
Kumardhubi.  41,000  
256. Pure Laikdih ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Pure Laikdi  Colliery (Private) Limited, 
26A, Fern Road, Calcutta -19. 2,18,400  
257. Pure Mandman ...  Post Office Mugma  East Indian Coal Company Limited , 4, 
Clive Row, Calcutta.  1,46,000  
258. Pure Rajpura ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  Shrimati Sankarbe n Patel, Post Office 
Kumardhubi, Dhanbad.  79,000  
259. Pure Shampur ...  Post Office 
Nirsh achati  D. Mondal & Company , Post Office 
Nirshachati.  3,04,000  
260. Palasia ...  Post Office Mugma  K.K. Goswami, Post Office Mugma.  73,000  
261. Pure Hariajan ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  East Indian Coal Company Limited, 4, 
Clive Row, Calcutta.  78,000  
262. Pure Singhpur ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Satya Pal Kapoor, Kapoor Niwas, 
Dhanbad.  1,68,000  
263. Rajpura ...  Post Office  
Mugma  R.K. Coal Company, Barakar (West 
Bengal).  37,000  
264. Reliance ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  Reliance Coal Company, Post Office 
Kumardhubi, Dhanbad  1,30,000  
265. Ramkrishna ...  Post Office 
Chirkunda  P.N. Mukherjee, Post Office Chirkunda.  83,600  
266. Raj ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  D.N. Sen, Post Office Mugma, Dhanbad.  10,000  
267. Satyanarayan ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  Rurmal Agarwal, Post Office 
Stayanarayan Colliery, Kumardhubi  55,700  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. No. 277.  36 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
268. Shampur ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Khas Shampur Coal Company, Post 
Office Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  2,51,000  
269. Shampur ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  The Kamala Coal C ompany, Post Office 
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  17,400  
270. South Marma  ... Post Office  
Mugma  Guljarilal Agarwalla, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  29,800  
271. Shri Durgamata ...  Post Office  
Mugma.  J.N. Garai & others, Post Office 
Chirkunda.  81,700  
272. Shri Gopinathpur ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Srimati Mahamaya Devi, Post  Office 
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  3,23,400  
273. Shri Lakhmimata. 
... Post Office 
Chirkunda  J.K. Garai & Company, Post Office 
Mugma, Dhanbad.  1,55,000  
274. Sudarshan  
Shampur ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  K.L. Bhambri & Company, Post Office 
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  1,07,800  
275. Shri Raghunathji ...  Post Office 
Chirkunda  Shri Raghunathji Coal Company, Post 
Office Chirkunda . 1,13,000  
276. Selected Fatka ...  Post Office  
Nirsha chati  Shri Krishna Colliery Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Kumardhubi, 
Dhanbad.  1,13,000  
277. South Badjna ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  South Badjna Coal Company, Post 
Office Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  Amount      
included in the 
amount specified 
against SL. No. 
253. 
278. Shampur ...  Post Office  
Mugma  The Durga Coal Company, Post Office 
Mugma . 39,000  
279. Selected Bhaljori ...  Post Office  
Dhanbad  Selected Bhaljori Colliery Company 
(Private) Limited, Post Office 
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  4,000  
280. Selected Laikdih ...  Post Office 
Govindpur  Satya Narayan Agarwala & Partners, 
Post Office Nirshachati Dhanbad.  8,000  
281. South East Badjna 
... Post Office 
Nirshachati  J.K. Banerjee & others, Post Office 
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  4,000  
282. Tewari ‟s Beldanga 
Khas ...  Post Office  
Churulia  M/s. S.C. Tewari & others Post Office 
Parsundi , District Birbhum.  4,000  
283. Upper M ehtadih ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  East Indian Coal Company, 4 Clive 
Row, Calcutta -1. 1,69,000  
  37 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
284. West Barakar ...  Post Office 
Kumardhubi  Dinendra nath Das, Post Office 
Kumardhubi.  4,000  
285. West Barakar ...  Post Office Mugma  Bihar Fire Bricks and Potteries Limited, 
22 Strand Road, Calcutta - 1. 15,000  
286. West Chanch ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  West Chanch Coal Company, Post 
Office Barakar.  8,000  
287. West Laikdih ...  Post Office Mugma  West Laikdih Col Company, 152, B.K. 
Pal Avenue, Calcutta -5. 64,200  
288. West Rajpura  Post Office Mugma  Kalyaneshwari Coal Company, Post 
Office Mugma,  Dhanbad.  8,000  
289. West Shampur ...  Post Office 
Nirshachati  Beharilal Agarwalla, Post Office 
Nirshachati, Dhanbad.  4,000  
Karanpura Coalfields  
290. Ara ...  Post Office Kuju  North Ramgarh Colliary Company 
(Private) Limited, 8, Deodar Street, 
Calcutta -19. 6,87,000  
291. Banwar ...  Post Office Mandu  Raghunath Bhagat, Hazaribagh  4000  
292. Churi ...  Post Office Ray  United Karanpura Colliery Company 
(Private) Limited, 91, Stephen House, „ 
Calcutta.  4,40,000 
293. Central Saunda ...  Post Office Saunda  United Collieries Limited, 5, Royal Ex -
change Place, Calcutta -1. 28,00,000  
294. Dakra Buk Buka ...  Post Office Khalari  United Karanpura Colliery Company 
(Private) Limited, 91, Stephen House, 
Calcutta.  25,84,000  
295. Damodar Valley ...  Post Office Hendegir  B.K. Bhaduri & Sons, 10, Purulia Road, 
Ranchi  1,31,000  
296. Datma ...  Post Office Kuju  M.K. Rana (Receiver), Bansilal Chowk, 
Hazaribagh  4,000  
297. Gidhania ...  Post Office Ramgarh  (1) Dhori Coal Company Limited,  
(2) M/s. Anderson Wright Limited,  
34/4, Gros  Venor House, Old Court 
House, Calcutta . 4,000  
298. Hindegir ...  Post Office Hindegir  Hindegir Mining Corporation Limited, 
Hirapur, Dhanbad . 5,45,000  
299. Hessagora ...  Post Office Kuju  Hessagora Coal Company, Post Office 
Kuju . 88,000  
300. Jharkhand ...  Post Office Ghatutand  (under dispute)  11,000  38 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount  
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
301. Karanpura 
Dewarkhand ...  Post Office Khalari  Karanpura Dowarkhand Colliery 
Company Limited, F -3, Gillanders 
House, Calcutta  10,83,000  
302. Karkata ...  Post Office Khalari  Ajit Prasad Singhdeo & Others, 82, 
Stephen House, Calcutta -1 5,16,000  
303. Karanpura ...  Post Office Patratu  Associated Karanpura Colliery (Private) 
Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta - 1 12,14,000  
304. Khas Karanpura ...  Post Office Patratu  Khas Karanpura Collieries Limited, 71, 
Ganesh Chandra Avenue, Calcutta  8,30,000  
305. Kedla ... Post Office 
Ghatutand  (under dispute)  34,000 
306. Kuju ...  Post Office Kuju  Kuju Colliery Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Kuju  1,82,000  
307. Lapanga ...  Post Office 
Bhadaminagar  Hindustan Coal Company, 
Bhadaminagar, Hazaribagh  2,36,000  
308. Laiyo ...  Post Office Daneya  North Bokaro Coal Company, Post 
Office Daneya, Hazaribagh  1,89,500  
309. Manki ...  Post Office Ray  National Cement Mines & Industries, 
82, Stephen House, East , Calcutta -1. 2,58,000  
310. Mael ...  Post Office 
Chitarpur  Rajballav Singh , Chitarpur, Hazaribagh . 73,000  
311. Model Dhori ...  Post Office  
Chainpur  Model Dhori Colliery Company, Hazari -
bagh . 39,000  
312. Mourpa ...  Post Office Kuju  A.K. Roy & R.P. Choudhary, Post 
Office Kuju . 2,29,500  
313. Mangardh ...  Post Office Mandu  Mani Chatterjee, Hazaribagh . Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 327  
314. New Sirkar 
Colliery ...  Post Office Mandu  (Ownership under dispute)  4,000  
315. Pindra ...  Post Office Kuju  Pindra Coal Company, Ram Nara yan 
Jai‟s Compound, Ranchi . 93,000  
316. Pakribarwadih ...  Post Office 
Barkagaon  Sayed Bokir Mehdi, Ranchi . 4,000  
317. Ray ...  Post Office Ray  N.C.M.I. Limited, 82, Stephen House, 
Calcutta . 5,63,000  39 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount  
(in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
318. Rauta ...  Post Office  
Ramgarh 
Cantonment  (Ownership under dispute)  4,000  
319. Religara ...  Post Office  
Religara  The Karanpura Colliery Limited, 
Chartered Bank Building, Calcutta -1. *77,70,000  
320. South Karanpura 
... Post Office  
Hindegir  Chauhan Brothers, Old Commissioner ‟s 
Compound, Ranchi . 1,25,000  
321. Sugia ...  Post Office 
Chitarpur  Sugia Coal Company, Chita rpur. 4,500  
322. Saunda „D‟  
(Birds) ...  Post Office 
Bhurkunda  Karanpura Collieries Limited, Chartered 
Bank Building, Calcutta -1. Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 319 . 
323. Sirka ...  Post Office Argada  South Karanpura Coal Company 
Limited, Chartered Bank Building, 
Calcutta - 1 28,83,000  
324. Sarube ra ... Post Office Kuju  North Ramgarh Coal Company Limited, 
8, Deodar Street, Calcutta -19 2,42,000  
325. Semra ...  Post Office Mandu  B.M. Roy, Burrabazar, Hazaribagh  9,000  
326. Toera ...  Post Office Kuju  M.N. Chatterjee, Post Office Kuju  1,12,000  
327. Topa ...  Post Office Kuju  Topa Coal Company, Kuju, Receiver; 
M.H. Chatterjee and  S.K. Banerje e, Post 
Office Kuju, Hazaribagh.  †1,23,000  
328. West Tumang ...  Post Office M.C. 
Chuskieganj,  
Ranchi  Chauhan Brothers, Old Commissioner ‟s 
Compound, Ranchi .  2,89,500  
   Giridih   
329. Kabribad ...  Post Office  
Beniadih  Serampore Coal Company, Post Office, 
Giridih . 23,000  
MADHYA PRADESH  
Central India Coalfields  
330. Chirimiri ...  Post Office  
Chirimiri  Chirimiri Coll iery Company (Private) 
Limited, 18/22, Sheik Me mon Street, 
Bombay -2. 37,51,000  
331. New Chirimiri 
(Ponri Hill) ...  Post Office  
Chirimiri  Dababhoy ‟s New Chirimiri Ponri Hill 
Company (Private) Limited, Post Box 
No. 85, Nagpur . 63,60,000  
332. North Chirimiri ...  Post Office 
Gelhapani  United Collieries Limited, 25, 
Brabourne Road, Calcutta . 15,01,000  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. No. 322.  
† This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mine specified against SI. No. 313.  40 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
333. North 
Jhagrakhand ...  Post Office 
Jhagrakhand Colliery  Jhagrakhand Colliery (Private) Limited, 
13, Gariahat Road, Calcutta -19. *61,42,000  
334. Pure Chirimiri ...  Post Office Chirimiri  K.N. Dhady, Post Office Chirimiri . 1,80,000  
335. Rajnagar ...  Post Office Rajnagar 
Colliery  M/s. Dalchand Bahadur Singh, 15, 
Gariahat Road, Calcutta -19. 14,71,000  
336. Ramnagar ...  Post Office 
Ramnagar Colliery  Vindhya  Colliery (Private) Limited, 18, 
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. 12,02,000  
337. South 
Jhagrakhand ...  Post Office 
Jhagrakhand   
Colliery.  Jhagrakhand Collieries (Private) 
Limited, 15, Gariahat Road,  
Calcutta -19. Amount included 
in the amount 
specified aga inst 
Sl. No. 333 . 
338. West Chirimiri ...  Post Office Chirimiri  Indra Singh & Sons (Private) Limited, 
7, Wellesly Place, Calcutta -1 33,75,000  
339. West  
Jhagrakhand ...  Post Office West 
Jhagrakhand . Jhagrakhand Collieries (Private) 
Limited, 13, Gariahat Road,  
Calcutta -19. Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 333 . 
Pench -Kanhan Valley Coalfields  
340. Ambara ...  Post Office  
Junnerdeo  N.H. Ojha & Company Limited, F -3, 
Gillander House, 8, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta . 5,41,000  
341. Barku hi ... Post Office Parasea  Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, 
„Hong Kong House ‟, 31, Dalhousie 
Square, Calcutta -1. †53,08,000  
342. Barkuhi West ...  Post Office Parasea  M/s. J. A. Trivedi Brothers, Post Box 
No. 1 , Balaghat, District Chhindwara . 2,16,000  
343. Bhamori ...  Post Office Parasea  Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, 
„Hong Kong House ‟, 31, Dalhousie 
Square, Calcutta -1. ‡94,04,000  
344. Chandamata ...  Post Office Parasea  Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, 
Post Office Parasea, Chhindwara . Amount includeed 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 341 . 
345. Datla East ...    M/s. Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, 
Post Office Parasea, District 
Chhindwara  Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 343 . 
  
                                                           
*  This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 337 and 339.  
† This amount i ncludes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 344, 349 and 357.  
‡ This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 345, 346, 350 and 360.  41 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
346. Datla West ...  Post Officer 
Junnerdeo  Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, „Hong 
Kong House‟ , 31, Dalhousie Square, 
Calcutta -1. Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
against Sl. No. 
343. 
347. Damua ...  Post Office  
Damua  Calliery  (Ownership under dispute)  *6,76,000  
348. Dhao ...  Post Office Dhao  Shri Durga Prasad, Dhao Colliery, 
Junnerdeo, Chhindwara . 21,500  
349. East 
Dongarchickli ...  Post Office Parasea  Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, 
„Hong Kong House ‟, 31, Dalhousie 
Square, Calcutta -1. Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 341 . 
350. Eklehra ...  Post Office Parasea  Amalgamated Coalfields Limited „Hong 
Kong House ‟, 31, Dolhousic Square, 
Calcutta -1. Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 343 . 
351. East Barkuhi ...  Post Office Parasea  J.A. Trivedi and Brothers, Balaghat, 
Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh . 4,000  
352. Ghorawari -
Hirdagarh ...  Post Office 
Ghorawari -Khurd  J.A. Trivedi and Brothers, Balaghat, 
Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh . 3,47,000  
353. Ghorawari Kalan 
... Post Office 
Ghorawari  T.K. Sukla, Post Office Ghorasora, 
Chhindwara . 4,000  
354. Jamkunda ... Post Office 
Junnerdeo  N.H. Ojha & Company Limited, F/3, 
Gillander House, 8, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta -1. 4,000  
355. Kalichhapar ...  Post Office Damua 
Collieries . (Ownership under dispute)  Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 347 . 
356. Newton Chickli  Post Office Parasea  Newton Chickli Collieries (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Parasea, Chhindwara . 52,01,000  
357. North 
Chandameta ...  Post Office Parasea  Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, 
„Hong Kong House ‟, 31, Dalhousie 
Square, Calcutta -1. Amount included 
in the amount 
specified against 
Sl. No. 341 . 
358. Nandora ...  Post Office Parasea  Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, 
Parasea . 41,000  
359. Rakhikol ...  Post Office Rakhikol  S.C. Kambata (Private) Limited, Maharshi 
Karve Road, Bombay -20. 2,51,000  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. No. 355.  42 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in  
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
360.  Rawanwara ...  Post Office Parasea  Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, Post 
Office Parasea, Chhindwara . Amount included in 
the amount 
specified against Sl. 
No. 343 . 
361.  Rawanwara Khas 
... Post Office Parasea  Oriental Coal Company Limited 25, Bra -
bourne Road, Calcutta . 9,14,000  
362.  Sial Ghogri ...  Post Office 
Junnerdeo  Sial Ghogri Group, Nelson Square, 
Nagpur . 2,94,000  
363.  Sukri ...  Post Office Parasea  The Jamai Majri Coal Company Limited, 
Post Office Parasea, Chhindwara . 6,92,000  
364.  South Panara ...  Post Office 
Junnerdeo  Lala Bikimla Jagannath, Post Office 
Junnerdeo, Chhindwara . 4,000  
Raigarh Coalfield  
365.  Baroud ...  Post Office 
Ghorghoda  P.R. Gupta & others, Raigarh, Madhya 
Pradesh . 11,000  
366.  Domnara ...  Post Office  
Khar sia-Raigarh . R.N. Poddar, North Ambajhari Road,  
Nagpur.  *12,000  
367.  Dumnara ...    Sri J.K. Poddar, 32, Wardha Road, 
Nagpur . Amount included in 
the amount 
specified against Sl. 
No. 366 . 
Sohagpur and Johilla Coalfields  
368.  Amlai ...  Post Office  
Dhanpuri  Rewa Coalfields Limited, 4, Bankshall 
Street , Calcutta -1. †97,42,000  
369.  Bhadra ...  Post Office Kotma  Rewa Mining Company Limited, Post 
Office Kotma . 6,27,000  
370.  Birsingpur ...  Post Office 
Birsingpur Pali  Johilla Coalfields Limited, Post Office 
Birsingpur Pali, District Sahdol . 22,13,000  
371.  Burhar No. 1  
and 2 ...  Post Office  
Dhanpuri  Rewa Coalfields Limited,  4, Bankshall 
Street, Calcutta -1. Amount included in 
the amount 
specified against Sl. 
No. 368 . 
372.  Burhar No. 3 ...  Post Office Dhanpuri  Rewa Coalfields Limited,  4, Bankshall 
Street, Calcutta -1. Amount included in 
the amount 
specified against Sl. 
No. 368. 
373.  Kotma ...  Post Office Kotma 
Colliery  Associated Cement Company Limited, 
121, Maharshi Karve Road, Bombay -20. 44,28,000  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. No. 367.  
† This amunt includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. No. 371, 372 and 376.  43 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in  
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
374.  Nowrazabad ...  Post Office 
Nowrazabad  Associated Cement Company Limited, 
121, Maharshi Karve Road, Bombay -20. 32,41,000  
375.  Rungta ...  Post Office Rungta 
Colliery . Mahabir Prasad Rungta and Partners, 
Post Office Rungta Colliery . 4,42,000  
376.  Umari a ... Post Office Umaria  Rewa Coalfields Limited, Post Office 
Umaria, District Sahdol . Amount included in 
the amount 
specified against Sl. 
No. 368 . 
MAHARASHTRA  
Kamptee Coalfield  
377.  Inder ...    M/s. Oriental Coal Company Limited, 
25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta -1. 8,29,000  
378.  Kamptee ...  Post Office  
Kamptee  M/s. Oriental Coal Company Limited, 
25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta -1. 21,22,000  
Wardha Valley Coalfield  
379.  Ballarpur ...  Post Office  
Ballarpur  Ballarpur Collieries Company, Biseswar 
House, Lajpat Rai Marg, Post Box No. 
11, Nagpur . *38,77,000  
380.  Chanda 
Rawatwari ...  Post Office Chanda  R.B. Seth and Sri Ram Durga Prasad 
Tumsar, District Bhandara . 8,21,000  
381.  Ghugus ...  Post Office 
Mane akpur Ballarpur Collieries Company, Biseswar 
House,  Post Box No. 11, Nagpur . Amount included in 
the amount 
specified against Sl. 
No. 379 . 
382.  Hindustan 
Lalpeth ...  Post Office Chanda  Perfect Pottery Company Limited, 
Hanumantlal, Jubbalpore . 17,80,000  
383.  New Majri ...  Post Office Shivaji 
Nagpur, Chanda . Sethia Mining & Manufacturing 
Corporation, 4, Bakul Bagan Row, 
Calcutta -25. 10,10,000  
384.  Rajur ...  Post Office Rajur  Rajkumar Mining Company . 75,000  
385.  Sasti ...  Post Office Ballarpur  Ballarpur Collieries Company Limited, 
Temple Road, Post Box No. 11, Nagpur . Amount included in 
the amount 
specified against Sl. 
No. 379 . 
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 381 and 385.  44 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the  mine  Name and address of owners of the  mine     Amount (in   
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
386. Shri Mahakali ...  Post Office Mahakali  Shri Mahakali Coal Mines Limited, 23B,  
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. (Under 
Liquidator)  4,000  
MEGHALAYA  
Khasi and Jaintia Coalfields  
387. Barsora ...   Assam Bengal Cement Company 
Limited, 7, Wellesly Place, Calcutta -1. 4,000  
388. Cherapunji ...  Post Office 
Cherapunji, District 
K and J. Hills . The Cherrachhatak Ropeway Company 
Limited, 1 & 2, Old Court House 
Corner, Calcutta - 1. 4,000  
389. Laitryngew ...    The Cherrachhatak Ropeway Company 
Limited, 1 & 2, Old Court House 
Corner, Calcutta - 1. 4,000  
390. Laitryngew ...    The Laitryngew Cherra Coal 
Association, Post Office Cherapunji, 
District U. K. Hills . 4,000  
391. Mawsynram ...  Post Office 
Mawsynram U. K. 
Hills  Messra, Sidroka Marban iang, Post 
Office Shillong . 4,000  
392. Thangjinath ...  Post Office  
Pynurs la Assam Trading & Mining Company 
(Private) Limited, Shillong . 7,000  
ORISSA  
Ib Valley Coalfield  
393. Hingir Rampur ...  Post Office Rampur 
Colliery  Hingir Rampur Coal Company Limited, 
Post Box - 109, Home Street, Fort, 
Bombay . 18,74,000  
394. Ib River ...  Post Office 
Brajrajnagar  Chandmal Indra Kumar Karnani, 3, 
Synagogue Street, Calcutta -1. 1,50,000  
395. Orient ...  Post Office 
Brajrajnagar  Western Bengal Coal Company Limited, 
Administrative Office, Moira Colliery, 
District Burdwan . 34,90,000  
WEST BENGAL  
396. Ajoy Bank ...  Post Office 
Nutandanga  Ajoy Coal Company (Private) Limited, 
34A, Sardar Sankar Road, Calcutta -29. 47,000  
397. Ardhagram Khas 
... Post Office 
Ardhagram  M/s. R.K. Agarwala & Sons (Private) 
Limited, Lal Bazar, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad . 4,000  
398. Adjoy Second ...  Charanpur  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta -1. Amount includ ed in 
the amount specified 
against Sl. No. 432 . 
  45 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in  
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
399. Alkusa ...  Post Office Samdi  J.D. Mondal, Post Office Samdi, 
Burdwan . 16,000  
400. Alkusa Gopalpur 
... Post Office Samdi  Khanna Coat Corporation, Post Office 
Samdi.  1,31,000  
401. Aldih ...    Equi table Coal Company  Limited, 1/2  
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta -16. Amount 
included in the 
amount 
specified 
against Sl. No. 
411. 
402. Akhalpur ...  Post Office 
Charanpur  West Jamuria Coal Company Limited, 2, 
Brabourne Road, Calcutta -1. 4,000  
403. Aurang ...  Post Office Kasta  Kasta Coalfields Limited, 3, Synagogue 
Street, Calcutta - 1. 4,000  
404. Barmondia 3 & 4 
Pits ...  Post Office 
Kanayapur  New Beerbhum Coal Company Limited, 
8, Clive Row, Calcutta -1. 8,90,000  
405. Bhamuria ...  Post Office 
Bhamuria  Naturia Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Bhamuria, District 
Purulia . 1,31,000  
406. Burradheme ...  Post Office 
Sitarampur  North Dheme Coal Company Limited, 
135, Canning Street, Calcutta -1. 1,12,000  
407. Babisole ...  Post Office Ondal  Bharat Mining Corporation Limited, 91, 
Stephen House, 5th Floor, Dalhousie 
Square, Calcutta . 85,100  
408. Belbaid ...  Post Office Toposi  Belbaid Collieries Limited, Post Office 
Raniganj, Burdwan . 2,06,000  
409. Bankola ...  Post Office Ukhra  Burrakar   Coal  Company Limited, 
Chartered Bank Building, Calcutta - 1. 36,78,000  
410. Banksimula 7 & 8 
Pits ...  Post Office 
Charanpur  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8 Clive 
Row, Calcutta - 1. Amount included in 
the amount specified 
against Sl. No. 432 . 
411. Bhanora ...  Post Office 
Charanpur  Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, 
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta - 16. *1,41,30,000  
412. Bhanora South ...  Post Office 
Charanpur  Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, 
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta -16. Amount included in 
the amount specified 
against Sl. No. 411 . 
413. Bright ‟s Rana ...  Post Office 
Charanpur  D. Bright & Company (Private) Limited, 
Post Office Charanpur, Burdwan . 2,30,000  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable  in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 401, 412, 419, 452, 471, 510, 517, 
518, 527, 563 and 629.  46 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in  
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
414. Benodi Katta ...  Post Office Samdi  Jiwanlal Collieries (Private) Limited, 
Post Office Samdi . 19,000  
415. Bhagran ...  Post Office  
Salanpur  The South Bhagran Coal Company, Post 
Office Salanpur, Burdwan . 1,01,000  
416. Bon-Jemihari ...  Post Office  
Salanpur  Bon-Jemihari, Anthracite Coal 
Company, Post Office Salanpur, 
Burdwan . 2,65,000  
417. Benali ...  Post Office  
Raniganj  Nimcha Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 21, Jatindra Mohan Avenue, 
Calcutta -6. 45,000  
418. Bhadulia ...  Post Office 
Khoriasole  Dubrajpur Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Bhadulia, Birbhum . 15,000  
419. Bejdi ...  Post Office 
Sitarampur  Equitable Coal Company, 1/2, Lord 
Sinha Road, Calcutta -16. Amount included in 
the amount specified 
against Sl. No. 411 . 
420. Bhutdoba ...  Post Office  
Asansol  A.P. Dutta & Company, Hutton Road, 
Asansol . 4,000  
421. Borachak ...  Post Office  
Asansol  Borachak Collieries Company, Post 
Office Sitarampur . 4,000  
422. Bhatmura ...    P.K. Agarwalla & Other, Post Office 
Jharia Dhanbad . 4,000  
423. Bharatchak ...    B.N. Sanyal (Private) Limited, District 
Burdwan . 4,000  
424. Borejore ...  Post Office 
Hazaribagh  Samla Kajora Coal Company , Post 
Office Hazaribagh, Birbhum . 4,000  
425. Banksimula Old 
Pits ...    Bengal Coal Company, 8, Clive Row, 
Calcutta . Amount included in 
the amount specified 
against Sl. No. 432 . 
426. Bansrachak ...    New Birbhum Coal Company Limited, 
Burdwan  Amount included in 
the amount specified 
against Sl. No. 611 . 
427. Bamanbandh ...  Post Office 
Charanpur  Gopal Narayan Singh, Nageswar Bag, 
Post Office B uniadganj , Gaya  4,000  
428. Bon-biddi ...  Post Office, 
Salanpur  Shri Durgadas Maji, Village -Khurdike, 
Post Office Salanpur, District Burdwan.  34,000  
429. Bastabpur ...  Post Office 
Khayeresel  Sakti Pada Nayak and o thers, Post Office 
Bhadulia, Burdwan.  4,000  
430. Banksimula 11 & 
12 Pits. ...  Post Office 
Charaupur  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  Amount included in 
the amount specified 
against Sl. No. 432.  
  47 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the  mine  Amount (in  
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
431.  Belrui 
Dishergarh ...  Post Office 
Sitarampur  M/s. Be lrui Dishergarh Coiliery 
(Private) Limited, Post Office Salanpur, 
Burdwan.  4,000  
432.  Chinakuri Nos. 1 
& 2 Pits. ...  Post Office 
Sunderchak  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  *3,75,06,000  
433.  Chinakuri No. 3 
Pit. ... Post Office 
Sunderchak  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  Amount  
included  
in the amount 
specified against  
Sl. No.  432. 
434.  Chowkidanga ...  Post Office Toposi  Birbhum Mining (Private) Limited, 7, 
Monoharpuku r Road, Calcutta.  16,000  
435.  Central & Lower 
Jambad . ... Post Office Bahula  East B ahula Collieries Limited, 18, 
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. 5,34,000  
436.  Chora Pits 
1.Chora -10 Pit  
2. Chora -7 and 9 
Pits. ...  Post Office Bahula, 
Bardwan . Chora Coal Company, 8, Synagogue 
Street, Calcutta - 1. 11,77,000  
437. Central Satgram 
... Post Office 
Jaykaynagar  Harsookdas Balkissendas, 22, Burtolla 
Street, Calcutta . 9,46,000  
438. Chalbalpur ...  Post Office 
Jayka ynagar  K.L. Selected Coal Concern, Post Office 
Jaykaynagar.  93,000  
439. Chapu i Khas ...  Post Office 
Kalipahari  Sahu Minerals & Properties Ltd., A -3, 
Prithviraj Road, Jaipur.  16,28,000  
440. Central Jamuria ... Post Office Nandi  B.D. Gorach, Nuruddin Road, Post 
Office Asansol, Burdwan.  9,000  
441. Chaptoria ...  Post Office Salanpur  East Chaptoria Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 22, Canning Street, Calcutta - 1. 99,000  
442. Chinchuria ...  Post Office Asansol  Ajoy Bank Minerals, Post Office 
Churulia, Burdwan.  4,000  
443. Chak Keshabganj 
...   Shrimati Indumati Devi C/o. Kartick Ch. 
Mukherjee, Village Jasidih, Post Office 
Dishergarh, District Burdwan.  4,000  
444. Chowrassia ...    Chowrassia Coal Company, Post Office 
Kalipahari, Burdwan.  4,000  
445. Chinchuria and 
Chinchuria East. 
...   Bahadur Singh Bhutoria & others, Post 
Office Asansol, Burdwan.  4,000  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 398,  410, 425,430, 433, 494, 526, 
604, 606, 635,64 2,643 and 644.  48 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the  mine  Name and address of owners of the  mine  Amount (in  
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
446. Central Nandi ...  Post Office Nandi  Sri Nathumall Layelka Post Office 
Raniganj, Burdwan.  4,000  
447. Central Sitapur ...    Kanailal Mukherjee, Village Ra jpur, 
Nandi, Post Office Jamuria, Burdwan.  4,000  
448. Central Ke nda ...  Post Office Toposi  Gopal Prasad Pandey, Central Kenda 
Collieries, Post Office Toposi.  4,000  
449. Chora Khas ...  Post Office Chora  Selected Chora Coal Company Limited, 
6, Ezra Street, Calcutta -1. 4,000  
450. Central 
Dishergarh ...  Central Dishergarh  Central Dishergarh  Coal Company 
Limited, 174 Harrison Road, Calcutta.  4,000  
451. Chakbaga Khas ...  District Bankura  Sankar Prasad Singh Deo, Post Office 
Panchaketeraz, Purulia.  4,000  
452. Chowrashi ...  Post Office Neturia  Equitable C oal Company Limited, 1/2, 
Lord Sinha Road Calcutta -16. Amount  
included in the                 
amount specified 
against Sl. No. 
411. 
453. Churulia East ...  Post Office Churulia  East Churulia Colliery Company, Post 
Office Churulia, Burdwan.  4,000  
454. Central Kajora ...  Post Office 
Kajoragram  Dutta ‟s Kajora Coal Company Limited, 
1, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.  15,000  
455. Chinchuria Khas 
... Post Office Asansol  Khas Chinchuria Collieries Limited, 
Post Office Asansol.  4,000  
456. Charanpur ...  Post Office Charanpur  Iswar Shib Thakur  Sabehat, Post Office 
Nirsachatt i. 4,000  
457. Churulia ...  Post Office Churulia  New Churulia Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 4, Lyons Range, Calcutta.  6,000  
458. Central Baraboni 
... Post Office Baraboni  Sri A.K. Ghosh and Shri B.N. 
Tarkatirtha, Post Off ice Baraboni, 
Burdwan.  4,000  
459. Central Poniati ...  Post Office Nandi  Central Poniati Coal Company 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  4,000  
460. Deoli (Mondal ‟s) 
... Post Office 
Dishergarh  B.N. Mondal and Company, Post Office 
Dishergarh, Burdwan.  1,56,000  
461. Dhemomain ...  Post Office 
Sitarampur  Dhemomain Collieries and Industries 
Ltd., 36, Chowringhee Road, Calcutta -
16. 9,27,000  
462. Darula ...  Post Office 
Pandaveswar  East Satgram Coal Company Limited, 
135, Canning Street, Calcutta.  5,41,000  
463. Domoda ...  Post Office Raniganj  Damodar Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Raniganj, Burdwan.  5,64,000  
  49 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
464. Damra ...  Post Office Kalipahari  Katras Jherriah Coal Company, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  17,41,000  
465. Dabor ...  Post Office Samdi  H. Roy and T. Roy, Dab or Colliery 
(Private) Limited , Post Office Samdi, 
Burdwan.  85,000  
466. Damagoria Amdiha 
... Post Office Samdih  Damagoria Amdiha Coal Company, Post 
Office Salanpur.  1,31,000  
467. Deshermohan ...  Post Office Churulia  C.L. Poddar & others, Post Office 
Churulia.  1,09,000  
468. Dalmiya ...  Post Office Salanpur  R.S. Dalmiya, 26, New Alipore Road, 
Calcutta -27. 1,07,000  
469. Damra  ... Post Office Kalipahari  A.P. Dutta & Company, Hutton Road, 
Asansol.  4,000  
470. Develia and W. 
Develia ....  Post Office Kalipahari  K.D.N. Singh, Chattapathar, Post Office 
Kalipahari  4,000  
471. Dhussal ...    Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, 
Lord Si nha Road, Calcutta -16. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 411.  
472. Dhun dabad ...  Post Office Samdi  J.B. Mondal & Company, Post Office 
Samdi , Burdwan.  4,000  
473. Dhadka ...  Post Office Asansol  Dhadka Colliery Company Limited, Post 
Office, Asansol.  4,000  
474. Diguli ...  Post Office Churulia  Oriental Mining & Trading Syndicate, 
Post Office Churulia Burdwan.  4,000  
475. East Jambad ...  Post Office 
Kajoragram.  Amalgamated Jambad Syndicate (Private) 
Limited 33, Biplabi Rash Behari Bose 
Road, Calcutta -1. 1,93,000  
476. East Kajora ...  Post Office Ondal  Swadeshi Mining & Manufacturing 
Company Limited 33, Netaji Subhas 
Road, Calcutta -1. 56,000  
477. East Sitalpur ...  Post Office Ukhra  East Barrakar Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Ukhra.  7,75,000  
478. East Jamehari ...  Post Office Raniganj  Harsookdas Balkissendas, 22, Burtolla 
Street, Calcutta -7. 2,09,000  
479. East Nimcha ...  Post Office 
Jaykaynagar  East Laikdih  Colliery Company (Private) 
Limited , Post Office, Jaykaynagar, 
Burdwan.  69,56,000  50 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
480. East Satgram ...  Post Office 
Jaykaynagar  East Satgram Coal Company (Private) 
Limited 135, Canning Street, Calcutta -1. 4,000  
481. East B araboni ...  Post Office Charanpur  East Baraboni Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 4, Mandevilla Gardens, 
Calcutta -19. 4,000  
482. East Jamuria ...  Post Office Toposi  East Jamuria Coat Company, Post Office 
Toposi Burdwan.  93,000  
483. East Ramnagar ...  Post Office Salanpur  D.R. Sabhlok (Through Constituted 
Attorney B.L. Satnalika, Post Office 
Salanpur, Burdwan)  44,000  
484. East Lachipur ...  Post Office Sitarampur  East Lachipur Collieries Balrui 
Dishergarh Colliery Company, Post 
Office Sitarampur, Burdwan.  4,000  
485. East Dhundabad  Post Office Samdi  East Chundabad Colliery, Post Office 
Sitarampur.  4,000  
486. East Parsundi ...  Post Office Barhra 
District Birbhum . East Parsundi Collieries Limited, 2, 
Commercial Building, 102, Netaji Subhas 
Road, Calcutta -1. 4,000  
487. East Searsole ...  Post Office Raniganj  Shri Jayanta Kr. Banerj ee & others, 
Burdwan.  4,000  
488. East Bonbiddi ...  Post Office Salanpur  Shri T.K. Mah ato, Managing Agent, 
Salanpur, Burdwan.  4,000  
489. Ekrah Nandi(New 
Jamuri) ...    Ekrah Nandi Coal Company, F -2, Clive 
Building, 8, Netaji Subhas Road,  
Calcutta -1. 4,000  
490. Goen ka Kajora ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram  Goenka Coal Company, S. B. Goenka, 
Post Office Ukhra, Burdwan.  7,75,000  
491. Guru Gopinath ...  Post Office Ukhra  Gnananda, Industries (Private) Limited, 
Post Office Ukhra, Burdwan.  86,000  
492. Ghusick ...  Post Office Kalipahari  Coal & Mineral Syndicate, 36, Strand 
Road, Calcutta - 1. 4,75,000  
493. Ghusick ...  Post Office Kalipahari  Ghusick & Muslia  Collieries Limited, 
Post Office, Kalipahari, Burdwan.  5,44,000  
494. Girmint ...  Post Office Charanpur  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta -1.     Amount     
included in the  
amount 
specified 
against Sl. No. 
432. 
  51 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
495. Gourangdih ...  Post Office Panuria  Gourangdih Colliery Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office, Panuria Burdwan.  1,33,000,  
496. Gourangdih  
Begunia ...  Post Office Jamgram  Jamgram Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Jamgram, Burdwan.  1,08,000  
497. Gangaram Chak ...  Post Office Barhara  Mishra Mukherjee & Company, Post 
Office Sagarbhanga, Birbhum,  26,000  
498. Gopalpur ...  Post Office Mejia  Shri D.B. Parmar, Post Office Ardhagram 
Bankura.  4,000  
499. Hirakhun ...  Post Office Neturia  Shrimati Durgadevi Singhania, Post 
Office Neturia, District Purulia.  7,000  
500. Haripur ...  Post Office Bahula  Selected Baraboni Coal Company 
(Private) Limited, 18, Netaji  Subhas 
Road, Calcutta -1. 9,32,000  
501. Hindustan Alkusa ...  Post Office Samdi  Shri S.N. Agarwala, Post Office 
Burrakar, Burdwan.  98,000  
502. Hamirpur ...  Post Office Mejia 
Bankura  New Hamirpur Colliery Company, Post 
Office Toposi, Burdwan,  4,000  
503. Itapara ...  Post Office Entapara, 
District Burdwan  Shri Keshordeo, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  4,000  
504. Jorekuri ...  Post Office Churulia  Jorekuri Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Box No. 55, Dhanbad.  26,000  
505. Jambad Selected ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram  Shri Devji Gelabhai & others, Post 
Office Kajoragram, Burdwan.  4,85,000  
506. Jaipuria Kajora ...  Post Office Ondal  Swadeshi Mining & Manufacturing 
Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas 
Road, Calcutta -1. 7,24,000  
507. Jotejanki Khas ...  Post Office Toposi  Messrs. Banerjee Santan, Post Office 
Toposi, Burdwan.  2,12,000  
508. Jambad Kajora ...  Post Office Siduli  Jambad Kajora Colliery Company 
(Private) Limited, Post Office Siduli, 
Burdwan.  4,33,000  
509. Jaykaynagar ...  Post Office 
Jaykaynagar,  Aluminium Corporation of India 
Limited, Post Office Jaykaynagar, 
Burdwan.  10,88,000  
  52 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
510. Jamuria A and B 
Pits ...  Post Office Nandi  Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1 /2, 
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta -16. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 411.  
511. Jambad ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram.  North Adjoy Coal Company, Post Office 
Kajoragram, Burdwan.  15,000  
512. Jamuna  
Kanali New ...  Post Office Mejia, 
District Bankura.  New Jamuna Kanali Colliery Company, 
Post Office, Rajgaran, District Bankura.  4,000  
513. Jamehari Selected. 
... Post Office Raniganj  Coal Products (Private) Limited Post 
Office Nutandanga District, Burdwan.  4,000  
514. Jotedhemo ...  Post Office Ukhra  Jotedhemo Colliery Company (Private) 
Limited, 23/B, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta -1. 15,000  
515. Jamehari Khas  
East ...  Post Office Searsol 
Rajbari.  Jamehari Khas Colliery Private Limited, 
Post Office Searsol, Rajbari . 4,000  
516. Jambad ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram.  S.S. Devi ‟s Jambad Coal Concern 
(Private) Limited, 10, Akhil Mistri Lane, 
Calcutta.  4,000  
517. Jamuria 5 and  
6 Pits ...  Post Office  
Charanpur.  Equitable Coal Company Limited, 2, 
Fairlie Place, Calcutta.  Amount in -
cluded in the 
amount spe -
cified against 
Sl. No. 411.  
518. Jamuria 7 and  
8 Pits ...  Post Office Charanpur.  Equitable Coal Company Limited, 2, 
Fairlie Place, Calcutta.  Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 411.  
519. Kasta Bengal ...  Post Office Churulia  Kasta Coalfields Limited, 3, Synagogue 
Street, Calcutta.  13,000  
520. Kajora and  
Western Kajora ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram.  Shri K.C. Palchowdhury, Post Office 
Kajoragram, Burdwan.  2,07,000  
521. Kajora (Guzdar) ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram.  The G uzdar Kajora Coal Mines Limited,  
Post Office, Kajoragram.  2,24,000  
522. Kajora Selected ...  Post Office  
Raniganj  Kajora Selected Colliery Company 
Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta -1. 3,38,000  
  53 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
523. Khas Kajora ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram.  Khas Kajora Coal Company Limited, 18, 
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. 21,09,000  
524. Khas Searsole ... Post Office Searsole 
Rajbari.  Kumar K.N. Maliah, Post Office, 
Searsole Rajbari.  7,000  
525. Krishnagar ...  Post Office Toposi  Parasea Colliery Limited, 25, Netaji 
Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. 1,18,000  
526. Kunustoria ...  Post Office Toposi  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta -1. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 432.  
527. Kottadih ...  Post Office Kottadih  Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1 /2, 
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta.  Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against  Sl. 
No. 411.  
528. Kumardih ...  Post Office Ukhra  Kumardih Coal Company, Post Office 
Ukhra, Burdwan.  11,19,000  
529. Kumarkhala ...  Post Office Bahula  Kumarkhala Colliery Company, Post 
Office Bahula, Burdwan.  *2,36,000  
530. Khas Chadbalpur ...  Post Office  
Jaykaynagar.  Rani H. Devi and Rani K. Devi, Post 
Office Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan.  6,97,000  
531. Kalipahari ...  Post Office Kalipahari.  Ghusick and Muslia Colliery Limited, 
Post Office Kalipahari, Burdwan.  4,03,000  
532. Kuardih ...  Post Office Kalipahari.  Kuaridh Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 41, Chowringhee Road, 
Calcutta -16. 39,82,000  
533. Khas Baraboni ...  Post Office Raghunath 
Chak.  A. K. Collieries Company, 34 -A, Sardar 
Sankar Road, Calcutta -29. 19,000  
534. Khas Mohanpur ...  Post Office Samdi  Late Shri Ramgoti Hazra, Post Office  
Kajoragram, Burdwan.  74,000  
535. Khoirabad ...  Post Office Panuria  M/s. Jamgram Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Bara Kalibari, 
District Bankura.  51,000  
536. Kalikapur ...  Post Office Bara 
Kalibari.  Shri Harihar Banerjee and Others, Post 
Office Bara Kalibari, District Burdwan.  4,000  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. No. 598.  54 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
537. Kanyapur  Post Office Naturia.  Neturia  Coal Company Limited, Post 
Office Neturia, District Purulia.  4,000  
538. Khas Dhundabad ...  Post Office Samdi.  Nagrath Collieries Limited, Post Office 
Sarodi.  4,000  
539. Khas Sita lpur ...  Post Office Ukhra  N.H. Ojha Company (Private) Limited, 
Clive Buildin g, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta -1. 4,000  
540. Kajora (Roy Dutta) 
... Post Office Kajoragram.  Roy Dutta and Company, Post Office 
Kajora, Burdwan.  4,000  
541. Khandra Sitalpur ...    N.H. Ojha Company (P rivate) Limited, 
Clive Building, Netaji Subhas Road, Cal -
cutta -1. 4,000  
542. Khudika ...  Post Office Salanpur  Sri Krishna Colliery, Post Office 
Salanpur.  4,000  
543. Kalidaspur ...  Post Office Mejia  Shri M.D. Chatterjee, 2, Thana Road, 
Asansol . 4,000  
544. Khiratore Khas ...  Post Office Khiratore  Messrs. Sankari Prasad Singh Deo, Post 
Office, Panchakot Raj, Purulia.  4,000  
545. Khas Jamba d ... Post Office Ukhra  Shri Mohanlal Goenka, Post Office 
Ukhra, Burdwan.  11,000  
546. Kumarpur ...  Post Office Sitarampur  Shri. M.M. Bose Borachak, Post Office 
Sitarampur, Burdwan.  4,000  
547. Kankartola ...  Post Office Kankartola  Kankartola Collieries (Private) Limited, 
Post Office Kankartola, Burdwan.  75,000  
548. Kasta ...  Post Office Churulia  Kasta Coalfields Limited, 3, Synagogue 
Street , Calcutta.  26,000  
549. Lachipur ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Katras Jherriah Coal Company, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta -1. 10,53,000  
550. Lower Kenda ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Khas Kend a Colliery Company (Private) 
Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta -1. 5,49,000  
551. Lohat ...  Post office Salanpur  Shri Bhuramal Agarwal, Post Office 
Salanpur Burdwan.  64,000  
552. Lakshmi ...    Shri Sahade v Dutta, Bir bhum . 4,000  
553. Monoharbaha l ... Post Office Asansol  Messrs. Chandramal Indra Kumar 
(Private) Limited, 3 , Synagogue Street, 
Calcutta -1. 4,99,000  
  55 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
554. Mukherjee ‟s Jote 
Janaki ... Post Office Toposi  Shri C.R. Mukher jee, Netaji Subhas 
Road, Raniganj, Burdwan.  27,000  
555. Madhujore ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Madhujore Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta -1. 30,13,000  
556. Mahabir ...  Post Office Raniganj  Mahabir Collieries Limited, 178, 
Mahatma Gandhi Road, Calcutta.  1,43,000  
557. Moira ...  Post Office Moira 
Colliery  Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 9/1, 
R.N. Mukherjee Road, Calcutta.  43,15,000  
558. Mithapur ...  Post Office Searsole 
Rajbari  Shri Nirmal Kumar Geaulecha,  7/2, Babu 
Lal Lane, Calcutta -7. 1,59,000  
559. Modern Satgram ...  Post Office Raniganj  West Bengal Mining Company, Post 
Office Raniganj  12,98,000  
560. Muslia ...  Post Office Kali pahari  Ghusick and Muslia Collieries Limited, 
Post Office Kalipahari, Burdwan.  60,000  
561. Mohanpur ...  Post Office Samdi  S.N. Chaudhury & Company, Kartar 
Nivas, Burnpur Road, Asansol.  1,19,000  
562. Madhabpur ...  Post Office Ondal  Madhabpur Coal Company, 3, 
Synagogue Street, Calcutta.  1,54,000  
563. Methani ...  Post Office Sitarampur  Equitable Coal Company, 1/2, Lord 
Sinha Road, Calcutta.specified  Amount 
included in 
the amount  
against Sl. 
No. 41 1. 
564. Mondal ‟s Nandi ...  Post Office Nandi  Mondal and Company, Post Office 
Disherg arh. 4,000  
565. Middle Kajora & 
Southern Kajora ...  Post office Kajoragram  Shri K.C. Pal Choudhury, Kajoragram . 4,000  
566. Mondalpur ...  Post Office Nandi  Mondalpur Coal Company Limited, Post 
Office Neamatpur.  4,000  
567. Mangalpur ...  Post Office Raniganj  New Beerbhoom Coal Company 
Limited, Managing Agents M/s. Andrew 
Yule and Company Limite d, Post Box  
150, Calcutta -1. 4,000  
568. Sheikhpur ...    Shri M.M. Chatterjee. Ondal . 4,000  
569. Mouthdih ...  Post Office Sunderchak  Messrs. Mouthdih Coal, Company, 
Dishergarh . 4,000  
  56 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
570. Madanpur ...    Ghanshyam Coal Industries (Private) 
Limited, 9 Bhawani Dutta Lane, 
Calcutta -7. 4,000  
571. New Kenda ...  Post Office Toposi  New Birbhum Coal Company Limited, 8, 
Clive Row, Calcutta -1. 41,23,000  
572. North Jambad ...  Post Office Kajoragram  North Jambad Coal Company, Post 
Office Kajoragram, Burdwan.  98,000  
573. North Searsole ...  Post Office Searsole 
Rajbari  Searsole Mining and Industries (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Searsole Rajbari,  
Burdwan.  12,33,000  
574. Nag‟s Kajora 
Jambad ...  Post Office Ukhra  Shrimati Ashalata Nag and others, 4, 
Mandevilla Gardens, Calcutta . 3,57,000  
575. North Chora ...  Post Office Bahula  Shri B.M. Dutta, North Chora Colliery 
Company, Post Office Bahula, Burdwan.  68,000  
576. New Jamehari  
Khas ...  Post Office  
Jaykay nagar  New Jamehari Khas Colliery (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Searsole Rajbari 
Burdwan.  13,47,000  
577. New Satgram ...  Post Office Devchand -
nagar  Shethia Mining and Manufacturing 
Company Limited, 4, Bakul Bagan Row, 
„Manohar Mahal ‟, Calcutta 25.  18,70,000  
578. Nimcha ...  Post Office Raniganj  Nimcha Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 1/1, Rowland Road, Calcutta 
20. 3,32,000  
579. North Brook ...  Post Office  
Jaykaynagar  Shri Bimal Kanti Roy, Post Office 
Jaykaynagar . 5,58,000  
580. New Ghusick ...  Post Office Kalipahari  West Ghusick Coal Company Limited, 
10, Netaji  Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. 2,53,000  
581. North Charanpur ...  Post Office Charanpur  Shri B.N. Ganguly, Ushagram, Post 
Office Asansol, Burdwan.  18,000  
582. North Ghusick ...  Post Office Majihara  Shri Ganesh Coal Company, Post Office 
Asansol, Burdwan.  36,000  
583. New Damagoria... 
... Post Office Salanpur  New Damagoria Coal Company (Privat e) 
Limited, Post Office Salanpur, Burdwan.  4,06,000  
584. North East Salanpur 
... Post Office Samdi  Shri A.R. Acharyya, Post Office 
Heamatpur, Burdwan.  1,28,000  
585. North West 
Salanpur ...  Post Office Samdi  Shri A.N. Mukherjee and others, Post 
Office Samdi, Burdwan . 32,000  
  57 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
586. New Bhagran ...  Post Office Sitarampur  Shri S. Banerjee (Nilachal), Post Office 
Baraboni, Burdwan.  4,000  
587. North Poniati ...  Post Office Baraboni  Shri B.B. Dutta, Post Office Baraboni, 
Burdwan.  18,000  
588. New Ardhagram ...  Post Office Ardhagram  Shri B.P. Singhdeo, Post Office 
Panchkotraj, District Purulia.  4,000  
589. New Bamna ...  Post Office Salanpur  New Bamna Colliery Company, Mehta 
Press, Asansol.  58,000  
590. Nakrekonda 
Baljuri. 
Nabaghan apur 
Maheshpur ...    Western Bengal Coalfields Limited , 15, 
India Exchange Place, Calcutta -1. Amount 
included in 
the amoun t 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 654.  
591. Nakr ekonda and 
Sarpi ...    Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 15, 
India Exchange Place, Calcutta - 1. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 654.  
592. New South Bara -
boni ...  Post Office Baraboni  Messrs. Amiya Bala Ghose and Sons, 
Post Office Baraboni.  13,000  
593. Narsamuda ...  Asansol  Sanpukuria Asansol Colliery Limited, 18 
Mission Row, Calcutta.  4,000  
594. North Mosila ...  Post Office Kalipahari  North Mosila Colliery Company, Post 
Office Kalipahari.  4,000  
595. New Begunia ...  Post Office Barakar  Shri S.K. Mukherjee, Ba rakar.  4,000  
596. Nuni ...  Post Office Ethora  Mukherjee P. (Rai Bahadur) G. T. Road 
Delhi . 4,000  
597. New Mangalpur ...    Shri Jaladhar Mondal, Village Bonbiddi 
Post Office, Salanpur.  4,000  
598. North Haripur ...  Post Office Ghore  Previously owned by Shri K.L. Dutt a, 
Post Office Bahula, Burdwan Dutta Pal 
and Company, North Haripur Colliery, 
Post Office Bahul a (Partners -K.L. Dutta 
and D.N. Pal) , Burdwan . Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 529.  
  58 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
599. New Madhapur ...    A.B. Ojha and Company, 23/B, Netaji 
Subhas Road, Calcutta.  Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 618 . 
600. New Nandi ...  Post Office Nandi  Shrimati Gayatri Devi, wife of Shri 
Subodh Mukherjee, Feeder Road, 
Ranigan j. 4,000  
601. New Jamuria ...  Post Office Nandi  Selected Satgram Collieries. Limited, 18 
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.  4,000  
602. Palasthali ... Post Office Churulia  Palasthali Coal Concern (Private) 
Limited 53, Mechua Bazar Road , 
Chin sura (Hooghly).  8,000  
603. Pariarpur ...  Post Office Kalipahari  Shri Shews iamal Agarwalla, Post Office 
Sainthia, Birbhum.  4,000  
604. Parbelia ...  Post Office Ne turia Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8 Clive 
Row, Calcutta -1. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 432.  
605. Patmohana ...  Post Office Patmohana  Messrs. Patmohana and Bharatchak 
Collieries (Private) Limited, Post Office 
Sitarampur, Burdwan.  9,45,000  
606. Poidih ... Post Office Su nderchak  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta -1. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 432.  
607. Prossono  Dutta ‟s 
Kajora ... Post Office Kajoragram  Shri P.C. Dutta and Sons,  71A, Netaji 
Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. 1,30,000  
608. Parascole ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Parascole Coal Company, 18, Netaji 
Subhas Road Calcutta -1. 16,56,000  
609. Parasea ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Parasea Collieries Company, 25, Netaji 
Subhas Road, Calcutta - 1. 29,19,000  
610. Proper Kajora ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Shri Nimbarak Proper Kajora Coal 
Company (Private) Limited, 135, Biplabi 
Rash Behari Bose Road Calcutta -1. 1,27,000  
  59 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
611. Pure Bansra  ... Post Office Raniganj  Pure Kustore Colliery Company Limited, 
8, Lyons Range Calcutta.  *10,39,000  
612. Pure Jambad ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Pure Jambad Colliery Private Limited, 
135, Canning Street, Calcutta.  3,52,000  
613. Pure Kajora ...  Post Office Kajoragram  East Bar akar Coal Company (Private) 
Limited , 18, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta.  6,40,000  
614. Pure Kenda ...  Post Office Ukhra  Pure Ken da Coal Company, Post Office 
Ukhra, Burdwan.  4,000  
615. Pure Searsole ...  Post Office Searsole 
Rajbari  Kumari Rani H. Devi, Post Office 
Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan.  2,48,000  
616. Pansuli ...  Post Office Nutandanga  Krishna Valley Selected Coal Company, 
Post Office Nutandanga.  33,000  
617. Pure Samla ...  Post Office Nutandanga  Sun Dist ributors and Mining Company 
Limited , 14, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta.  2,78,000  
618. Pure Sitalpur ...  Post Office Ukhra  Pure Sitalpur Coal Concern (Private) 
Limited 23 -B, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta.  †3,50,000  
619. Pans uli  
Nutandanga ...  Post Office Gogla  Shri D.T. Dhanuka, Post Office 
Nutandanga, Burdwan.  3,01,000  
620. Pottery ...  Post Office Raniganj  Burn &  Co., 12, Mission Row, Calcutta.  4,000  
621. Pretoria ...  Post Office Charanpur  Seebpor Coal Company Limited, 8, 
Clive Row, Calcutta.  4,000  
622. Purushottampur and 
Abhirampur ...    Tara Iron and Steel Company Limited.  4,000  
623. Pandav eswar ...  Post Office Barakar  Shri Pandaveswar Coal Company 
Limited, Post Office Salanpur, Burdwan.  4,000  
624. Poniati Baraboni ...  Post Office Charanpur  Shrimati Ashalata Nag and others, 4, 
Mandevilla Gardens, Calcutta -19. 4,000  
625. Premier Nandi ...  Post Office Nandi  Shri Sunil Kumar Mitra, 19 /A, Dalimtala 
Lane, Calcutta -6. 4,000  
626. Pure Dalurband 
(Near Saml a 
Dalurband) ...    Pure Dalurband Coal Company, Post 
Office Pandveswar, Burdwan.  Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 660.  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI.No. 426.  
† This amount includes the amount payable in r espect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 599 and 681.  60 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
627. Poniati Mines  Post Office Nandi  Krishna Valley Selected Coal Company, 
Post Office Nandi, Burdwan.  11,000  
628. Ramjibanpur 
(Nag ‟s) ... Post Office Sita rampur  Ramjibanpur Coal Company Limited, 4, 
Mande villa Gardens, Calcutta.  4,20,000  
629. Ranipur ... Post Office Dishergarh  Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, 
Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta.  Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 411.  
630. Real Kajora ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Real Kajora Colliery Trust, 24, Strand 
Road, Calcutta.  1,48,000  
631. Real Jambad ...  Post Office Bahula  Oriental Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, 25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta.  4,66,000  
632. Ratiba ti ... Post Office Kalipahari  West Bengal Mining Company, Post 
Office Kalipahari Burdwan.  19,29,000  
633. Radhamadhabpur ...  Post Office Kalipahari  Ghusick and Muslia Collieries Limited, 
Post Office Kalipahari, Burdwan.  71,000  
634. Rana Number 6 Pit 
... Post Office Kalipahari  Lodna Colliery Company (1920)  
Limited , 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta.  *94,66,000 
635. Raniganj ...  Post Office Raniganj  Bengal Coal Company, 8, Clive Row , 
Calcutta.  Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 432.  
636. Radhaballavpur ...  Post Office Samdi  Automotive Manufacturer ‟s Agencies,  
p- 27, Princep Street , Calcutta -13. 14,000  
637. Rangakanali ...  Post Office Samdi  Messrs Surajmal Gupta and others 135, 
Biplabi Rashbehari Bose Road, Calcutta -
1. 82,000  
638. Real Salanpur ...  Post Office Salanpur  Salanpur Syndicate Limited, 3, 
Synagogue Street, Calcutta.  4,000  
639. Real Raniganj ...  Post Office Raniganj  Real Raniganj Coal Company Limited, 
Post Office Raniganj.  4,000  
640. Real Nandi ...  Post Office Nand  Real Nandi Collieries Limited, 8/2, Hast -
ings Street Calcutta.  4,000  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 669, 670 and 671.  61 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
641. Russa ...  Post Office Russa  Selected Raniganj Collieries, 21, Ekdal ia 
Road, Calcutta.  4,000  
642. Sanctoria ...  Post Office Dishergarh  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 432.  
643. Seetalpur ...  Post Office Dishergarh  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  Amount 
includ ed in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 432.  
644. Sodepur 9 and 10 
Pits ... Post Office Sunderchak  Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta -1. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 432.  
645. South  
Joyramdanga ...  Post Office Asansol  Dishergarh Coal Company Limited, 3, 
Synagogue Street, Calcutta.  4,72,000  
646. Searsole ...  Post Office Raniganj  Searsole Coal Company Limited, 22, 
Chittaranjan Avenue, Calcutta.  2,61,000  
647. Singaran ...  Post Office Toposi  Singaran Coal Syndicate Limited, 237 -
P/lA, Manicktola Main Road, Calcutta.  1,02,000  
648. Sitaldassji Selected 
... Post Office  
Searsole Raj -bari Messrs. Puranmall Shreen iwas and 
Brothers, Searsole Rajba ri, Burdwan.  2,80,000  
649. South Jambad ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram  South Parasia Collieries (Private) 
Limited, 33, Canning Street, Calcutta -1. 8,000  
650. South Parasia ...  Post Office  
Kajoragram  South Parasia Collieries (Private) 
Limited , 25, Netaji Subhas Road, 
Calcutta -1. 1,14,000  
651. Samla 
Baidyanathpur ...  Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Ashoku Mineral and Company, Post 
Office Pandaveswar, Burdwan.  2,88,000  
652. Samla  
Chatrisgonda ...  Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing 
Com pany Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas 
Road, Calcutta - 1. 2,31,000  
  62 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
653. Samla Dalurband ...  Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Samla Dalurband Coal Company 
(Private) Limited, Post Office Jharia, 
Dhanbad.  6,25,000  
654. Samla Manderboni 
... Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 9/1, 
R.N. Mukherjee Road, Calcutta -1. *24,67,000  
655. Samla Kendra ...  Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing 
Com pany Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas 
Road, Calcutta -1. 11,34,000  
656. Samla Pandaveswar 
... Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing 
Com pany Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas 
Road, Calcutta -1. 2,25,000  
657. Samla Ramnagar ...  Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing 
Com pany Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas 
Road, Calcutta. .  4,50,000  
658. Sarpi  Kajora ...  Post Office Ukhra  Sarpi Kajora Coal Mines (Private) 
Limited, 33, Canning Street, Calcutta.  6,49,000  
659. Selected Kajora 
Jambad ...  Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Selected Kajora Jambad Colliery, Post 
Office Ukhra, Burdwan.  1,31,000  
660. Selected Samla  Post Office  
Pandaveswar  Selected Dalurband Coal Company 
(Private) Limited, 137, Cotton Street, 
Calcutta -7. †7,04,000  
661. Siduli ...  Post Office Ukhra  Siduli Colliery Company , Post Office 
Ukhra, Burdwan.  1,42,000  
662. Sitalpur ...  Post Office Sidul i Sitalpur Coal Company (Private) 
Limited, Post Office Siduli, Burdwan.  3,02,000  
663. South Adjai ...  Post Office Gogla  Gopal Collieries Limited, 174, Mahatma 
Gandhi Road, Calcutta -7. 4,000  
664. Sunkerpore ...  Post Office Ukhra  Ukhra Minerals (Private) Limited, Post 
Office Ukhra, Burdwan.  4,17,000  
665. Satgram 
(Nageswar) ...  Post Offi ce Searsole 
Rajbari  Nageswar Coal Company Kargali 
Colliery, Post Office Bermo, Hazaribah.  4,75,000  
666. Selected  
Searsole ...  Post Office Raniganj  Puranmal Jagannath, Post Office Rani -
ganj.  4,88,000  
667. Sri Amritnagar 
Selected ...  Post Office Raniganj  Sriniwas and Sons, Post Office Raniganj.  14,41,000  
  
                                                           
* This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against SI. Nos. 590 and 591.  
† This amount includes the amount payable in respect of coal mines specified against 626.  63 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
668. Seebpore ...  Post Office Gharanpur  Katras Jherriah Coal Company Limited, 
8, Clive Row, Calcutta -I. 4,000  
669. Sripur Incline ...  Post Office Kalipahari  Lodna Colliery Company (1920) 
Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta - I. Amount 
included in  
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 634.  
670. Sripur 1, 2 and 3 
Pits ...  Post Office Kalipahari  Lodna Colliery Company (1920) 
Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta -I. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 634.  
671. Sripur 4, 5 and 6 
Pits ... Post Office Kalipahari  Lodna Colliery Company , (1920)  
Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta -1, Amount 
includ ed in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 634.  
672. Samdi Sangramgarh 
... Post Office Sam di B. Hazra and Company, Post Office 
Samdi.  3,44,000  
673. Shibpur ...    Manish Kumar Mukherjee and Doctor 
A.K. Bhattacharjee, Post Office Shibpur, 
Burdwan.  4,000  
674. Shri Ghanashyam ...  Post Office Kajora  Ghanashyam Coal Industries (Private) 
Limited, 7, Bhowani Dutt Lane, 
Calcutta -7. 53,000  
675. Shabanpur ... Post Office Salanpur  Shridhar Mukherjee New Beerbhum 
Coal Company, Burdwan.  4,000  
676. Selected Kajora ...  Post Office Raniganj  Kajora Selected Colliery Company, 135, 
Canning Street, Calcutta -I. 4,000  
677. Selected 
Dhundabad ...  Post Office Salanpur  Selected Dhundabad Colliery Company, 
Post Office, Salanpur.  4,000  
678. South Nawpara ...  Post Office Ondal  Pure Dishergarh Coal Company Limited, 
51 , Garanhatta Lane, Calcutta.  4,000  
679. Sitalnagar ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Jagannath Buchasia and Others, Pu rna 
Nibash Man ison, Raniganj.  4,000  
680. Sree ...  Post Office Charanpur  Belbaid Colliery Limited, Post Office 
Raniganj . 4,000  
  64 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
681. Sree Sitalpur ...    Pure Sitalpur Coal Concern, 23/B,  
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. Amount 
included in 
the amount 
specified 
against Sl. 
No. 618.  
682. Selected Banskuri 
... Post Office Mejia  Selected Banskuri Colliery Company, 3, 
Gangedhar Sarayan,  Post Office Rani -
ganj.  4,000  
683. Santalmoutha ...  Post Office Net uria Moutha Dishe rgarh Coal Company, Post 
Office Barakar.  4,000  
684. South Kenda ...  Post Office Toposi  South Kenda Coal Company (Ratanlal 
Goenka and Surajbhan Ganeriwala), Post 
Office Toposi.  15,000  
685. Sibdaspur ...  Post Office Salanpur  Sibdaspur Colliery Company, Post 
Office Sitarampur, Burdwan.  4,000  
686. Selected Jamuria ...  Post Office Nandi  A.K. Goswamy, Post Office Birkulti, 
Burdwan.  4,000  
687. Satpukuria ...  Post Office Asansol  Satpukuria and Asansol Collieries 
Limited, 18, Mission Row, Calcutta  4,000  
688. South Samla ...  Post Office  
Pandave wsar Kalyanji Mavji and Company, 14, Netaji 
Subhas Road, Calcutta.  11,000  
689. Salanpur A Seam ...  Post Office Salanpur  New Sergarh Coal Company, Post Office 
Salanpur Burdwan.  4,000  
690. South East Baraboni 
Khas ...  Post Office Charanpur  Bharat Collieries Limited, 11, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  4,000  
691. Shyamsundarpur ...  Post Office Ukhra  Burdwan Collieries Limited, 5, 
Synagogue  Street, Calcutta.  15,000  
692. Samla Govindpur ...  Post Office Pandaveswar  Samla Govnidpur Collieries (Private) 
Limited, 33, Canning Street Calcutta -1. 4,000  
693. Selected Na ndi ... Post Office Siduli  Jyotsna Devi, Post Office Sitarampur, 
Burdwan.  4,000  
694. Saltore ...  Post Office Saltore  Barakar Coal Company, Chartered Bank 
Building, Calcutta.  4,000  
695. Selected Baraboni 
... Post Office Charanpur  Selected Baraboni Coal Company 
Limited, Post Office Charanpur, 
Burdwan.  4,000  
696. Toposi ...  Post Office Toposi  Associated Nandi Collieries Limited, 18, 
Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta -1. 7,65,000  
  65 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the mine  Location of the mine  Name and address of owners of the mine  Amount (in 
rupees)  
1 2 3 4 5 
697. Tara ...  Post Office Birkulti  Tara Colliery Limited, 19, Radha Nagar 
Road, Burnpur, Asansol.  1,07,000  
698. Toposi Koradanga 
... Post Office Toposi  Toposi Kordanga Coa l Concern, Post 
Office Top soi, Burdwan.  4,000  
699. Uttar Dhadka ...  Post Office Kajoragram  New Beerbhum Coal Company , 8, Clive 
Row, Calcutta.  4,000  
700. Upper Kajora ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Hari Prasad Bhan Singha, 29 -A, Sir H. 
Goenka Street, Calcutta -7. 4,000  
701. Victory Group ...  Post Office Nutandanga  Coal Prod ucts (Private) Limited, 3, 
Bank shall Street, Calcutta.  12,55,000  
702. Visheshari Khandra 
... Post Office Ukhra  N.H. O hja and Company, Gi llander ‟s 
House, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta.  9,37,000  
703. Viceroy (Mandal ‟s) 
... Post Office Dishergarh  B.N. Mandal and Company, Parekh ‟s 
Building, 22 Canning Street, Calcutta.  4,000  
704. Western Kajora ...  Post Office Kajoragram  Western Kajora Collieries (Private) 
Limited , 178, Mahatma Gandhi Road, 
Calcutta.  2,37,000  
705. West Baraboni ...  Post Office Raghunath 
Chak  Modern Coal Trading Company (Private) 
Limited , Post Office , Raghunath Chak, 
Burdwan.  71,000  
706. West Palasiha ...  Post Office Asansol  P.K. Agarwala and others (B.L. 
Agarwala and Sons), Post Office Jharia.  4,000  
707. West Jamuria ...  Post Office Charanpur  West Jamuria Coal Company Limited, 2, 
Brabourne Road, Calcutta.  4,000  
Darjeeling Coalfield  
708. Dalingkota ...  Post Office Pillan ‟s Hat  Himalaya Coal and Mineral Industries, 
Post Office , Bagrakote , Darjeeling.  4,000  
709. East Bagrakote ...  Post Office Pillan ‟s Hat  Dalingkote Colliery, Post Office , Pillan ‟s 
Hat, Darjeeling.  4,000  
710. Cagu ...  Post Office Manabari  Choudhury and Chakravarty Chaturbhati, 
Post Office , Bagrakote.  4,000  
711. Lithi Valley ...  Post Office Fagu  B.D. Sharma, Darjeeling  4,000  
Explanation .—In this Schedule, wherever any amount, specified in the fifth column against a coal 
mine , has been declared in the foot notes to include also the amount payable in relation to one or more 
other coal mines, all the coal mines in relation to which such amount has bee n specified in the said 
column as payable, shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to constitute a group of coal mines.  
--------------------------The Delhi School Education Act, 1973--------------------------
1 THE DELHI SCHOOL EDUCATION ACT, 1973  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT, RECOGNITION, MANAGEMENT OF, AND AID TO, SCHOOLS  
3. Power of  Administrator to regulate education in schools.  
4. Recognition of schools.  
5. Scheme of management.  
6. Aid to recognised schools.  
CHAPTER III  
SCHOOL PROPERTY  
7. School property.  
CHAPTER IV  
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF EMPLOYEES OF RECOGNISED PRIVATE  SCHOOLS  
8. Terms and conditions of service of employees of recognised private schools.  
9. Employees to be governed by a Code of Conduct.  
10. Salaries of employees  
11. Tribunal.  
12. Chapter not to apply to unaided minority school.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS APPL ICABLE TO UNAIDED MINORITY SCHOOLS  
13. Power to prescribe minimum qualifications for recruitment.  
14. Power to prescribe Code of Conduct.  
15. Contract of service.  
CHAPTER VI  
ADMISSION TO SCHOOLS AND FEES  
16. Admission to recognised schools . 
17. Fees and other charges.  
18. School Fund.  
19. Affiliations.  
CHAPTER VII  
TAKING OVER THE MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOLS  
20. Taking over the management of schools.  
21. Section 20 not to apply to minority schools.  2 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
22. Delhi Schools Education Advisory Board.  
23. Delegation of powers.  
24. Inspection of schools.  
25. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
27. Liability of manager to punishment.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Power to remove difficulties.  
 3 THE DELHI SCHOOL EDUCATION ACT, 1973  
ACT NO. 18 OF 1973  
[9th April, 1973 .] 
An Act to provide for better organisation and development of school education in the Union 
territory of Delhi and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -fourth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called th e Delhi School Education 
Act, 19 73. 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by notification, appoint and 
different dates1 may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference to the 
commencement of this Act in relation to any provision thereof shall be construed as a reference to the 
date on which that provision comes into force.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of the Union territory of Delhi appointed by the 
President under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “Advisory Board ” means the Board referred to in section 22;  
(c) “aid” means any aid granted to a recognised school by the Central Government, 
Administrator, a local authority or any other authority designated by the Central Government, 
Administrator or a local authority;  
(d) “aided school ” means a recognised private school which is receiving aid in the form of 
maintenance grant from the Central Government, Administrator or a local authority or any other 
authority designated by the Central Government, Administrator or a local authority;  
(e) “appropriate authority ” means, — 
(i) in the case of a school recognised or to be recognised by an authority designated or 
sponsored by the Central Government, that authority;  
(ii) in the case of a school recognised or to be recognised by the Delhi Administr ation, the 
Administrator or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf;  
(iii) in the case of a school recognised or to be recognised by the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi, that Corporation;  
(iv) in the case of any other school, the Administrator or  any other officer authorised by him 
in this behalf;  
(f) “Delhi ” means the Union territory of Delhi;  
(g) “Director ” means the Director of Education, Delhi, and includes any other officer authorised 
by him to perform all or any of the functions of the Direc tor under this Act;  
(h) “employee ” means a teacher and includes every other employee working in a recognised 
school;  
                                                           
1. 28th April, 1973 , vide notification of the Delhi Administration in the Education Deptt. No. F. 5/15/72 -Education                               
dated 28 th April, 1973 , in respect of the provisions except Chapters II to V (both inclusive), sections 16, 17, 18, 22 and 27).  
 
   31st December, 1973,  vide notification No. F. 5/15/72 -Education (i), dated 31st December, 1973 , Delhi Gazette, Extraordinary, 
Pt. IV, dated 31 st December, 1973,  in respect of Chapters II to V (both inclusive), sections, 16,  17, 18, 22 and 27,  4 (i) “existing employee ” means an employee of an existing school who is employed in such school 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, and includes an employee who was employed in 
such school for a period of not less than twelve months immediately preceding the 2nd day of 
September, 1972;  
(j) “existing school ” means a recognised private school which is in existence at the 
commencemen t of this Act;  
(k) “Head of school ” means the principal academic officer, by whatever name called, of a 
recognised school;  
(l) “local authority ” means, — 
(i) in relation to an area within the local limits of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, that 
Corporation;  
(ii) in relation to an area within the local limits of the New Delhi Municipal Committee, that 
Committee;  
(iii) in relation to an area within the local limits of the Delhi Cantonment Board, that Board;  
(m) “manager ”, in relation to a school, means the person, by whatever name called, who is 
entrusted, either on the date on which this Act comes into force or, as the case may be, under a 
scheme of management made under section 5, with the management of the affairs of that school;  
(n) “managing c ommittee ” means the body of individuals who are entrusted with the management 
of any recognised private school;  
(o) “minority school ” means a school established and administered by a minority having the right 
to do so under clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitution;  
(p) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official  Gazette;  
(q) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(r) “private school ” means a school which is not run by the Central Government, Administrator, a 
local authority or any other authority designated or sponsored by the Central Government, 
Administrator or a local authority;  
(s) “public examination ” means an examination conducted by the Central Board of Secondary 
Education, Council for Indian School Certificate Examinations or any other Board which may 
hereafter be established for the purpose, and recognised by the Administrator or any other officer 
authorised by him in this behalf;  
(t) “recognised school ” means a school recognised by the appropriate authority;  
(u) “school ” includes a pre -primary, primary, middle and higher secondary school, and also 
includes any other institution which imparts educat ion or training below the degree level, but does not 
include an institution which imparts technical education;  
(v) “school property ” means all movable and immovable property belonging to, or in the 
possession of, the school and all other rights and interes ts in, or arising out of, such property, and 
includes land, building and its appurtenances, playgrounds, hostels, furniture, books, apparatus, maps, 
equipment, utensils, cash, reserve fund s investments and bank balances;  
(w) “teacher ” includes the Head of a school;  
(x) “unaided minority school” means a recognised minority school which does not receive any 
aid. 
 CHAPTER II   
ESTABLISHMENT, RECOGNITION, MANAGEMENT OF, AND AID TO, SCHOOLS  
3. Power of Administrator to regulate education in schools .—(1) The Administrator may regulate 
education in all the schools in Delhi in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder.  5 (2) The Administrator may establish and maintain any school in Delhi or may permit any person or 
local authority to establish and maintain any school in Delhi, subject to compliance with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
(3) On and from the commencement of this Act and subject to the provisions of clause (1) of article 
30 of the Constitution, the establishment of a new school or the opening of a higher class or the closing 
down of an existing class in any existing school in Delhi shall be subject to the provisions of this Act and 
the rules made thereunder and any school or higher class establis hed or opened otherwise than in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act shall not be recognised by the appropriate authority.  
4. Recognition of schools .—(1) The appropriate authority may, on an application made to it in the 
prescribed form and in the pr escribed manner, recognise any private school:  
Provided that no sch ool shall be recognised unless — 
(a) it has adequate funds to ensure its financial stability and regular payment of salary and 
allowances to its employees;  
(b) it has a duly approved scheme of management as required by section 5;  
(c) it has suitable or adequate accommodation and sanitary facilities having regard, among other 
factors, to the number, age and sex of the pupils attending it;  
(d) it provides for approved courses of study and effic ient instruction;  
(e) it has teachers with prescribed qualifications; and  
(f) it has the prescribed facilities for physical education, library service, laboratory work, 
workshop practice or co -curricular activities.  
(2) Every application for recognition of  a school shall be entertained and considered by the 
appropriate authority and the decision thereon shall be communicated to the applicant within a period of 
four months from the date of the receipt of the application; and where recognition is not granted,  the 
reasons for not granting such recognition shall also be communicated to the applicant within the said 
period.  
(3) Where recognition to a school is refused, any person aggrieved by such refusal may, within thirty 
days from the date of communication to him, of such refusal, appeal against such refusal, in the 
prescribed manner, to the prescribed authority and the decision of the prescribed authority thereon shall 
be final:  
Provided that the prescribed authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said period of thirty days, extend, for reasons to be 
recorded by it in writing, the said period by  a further period of sixty days . 
(4) Where the managing committee of a school obtains  recognition by fraud, misrepresentation or 
suppression of material particulars, or where, after obtaining recognition, the school fails to continue to 
comply with any of the conditions specified in the proviso to sub -section ( 1), the authority granting th e 
recognition may, after giving the managing committee of the school a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the proposed action, withdraw the recognition granted to such school under sub -section ( 1). 
(5) The recognition granted under sub -section  (1) shall not, by itself, entitle any school to receive aid.  
(6) Every existing school shall be deemed to have been recognised under this section and shall be 
subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder:  
Provided that where any suc h school does not satisfy any of the conditions specified in the proviso to 
sub-section ( 1), the prescribed authority may require the school to satisfy such conditions and such other 
conditions as may be prescribed, within a specified period and if any suc h condition is not satisfied, 
recognition may be withdrawn from such school.  6 (7) Every school, whose recognition is withdrawn under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 6), may 
appeal to the prescribed authority, who shall dispose of the appeal within six month s from the date of 
presentation of the appeal in such manner as may be prescribed, and if the appeal is not disposed of 
within that period, the order for the withdrawal of recognition shall, on the expiry of the said period of six 
months, stand cancelled.  
(8) On hearing an appeal preferred under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 7), the prescribed authority 
may, after giving the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the 
order appealed against.  
5. Scheme of management .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law, the managing committee of 
every recognised school shall make, in accordance with the rules made under this Act and with the 
previous approval of the appropriate authority, a scheme of management for such school:  
Provided that in the case of a recognised private school which does not receive any aid, the scheme of 
management shall apply with such variations and modifications as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that so much of this sub -section as relates to the previous approval of the appropriate 
authority, shall not apply to a scheme of management for an unaided minority school.  
(2) A scheme may be made, in l ike manner, to add to, vary or modify any scheme made under                
sub-section ( 1). 
6. Aid to recognised schools .—(1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf and subject to such conditions as may  be prescribed, pay to the 
Administrator, for distribution of aid to recognised private schools, not being primary schools recognised 
by a local authority, such sums of money as that Government may consider necessary:  
Provided that no existing school recei ving, immediately before the commencement of this Act, aid 
shall be eligible for the continuance of such aid unless it complies, within such period as may be specified 
by the Director, with the conditions specified in the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 4.  
(2) The authority competent to grant the aid may stop, reduce or suspend aid for violation of any of 
the conditions prescribed in this behalf.  
(3) The aid may cover such part of the expenditure of the school as may be prescribed.  
(4) No payment, out  of the aid given for salary, allowances and provident fund of employees of the 
school, shall be made for any other purpose.  
(5) No aid shall be given to a school the management of which has been taken over under section 20.  
(6) No unrecognised school shall be eligible to receive any aid or any benefit made available to 
private schools by the Administrator or any agency of the Administrator.  
CHAPTER  III 
SCHOOL PROPERTY  
7. School property .—(1) The management of every aided school shall furnish to the app ropriate 
authority, initially, at the time of grant of aid and thereafter annually, a statement containing a list of 
school property together with such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time b eing in force, no transfer, 
mortgage or lease of any movable or immovable property of an aided school, not being the property 
specified in the rules, shall be made except with the previous permission of the appropriate authority:  
Provided that where the ap propriate authority omits or fails to dispose of the application for such 
permission within sixty days from the date of receipt of the application in this behalf, the permission 
shall, on the expiry of the said period of sixty days, be deemed to have been granted.  7 (3) Any person aggrieved by the grant or refusal of permission under sub -section ( 2) may prefer, in 
such form and within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to the Administrator against such grant or 
refusal of permission and the decision of the Administrator thereon shall be final.  
(4) Any transaction made in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 2), or, as the case may be, 
decision of the Administrator, shall be void.  
CHAPTER IV  
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF EMPLOYEES OF RECOG NISED PRIVATE SCHOOLS  
8. Terms and conditions of service of employees of recognised private schools .—(1) The 
Administrator may make rules regulating the minimum qualifications for recruitment, and the conditions 
of service, of employees of recognised private schools:  
Provided that neither the salary nor the rights in respect of leave of absence, age of retirement and 
pension of an employee in the employment of an existing school at the commencement of this Act shall 
be varied to the disadvantage of such employee:  
Provided further that every such employee shall be entitled to opt for terms and conditions of service 
as they were applicable to him immediately before the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Subject to any rule that may be made in this behalf, n o employee of a recognised private school 
shall be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank nor shall his service be otherwise terminated except with 
the prior approval of the Director.  
(3) Any employee of a recognised private school who is dismissed, removed  or reduced in rank may, 
within three months from the date of communication to him of the order of such dismissal, removal or 
reduction in rank, appeal against such order to the Tribunal constituted under section 11.  
(4) Where the managing committee of a r ecognised private school intends to suspend any of its 
employees, such intention shall be communicated to the Director and no such suspension shall be made 
except with the prior approval of the Director:  
Provided that the managing committee may suspend an employee with immediate effect and without 
the prior approval of the Director if it is satisfied that such immediate suspension is necessary by reason 
of the gross misconduct, within the meaning of the Code of Conduct prescribed under section 9, of the 
employee:  
Provided further that no such immediate suspension shall remain in force for more than a period of 
fifteen days from the date of suspension unless it has been communicated to the Director and approved by 
him before the expiry of the said period.  
(5) Where the intention to suspend, or the immediate suspension of, an employee is communicated to 
the Director, he may, if he is satisfied that there are adequate and reasonable grounds for such suspension, 
accord his approval to such suspension.  
9. Employees to be governed by a Code of Conduct .—Every employee of a recognised school shall 
be governed by such Code of Conduct as may be prescribed and on the violation of any provision of such 
Code of Conduct, the employee shall be liable to such discipl inary action as may be prescribed.  
10. Salaries of employees .—(1) The scales of pay and allowances, medical facilities, pension, 
gratuity, provident fund and other prescribed benefits of the employees of a recognised private school 
shall not be less than t hose of the employees of the corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate 
authority:  
Provided that where the scales of pay and allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident 
fund and other prescribed benefits of the employees of any  recognised private school are less than those 
of the employees of the corresponding status in the schools run by the appropriate authority, the 
appropriate authority shall direct, in writing, the managing committee of such school to bring the same up 
to the level of those of the employees of the corresponding status in schools run by the appropriate 
authority:  8 Provided further that the failure to comply with such direction shall be deemed to be non -compliance 
with the conditions for continuing recognition of an existing school and the provisions of section 4 shall 
apply accordingly.  
(2) The managing committee of every aided school shall deposit, every month, its share towards pay 
and allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, provident fund and othe r prescribed benefits with the 
Administrator and the Administrator shall disburse, or cause to be disbursed, within the first week of 
every month , the salaries and allowances to the  employees of the aided schools.  
11. Tribunal .—(1) The Administrator shall, by notification, constitute a Tribunal, to be known as the 
“Delhi School Tribunal ”, consisting of one person:  
Provided that no person shall be so appointed unless he has held office as a District Judge or any 
equivalent judicial office.  
(2) If any vacancy, other than a temporary absence, occurs in the office of the presiding officer of the 
Tribunal, the Administrator shall appoint another person, in acc ordance with the provisions of this 
section, to fill the vacancy and the procee dings may be continued before the Tribunal from the stage at 
which the vacancy is filled.  
(3) The Administrator shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India.  
(5) The Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure in  all matters arising out of the 
discharge of its functions including the place or places at which it shall hold its sittings . 
(6) The Tribunal shall for the purpose of disposal of an appeal preferred under this Act have the same 
powers as are vested in a court of appeal by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ) and shall also 
have the power to stay  the operation of the order appealed against on such terms as it may think fit.  
12. Chapter not to apply to unaided minority school .—Nothing contained in this Chapter shall 
apply to an unaided minority school.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO UNAIDED MIN ORITY SCHOOLS  
13. Power to prescribe minimum qualifications for recruitment .—The Administrator may make 
rules regulating the minimum qualifications for, and method of, recruitment of employees of unaided 
minority schools:  
Provided that no qualification shall be varied to the disadvantage of an existing employee of an 
unaided minority school.  
14. Power to prescribe Code of Conduct .—Every employee of an unaided  minority school shall be 
governed by such Code of Conduct as may be prescribed.  
15. Contract of service .—(1) The managing committee of every unaided minority school shall enter 
into a written contract of service with every employee of such school:  
Provided that if, at the commencement of this Act, there is no written contract of service in relation to 
any existing employee of an unaided minority school, the managing committee of such school shall enter 
into such contract within a period of three months from such commencement:  
Provided further that no contract referred to in the foregoing proviso shal l vary to the disadvantage of 
any existing employee the term of any contract subsisting at the commencement of this Act between him 
and the school.  
(2) A copy of every contract of service referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be forwarded by the 
managing co mmittee of the concerned unaided minority school to the Administrator who shall, on receipt 
of such copy, register it in such manner as may be prescribed.  9 (3) Every contract of service referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall provide for t he following matters,  
namely: — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the employee, including the scale of pay and other 
allowances to which he shall be entitled;  
(b) the leave of absence, age of retirement, pension and gratuity, or, contributory provident fund 
in lieu of pension and gratuity, and medical and other benefits to which the employee shall be 
entitled;  
(c) the penalties which may be imposed on the employee for the violation of any Code of 
Conduct or the breach of any term of the contract entered into by him;  
(d) the manner in which disciplinary proceedings in relation to the employee shall be conducted 
and the procedure which shall be followed before any employee is dismissed, removed from service 
or reduced in rank;  
(e) arbitration of any dispute arising out of any breach of contract between the employee and the 
managing committee with regard to — 
(i) the scales of pay and other allowances,  
(ii) leave of absence, age of retirement, pension, gratuity, provident fund, medical and other 
benefits,  
(iii) any disciplina ry action leading to the dismissal or removal from service or reduction in 
rank of the employee;  
(f) any other matter which, in the opinion of the managing committee, ought to be, or may be, 
specified in such contract.  
CHAPTER VI  
ADMISSION TO SCHOOLS AND FEES  
16. Admission to recognised schools .—(1) A child who has not attained the age of five years, shall 
not be admitted to class I, or an equivalent class or any class higher than class I, in a recognised school.  
(2) A student seeking admission for the fir st time in a recognised school in a class higher than class I 
shall not be admitted to that class if his age reduced by the number of years of normal school study 
between that class and class I or an equivalent class, falls short of five years.  
(3) Admissi on to a recognised school or to any class thereof shall be regulated by rules made in this 
behalf.  
17. Fees and other charges .—(1) No aided school shall levy any fee or collect any other charge or 
receive any other payment except those specified by the Dir ector.  
(2) Every aided school having different rates of fees or other charges or different funds shall obtain 
prior approval of the prescribed authority before levying such fees or collecting such charges or creating 
such funds.  
(3) The manager of every re cognised school shall, before the commencement of each academic 
session, file with the Director a full statement of the fees to be levied by such school during the ensuing 
academic session, and except with the prior approval of the Director, no such school  shall charge, during 
that academic session, any fee in excess of the fee specified by its manager in the said statement.  
18. School Fund .—(1) In every aided school, there shall be a fund, to be called the “School Fund ”, 
and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any aid granted by the Administrator,  
(b) income accruing to the school by way of fees, charges or other payments, and  
(c) any other contributions, endowments and the like.  10 (2) The School Fund and all other funds, including the Pupils’  Fund, established with the approval of 
the Administrator, shall be accounted for and operated in accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
(3) In every recognised unaided school, there shall be a fund, to be called the “Recognised Unaided 
School Fund ”, and there shall be credited thereto income ac cruing to the school by way of — 
(a) fees,  
(b) any charges and payments which may be realised by the school for other specific purposes, 
and 
(c) any other contributions, endowments, gifts and the like,  
(4) (a) Income derived by unaided schools by way of fees shall be utilised only for such educational 
purposes as may be prescribed; and  
(b) charges and payments realised and all other contributions, endowments and gifts received by the 
school shall be utilised on ly for the specific purpose for which they were realised or received.  
(5) The managing committee of every recognised private school shall file every year with the 
Director such duly audited financial and other returns as may be prescribed, and every such return shall 
be audited by such authority as may be prescribed.  
19. Affiliations .—(1) For the purpose of any public examination every recognised higher secondary 
school shall be affiliated to one or more of the Boards or Council conducting such examination  and shall 
fulfil the conditions specified by the Board or Council in this behalf.  
(2) The students of recognised higher secondary schools shall be prepared for, and presented to, the 
public examinations or such other form of evaluation held or made for th e students of such schools.  
(3) The students of every recognised middle school shall be prepared for, and presented to, such 
public examination as may be held by the Directorate of Education, Delhi, for the students of such 
schools.  
(4) Every student of a recognised primary school shall be prepared for, and presented to, the public 
examination held by a local authority competent to hold such examination for the students of such 
schools.  
CHAPTER VII  
TAKING OVER THE MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOLS  
20. Taking over the m anagement of schools .—(1) Whenever the Administrator is satisfied that the 
managing committee or manager of any school, whether recognised or not, has neglected to perform any 
of the duties imposed on it by or under this Act or any rule made thereunder and  that it is expedient in the 
interests of school education to take over the management of such school, he may, after giving the 
managing committee or the manager of such school, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
the proposed action, take ov er the management of such school for a limited period not exceeding three 
years:  
Provided that where the management of a school has been taken over for a period of three years or 
less, the Administrator may, if he is of opinion that in order to secure prop er management of the school it 
is expedient that such management should continue to be in force after the expiry of the said limited 
period, he may, from time to time, issue directions for the continuance of such management for such 
period not exceeding on e year at a time as he may think fit, so, however, that the total period for which 
such management is taken over shall not, in any case, exceed five years.  
(2) Whenever the management of any school is taken over under sub -section ( 1), every person in 
charg e of the management of such school immediately before its management is taken over, shall deliver 
possession of the school property to the Administrator or any officer authorised by him in this behalf.  
(3) After taking over the management of any school und er this section, the Administrator may arrange 
to manage the school through  the Director or any other person author ised by the Director in this be half 
(hereinafter referre d to as the “authorised officer” ). 11 (4) Where the management of any school has been taken over under sub -section ( 1), the managing 
committee or manager of such school may, within three months from the date of taking over, appeal to 
the Administrator, who may after considering the representation made by the managing committee or the 
manage r, pass such orders, including an order for the restoration of the management or for the reduction 
of the period during which the management of such school shall remain vested in the Administrator, as he 
may deem fit.  
(5) Where the management of a school h as been taken over under this section, the Administrator shall 
pay such rent as may be payable for the building of the school to the person entitled to receive it as was 
being paid by the managing committee or the manager immediately before the management of such 
school was taken over.  
(6) During such period as any school remains under the manage ment of the authorised officer — 
(a) the service conditions, as approved by the Administrator, of the employees of the school who 
were in employment immediately befo re the date on which the management was taken over, shall not 
be varied to their disadvantage;  
(b) all educational facilities which the school had been affording immediately before such 
management was taken over, shall continue to be afforded;  
(c) the School Fund, the Pupils’  Fund and the Management Fund and any other existing fund 
shall continue to be available to the authorised officer for being spent for the purposes of the school; 
and 
(d) no resolution passed at any meeting of the managing committee  of such school shall be given 
effect to unless approved by the Administrator.  
21. Section 20 not to apply to minority schools .—Nothing contained in section 20 shall apply to 
any minority school.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Delhi Schools Education Advisory Board .—(1) There shall be an Advisory Board for school 
education, to be called the “Delhi School Education Advisory Board ” for the purpose of advising the 
Administrator on matters of policy relating to education in Delhi.  
(2) The Advisory Board shall be constituted by the Administrator and shall consist of a Chairman and 
fourteen other members, to be nominated by the Administrator.  
(3) The Advisory Board constituted under  sub-section ( 2) shall include — 
(a) Heads of recognised private schools;  
(b) representatives of the organisations of teachers of the recognised private schools;  
(c) managers of the recognised private schools;  
(d) representatives of parents or guardians of students of recognised private schools; and  
(e) eminent educationists.  
(4) The Advisory Board shall regulate its own procedure.  
(5) The terms of office of every member of the Board and travelling and other allowances payable to 
a member of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
23. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Administrator may delegate all or any of his powers, duties and 
functions under this Act to the Director or any other officer.  
(2) Every person to whom any power is delegated under sub -section ( 1), may exercise that power in 
the same manner and with the same effect as if such power had been conferred on him directly by this Act 
and not by way of delegation.  12 24. Inspection of schools .—(1) Every recognised school shall be inspected at least once in each 
financial year in such ma nner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Director may also arrange special inspection of any school on such aspects of its working as 
may, from time to time, be considered necessary by him.  
(3) The Director may give directions to the manager requiring the manage r to rectify any defect or 
deficiency found at the time of inspection or otherwise in the working of the school.  
(4) If the manager fails to comply with any direction given under sub -section ( 3), the Director may, 
after considering the explanation or repor t, if any, given or made by the manager, take such action as he 
may think fit, including — 
(a) stoppage of aid,  
(b) withdrawal of recognition, or  
(c) except in the case of a minority school, taking over of the school under section 20.  
25. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any 
matter in relation to which the Administrator or the Director or any other person authorised by the 
Administrator or Director or any other officer or authority a ppointed or specified by or under this Act, is 
empowered by or under this Act to exercise any power, and no injunction shall be granted by any civil 
court in respect of anything which is done or intended to be done by or under this Act.  
26. Protection of a ction taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Administrator, Director or any other person authorised by the Administrator or Director for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursu ance of this Act or any rule made 
thereunder.  
27. Liability of manager to punishment .—If the manager of any recognised private school. — 
(a) omits or fails, without any reasonable excuse, to carry out any orders made by the Tribunal, or  
(b) presents any student for any public examination without complying with the provisions of 
section 19, or  
(c) omits or fails to deliver any school property to the Administrator or any officer authorised by 
him under sub -section ( 2) of section 20,  
he shall be punished wit h imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Administrator may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, and subject to the con dition of previous publication, by notification, make rules to carry out 
the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which education may be regulated by the Administrator in Delhi;  
(b) the conditions which every existing school shall be required to comply;  
(c) establishment of a new school or the opening of a higher class or the closing down of an 
existing class in an existing school;  
(d) the form and manner in which an application for recognition of a school shall be made;  
(e) the facilities to be provided by a school to obtain recognition;  
(f) the manner in which, and the authority to which, an ap peal against the refusal or withdrawal of 
recognition shall be made;  
(g) the minimum qualifications for, and method of recruitment, and the terms and conditions of 
service of employees;  13 (h) the authorities to be specified for the purposes of the different provisions of this Act;  
(i) the particulars which a scheme of management shall contain, and the manner in which such 
scheme shall be made;  
(j) variations and modifications which may be made in the scheme of management for a 
recognised school which does not  receive any aid;  
(k) the conditions under which aid may be granted to recognised schools, and on the violation of 
which aid may be stopped, reduced or suspended;  
(l) the part of the expenditure of a recognised school which is to be covered by aid;  
(m) particulars of school property which should be furnished to the appropriate authority;  
(n) the form in which, and the time within which, an appeal shall be preferred to the 
Administrator against an order made in relation to the transfer, mortgage or lien of a ny school 
property;  
(o) the Code of Conduct for the employees and the disciplinary action to be taken for the 
violation thereof;  
(p) the benefits which should be granted to the employees of recognised private schools;  
(q) admissions to a recognised school;  
(r) fees and other charges which may be collected by an aided school;  
(s) the manner of inspection of recognised schools;  
(t) the term of office, travelling and other allowances payable to the members of the Advisory 
Board;  
(u) financial and other returns  to be filed by the managing committee of recognised private 
schools, and the authority by which such returns shall be audited;  
(v) educational purposes for which the income derived by way of fees by recognised unaided 
schools shall be spent;  
(w) manner of  accounting and operation of school funds and other funds of a recognised private 
school;  
(x) fees, not exceeding one rupee, for preferring any appeal under this Act;  
(y) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
(3) Every rule  made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the  expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effec t only 
in suc h modified form or  be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or 
annualment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
29. Power to remove difficulties .—If  any difficulty arise s in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
--------------------------The Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1973--------------------------
1 THE DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR OFFICERS (OATHS AND FEES) (EXTENSION TO 
JAMMU AND KASHMIR) ACT, 1973  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Extension of Act 41 of 1948 . 
3. [Repealed .] 2 THE DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR OFFICERS (OATHS AND FEES) (EXTENSION TO 
JAMMU AND KASHMIR) ACT, 1973  
ACT NO. 2 OF 1973  
[13th March , 1973 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of the Diplomatic and Consular Officer s (Oaths and Fees) 
Act, 1948 to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Diplomatic and Consular 
Officers (Oaths and Fees) (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1973.  
(2) It shall come into force at once.  
2. Extension of Act 41 of 1948. —The Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) is hereby extended to, and shall come into force in, and in 
relation to, the State  of Jammu and Kashmir and accordingly, — 
(a) the provisions of the principal Act and the rules made thereunder shall apply to and in relation 
to the State of Jammu and Kashmir as they apply to and in relation to any other State;  
(b) clause ( d) of section 2 of the principal Act shall be omitted.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
 
                                                           
1. Section  3 rep. by Act 38 of 19 78, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 26-11-1978). 
--------------------------The Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973--------------------------
1 THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL ACT, 1973  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL  COUNCIL AND ITS COMMITTEES  
3. Constitution of Central Council.  
4. Mode of election.  
5. Restriction on elections and membership.  
6. Incorporation of Central Council.  
7. Term of office of President, Vice -President and members of Central Council.  
8. Meetings of Central Council.  
9. The Executive Committee and other committees.  
10. Meetings of committees.  
11. Officers and other employees of Central Council.  
12. Vacancies in the Central Council and committees thereof not to invalidate acts, etc.  
CHAPTER IIA  
12A. Permission for establishment of new medical institu tion, new course of study, etc.  
12B. Non -recognition of medical qualifications in certain cases.  
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITION OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS  
13. Recognition of medical qualification granted by certain medical institution s in India.  
14. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in States or countries 
outside India.  
15. Rights of persons possessing qualifications included in Second or the Third Schedule to be 
enrolled.  
16. Power to require information as to courses of study  and examinations.  
17. Inspectors at examinations.  
18. Visitors at examinations.  
19. Withdrawal of recognition.  
20. Minimum standards of education in Homoeopathy.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE CENTRAL  REGISTER OF HOMOEOPATHY  
21. The Central Register of Homoeopathy.  
22. Supply of copies of State Register of Homoeopathy.  2 SECTIONS  
23. Registration in the Central Register of Homoeopathy.  
24. Professional conduct.  
25. Removal of names from the Central Register of Homoeopathy.  
26. Privileges of persons who are enrolled on the Central Register of Homoeopathy.  
27. Registration of additional qualifications.  
28. Persons enrolled on Central Register of Homoeopathy to notify change of place of residence or 
practice.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Information to be furnished by Central C ouncil and publication thereof.  
30. Commission of inquiry.  
31. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
32. Power to make rules.  
33. Power to make regulations.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.3 THE HOMOEOPATHY CENTRAL COUNCIL ACT, 1973 * 
ACT NO. 59 OF 1973  
[19th December , 1973.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of a Central Council of Homoeopathy and the maintenance 
of a Central Register of Homoeopathy and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Homoeop athy Central 
Council Act, 1973.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into  force in a State on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf for such Sta te and different dates may be appointed for 
different States and for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means a Board, Council, Examining Body or Faculty of Homoeopathy (by whatever 
name called) constituted by the State Government under any law for the time being in force 
regulating the award of medical qualifications in, and registration o f practitioners o f, Homoeopathy;  
(b) “Central Council ” means the Central Council of Homoeopa thy constituted under section 3;  
(c) “Central Register of Homoeopathy ” means the register maintained by the Central Council 
under this Act;  
(d) “Homoeopathy ” means the Homoeopathic system of medicine and includes  the use of 
Biochemic remedies;  
(e) “medical institution ” means any institution within or without India which grants degrees, 
diplo mas or licences in Homoeopathy;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations;  
(g) “recogni sed medical qualification ” means any of the medical qualifications, in Homoeopathy, 
included in th e Second or the Third Schedule;  
(h) “regulation ” means a re gulation made under section 33;  
(i) “State Register of Homoeopathy ” means a register or registers m aintained under any law for 
the time being in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners of Homoeopathy;  
(j) “University ” means any University in India established by law and having a Faculty of 
Homoeopathy and includes a University in India established by law in which instruction, teaching, 
training or resea rch in Homoeopathy is provided.  
                                                           
1. 1st August, 197 4, vide notification No. S.O. 460(E), dated 30th July, 1974, in respect of Chapter I, s. 12 and Chapter V, 
see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
1st August, 197 4, provisions of ss. 3 to 11 (both inclusive) and ss. 13 to 15 (both inclusive) sha ll come into force in all the 
States (except the States of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Nagaland, Punjab and Tripura) and in the 
Union territories of Chandigarh and Delhi. vide notification No. S.O. 460(E), dated 30th July, 1974, see Gazet te of India, 
Extraordina ry, Part II, sec. 3(ii).  
* Subject to verification and confirmation by the administrative ministry. 4 (2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, 
in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL  COUNCIL AND ITS COMMITTEES  
3. Constitution of Central  Council.—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of this Act a Central Council consisting of the following 
members, namely: — 
(a) such number of members not exceeding five as may be determined by the Central 
Government in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule from each State in which a State 
Register of Homoeopathy is maintained, to be elected from amongst themselves  by persons enrolled 
on that register as practitioners of Homoeopathy;  
(b) one member from each University to be elected from amongst themselves by the members of 
the Faculty or Department (by whatever name called) of  Homoeopathy of that University : 
Provid ed that until any such Faculty or Department of Homoeopathy is started in at least seven 
Universities, the Central Government may nominate such number of members not exceeding seven as 
may be determined by the Central Government from amongst the teaching s taff of medical 
institutions within India, so however, that the total number of members so nominated and elected 
under this claus e shall in no case exceed seven;  
(c) such number of members, not exceeding forty per cent . of the total number of members 
elect ed under clauses ( a) and ( b), as may be nominated by the Central Government, from amongst 
persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Homoeopathy or other related 
disciplines:  
Provided that until members are elected under clause (a) or clause ( b) in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Central Government shall nominate such 
number of members, being persons qualified to be chosen as such under the said clause ( a) or clause 
(b), as the case m ay be , as that Government thinks fit ; and references to elected members in this Act 
shall be construed as including refe rences to members so nominated.  
(2) The President and the Vice -President of the Central Council shall be elected by the members of 
the C entral Council from amongst themselves in such manner as may be prescribed : 
Provided that for two years from the first constitution of the Central Council, the President and the 
Vice -President shall be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the members of the Central 
Council and the President and the Vice -President so nominated shall, notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 7, hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
4. Mode of election. —(1) An election under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 
shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by it in this 
behalf.  
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Central Council, it shall be referred to the 
Central Government wh ose decision shall be final.  
5. Restriction on elections and membership. —(1) No person shall be eligible for election to the 
Central Council unless he possesses any of the medical qualifications included in the  Second or the Third 
Schedule, is enrolled on any State Register of Homoeopathy and resides in the State concerned.  
(2) No person may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity.  
6. Incorporation of Central Council. —The Central Council sha ll be a body corporate by the name 
of the Central Council of Homoeopathy having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said 
name sue and be sued.  5 7. Term of office of President, Vice -President and members of Central Council. —(1) The 
President, Vice -President or a member of the Central Council shall hold office for a term of five years 
from the date of his election or nomination, as the case may be, or until his successor shall have been duly 
elected or nominated, whichever is longer.  
(2) A person who holds, or who has held, office as President or Vice -President of the Central Council, 
shall be eligible for re -election to t hat office once, but  only once.  
(3) Members of the Central Council shall be eligible fo r re-election or re -nomination.  
(4) An elected or nominated member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without 
excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Central Council,  from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the 
Central Council or, in the case of a member elected under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3, if he 
ceases to be enrolled on the concerned State Register of Homoeopathy, or in the case of a member el ected 
under clause ( b) of that sub -section, if he ceases to be a member of the Faculty or Department (by 
whatever name called) of Homoeopathy of the University concerned.  
(5) A casual vacancy in the Central Council shall be filled by election or nomination , as the case may 
be, and the person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the 
term for which the member whose place he takes was elected or nominated.  
(6) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be 
elected or nominated at any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not assume 
office until the said term has  expired.  
8. Meetings of Central Council. —(1) The Central Council shall mee t at least once in each year at 
such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Council.  
(2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one -third of the total number of members of the Central Council 
shall form a quorum, and all the acts of the Central Council sh all be decided by a majority of the members 
present and voting.  
9. The Executive Committee and other committees. —(1) The Central Council shall constitute from 
amongst its members an Executive Committee and such other committees for general or special purpo ses 
as the Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) (i) The Executive Committee (hereafter in this section referred to as the Committee), shall consist 
of the President and Vice -President, who shall be members ex officio , and not less than five and not more 
than seven members who shall be elected by the Central Council from amongst its members.  
(ii) The President and the Vice -President shall be the President and Vice -President respectively of the 
Committee.  
(iii) In addition to the  powers and duties conferred and imposed upon it by this Act, the Committee 
shall exercise and discharge such powers and duties as the Central Council may confer or impose upon it 
by any regulations which may be made in this behalf.  
10. Meetings of committ ees.—(1) The committees constituted under section 9 shall meet at least 
twice in each year at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Council.  
(2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one -third of the total number of members of a committee shall for m 
a quorum, and all the acts of the committee shall be decided by a majority of the members present and 
voting.  
11. Officers and other employees of Central Council. —The Central Coun cil shall— 
(a) appoint a Registrar w ho shall also act as Secretary;  
(b) employ such other persons as it deems necessary to car ry out the purposes of this Act ; 
(c) require and take from the Registrar or from any other employee, such security for the due 
performance of his duties as the Centr al Council deems necessary; and  6 (d) with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix the remuneration and allowances to 
be paid to the President, Vice -President and members of the Central Council and to the members of 
the committees thereof and determine the conditions of service of  the employees of the Central 
Council.  
12. Vacancies in the Central Council and committees thereof not to invalidate acts, etc. —No act 
or proceeding of the Central Council or any committee thereof shall be called in question on the ground 
merely of the exi stence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Central Council or the 
committee, as the case may be.  
1[CHAPTER IIA  
12A.  Permission for  establishment of new medical institution, new course of study,                    
etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other l aw for the time being in force,  — 
(a) no person shall establish a Homoeopathic Medical College; or  
(b) no Homo eopathic Medical College shall — 
(i) open a new or higher course of study or training (including post -graduate course of study 
or training) which would enable students of each course or training to qualify himself for the 
award of any recognized medical qualification; or  
(ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or traini ng (Including the           
post-graduat e course of study or training),  
except with the previous permission of the Central Government obtained in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.  
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this section, “person ” includes any University or a trust, but does 
not include the Central Government.  
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of this section, “admission capacity ”, in relation to any course of 
study or training (including post -graduate course of study or training) in  a medical institution, means the 
maximum number of students as may be decided by the Central Council from time to time for being 
admitted to such course or training.  
(2) (a) Every person or medical institution shall, for the purpose of obtaining permis sion under              
sub-section ( 1) submit to the Central Government a scheme in accordance with the provisions of                
clause ( b) and the Central Government shall refer the scheme to the Central Council for its 
recommendations.  
(b) The scheme referred to in clause ( a) shall be in such form and contain such particu lars and be 
preferred in such manner and be accompanied with such fee as may be pre scribed.  
(3) On receipt of a scheme from the Central Government under sub -section ( 2), the Central Council 
may obtain such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or the medical 
institution conc erned, and thereafter, it may, — 
(a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain any necessary particulars, give a reasonable 
opportunity to the person or medical institution concerned for making a written representation and it 
shall be open to such person or medical institution to rectify the defects, if any, specified by the 
Central Council;  
(b) consider the scheme, having rega rd to the factors referred to in sub -section ( 7), and submit it 
to the Central Government together with its recommendations thereon within n period not exceeding 
six months from the date of receipt of the reference from the Central Government.  
(4) The Cen tral Government may, after considering the scheme and the recommendations of the 
Central Council under sub -section ( 3) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars as may 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-1-2003 ). 7 be considered necessary by it from the person or medical institution concerned, and having regard to the 
factors referred to in sub -section ( 7), either approve (with such conditions, if any, as it may consider 
necessary) or disapprove the scheme and any such approval shall constitute as a permission under                
sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Central Government except after giving the 
person or medical institution concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent any person or medical institution whose 
scheme has not been approved by the Central Government to submit a fresh scheme and the provisions of 
this section shall apply to such scheme, as if suc h scheme had been submitted for the first time under          
sub-section ( 2). 
(5) Where, within a period of one year from the date of submission of the scheme to the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 2), no order is communicated by the Central Governm ent to the person or 
medical institution submitting the scheme, such scheme shall be deemed to have been approved by the 
Central Government in the form in which it was submitted, and, accordingly, the permission of the 
Central Government required under sub -section ( 1) shall also be deemed to have been granted.  
(6) In computing the time -limit specified in sub -section ( 5), the time taken by the person or medical 
institution concerned in submitting the scheme, in furnishing any particulars called for by the Ce ntral 
Council, or by the Central Government, shall be excluded.  
(7) The Central Council, while making its recommendations under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) and 
the Central Government, while passing an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme under              
sub-section ( 4), shall have due regard to the following factors, namely: — 
(a) whether the proposed medical institution or the existing medical institution seeking to open a 
new or higher course of study or training, would be in a position  to offer the minimum standards of 
medical education as prescribed by the Central Council under section 20;  
(b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical institution or the existing medical institution 
seeking to open a new or higher course of stud y or training or to increase its admission capacity has 
adequate financial resources;  
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training, hospital 
and other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the medical instit ution or conducting the new 
course of study or training or accommodating the increased admission capacity have been provided or 
would be provided within the time -limit specified in the scheme;  
(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number of students likely to attend 
such medical institution or course of study or training or as a result of the increased admission 
capacity, have been provided or would be provided within the lime -limit specified in the scheme;  
(e) whether any arrangeme nt has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to 
students likely to attend such medical institution or the course of study or training by the persons 
having the recognised medical qualifications,  
(f) the requirement of manpower in the field  of practice of homoeopathic medicine in the medical 
institution; and  
(g) any other factors as may be prescribed.  
(8) Where the Central Government passes an order either approving or disapproving a scheme under 
this section, a copy of the order shall be co mmunicated to the person or medical institution concerned.  
12B.  Non-recognition of medical qualifications in certain cases .—(1) Where any medical 
institution is established without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with 
the provisions of section 12A, medical qualification granted to any student of such medical institution 
shall not be deemed to be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act.  8 (2) Where any medical institution opens a new or higher course of  study or training (including a  
post-graduate course of study or training) without the previous permission of the Central Government in 
accordance with the provisions of section 12A, medical qualification granted to any student of such 
institution on the basis of such study or training shall not be deemed to be recognised medical 
qualification for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) Where any medical institution increases its admission capacity in any course of study or training 
without the previous permission o f the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of          
section 12A, medical qualification granted to any student of such medical institution on the basis of the 
increase in its admission capacity shall not be deemed to be recognised medical  qualification for the 
purposes of this Act.]  
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITION OF MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS  
13. Recognition of medical qualification granted by certain medical institution s in                
India.—(1) The medical qualifications granted by any University, Board or other medical institution in 
India which are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognised medical qualification s for the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) Any University, Board or other medical institution in India which grants a medica l qualification 
not included in the Second Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have any such qualification 
recognised, and the Central Government, after consulting the Central Council, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend the Sec ond Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such 
notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Second Schedule against 
such medical qualification only when granted after a specified date.  
14. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in States or countries 
outside India. —(1) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India which are 
included in the Third Schedule shall be recognised medical qu alifications for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) (a) The Central Council may enter into negotiations with the authority in any State or country 
outside India, which by the law of such State or country is entrusted with the maintenance of a Register of 
practitioners of Homoeopathy, for settling of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical 
qualifications in Homoeopathy, and in pursuance of any such scheme, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Third Schedule so as to include therein any medical 
qualificati on which the Central Council has decided should be recognised, and any such notification may 
also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Third Schedule against such medical 
qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical  qualification only when granted after a 
specified date.  
(b) Where the Council has refused to recommend any medical qualification which has been proposed 
for recognition by any authority referred to in clause ( a) and that authority applies to the Central 
Government in this behalf, the Central Government, after considering such application and after obtaining 
from the Council a report, if any, as to the reasons for any such refusal, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare that such qualificatio n shall be a recognised medical qualification and the 
provisions of clause ( a) shall apply accordingly.  
15. Rights of persons possessing qualifications included in Second or the Third Schedule to be 
enrolled.—(1) Subject to the other provisions contained i n this Act, any medical qualification included in 
the Second or the Third Schedule shall be sufficient qualification for enrolment on any S tate Register of 
Homoeopathy.  
(2) No person, other than a practitioner of Homoeopathy who possesses a recognised medi cal 
qualification and is enrolled on a State Register or the Ce ntral Register of Homoeopathy, — 
(a) shall hold office as Homoeopathic physician or any other office (by whatever designation 
called) in Government or in any institution maintained  by a local or  other authority;  
(b) shall prac tise Homoeopathy in any State ; 9 (c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate 
required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly q ualified medical practitioner;  
(d) shall be entitled to give any evidence at any inquest or any court of law as an expert under 
section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) on any matter relating to Homoeopathy.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 2) shall aff ect— 
(a) the right of a practitioner of Homoeopathy enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy to 
practise Homoeopathy in any State merely on the ground that, on the commencement of this Act, he 
does not possess a recog nised medical qualification;  
(b) the  privileges (including the right to practise Homoeopathy) conferred by or under any law 
relating to registration of practitioners of Homoeopathy for the time being in force in any State, on a 
practitioner of Homoeopathy enrolled on a  State Register of Homo eopathy;  
(c) the right of a person to practise Homoeopathy in a State in which, on the commencement of 
this Act, a State Register of Homoeopathy is not maintained if, on such commencement, he has been 
practising Homoeopathy for not less than five years ; 
(d) the rights conferred by or under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) 
[including the right to practise medicine as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the said Act] or the 
Indian Medicine Central Counci l Act, 1970 (48 of 1970 ) of persons possessing any qualifications 
included in the respec tive Schedules to the said Act.  
(4) Any person who acts in contravention of any provision of sub -section ( 2) shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which  may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
16. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations. —Every University, 
Board or medical institution in India which grants a recognised medical qualification shall furnish such 
informati on as the Central Council may, from time to time, require as to the courses of study and 
examinations to be undergone in order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of 
study and examinations are required to be undergone and suc h qualification is conferred and generally as 
to the requisites for obtaining such qualification.  
17. Inspectors at examinations. —(1) The Central Council shall appoint such number of medical 
inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical colleg e, hospital or other institution where 
education in Homoeopathy is given, or to attend any examination held by any University, Board or 
medical institution for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of medical 
qualifications gran ted by that University, Board or medical institution.  
(2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but 
shall report to the Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff, 
equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education in Homoeopathy, 
as the case may be, or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  
(3) The Central Council shall forward a copy of any such report to the Un iversity, Board or medical 
institution concerned, and shall also forward a copy with the remarks of the University, Board or medical 
institution thereon, to the Central Government.  
18. Visitors at examinations. —(1) The Central Council may appoint such numb er of visitors as it 
may deem requisite to inspect any medical college, hospital or other institution where education in 
Homoeopathy is given or to attend any examination for the purpose of granting recognised medical 
qualification.  
(2) Any person, whether  he is a member of the Central Council or not, may be appointed as a visitor 
under this section but a person who is appointed as an inspector under section 17 for any inspection or 
examination shall not be appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or examination.  
(3) The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to 
the President of the Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff, 10 equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education in Homoeopathy 
or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  
(4) The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the President of 
the Ce ntral Counci l otherwise directs:  
Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of a visitor, the Central Council 
shall furnish the same.  
19. Withdrawal of recognition. —(1) When upon report by the inspector or the visitor, it appears to 
the Cent ral Council — 
(a) that the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency required from 
candidates at any examination held by, any University, Board or medical institution, or  
(b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation, training a nd other facilities for instruction and 
training provided in such University, Board or medical institution or in any college or other institutio n 
affiliated to the University,  
do not conform to the standard prescribed by the Central Council, the Central Co uncil shall make a 
representation to that effect to the Central Government.  
(2) After considering such representation, the Central Government may send it to the Government of 
the State in which the University, Board or medical institution is situated and t he State Government shall 
forward it along with such remarks as it may choose to make to the University, Board or medical 
institution, with an intimation of the period within which the University, Board or medical institution may 
submit its explanation to the State Government.  
(3) On the receipt of the explanation, or, where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, 
then, on the expiry of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendations to the Central 
Government.  
(4) The Central G overnment, after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may think fit, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the Second Schedule against the 
said medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognise d medical qualification only when granted 
before a specified date, or that the said medical qualification if granted to students of a specified college 
or institution affiliated to any University shall be recognised medical qualification only when granted 
before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said medical qualification shall be recognised 
medical qualification in relation to a specified college or institution affiliated to any University only when 
granted after a specified date.  
20. Minim um standards of education in Homoeopathy. —(1) The Central Council may prescribe 
the minimum standards of education in Homoeopathy, required for granting recognised medical 
qualifications by Universities, Boards or medical institutions in India.  
(2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the 
Central Council to all State Governments and the Central Council shall, before submitting the regulations 
or any amendment thereof, as the case may be, to the Centr al Government for sanction, take into 
consideration the comments of any State Government received within three months from the furnishing o f 
the copies as aforesaid.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE CENTRAL  REGISTER OF HOMOEOPATHY  
21. The Central Register of Homoeopathy. —(1) The Central Council shall cause to be maintained 
in the prescribed manner, a register of practitioners of Homoeopathy to be known as the Central Register 
of Homoeopathy which shall contain — 
(a) in Part I, the names of all persons who are for the time bei ng enrolled on any State Register of 
Homoeopathy and possess any of the recognised medical qual ifications ; 11 (b) in Part II, the names of all persons, other than those included in Part I, who are for the time 
being enrolled on any  State Register of Homoeopat hy. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Central Council to keep and maintain the Central 
Register of Homoeopathy in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the 
Central Council, and from time to time to revise the r egister and publish it in the Gazette of India and in 
such other manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) , and may be proved by a copy pub lished in the Gazette of India.  
22. Supply of copies of  State Register of Homoeopathy. —Each Board shall supply to the Central 
Council three printed copies of the State Register of Homoeopathy as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act and subsequently after the first day of April of each year, and each Board shall 
inform the Central Council without delay of all additions to, and other amendments in, the State Register 
of Homoeopathy made from time to time.  
23. Registration in the Central Register of Hom oeopathy. —The Registrar of the Central Council 
may on receipt of the report of registration of a person in a State Register of Homoeopathy or on 
application made in the prescribed manner by any person, enter his name in the Central Register of 
Homoeopathy,  provided that the Registrar is satisfied that the person concerned is eligible under this Act 
for such registration.  
24. Professional conduct. —(1) The Central Council may prescribe standards of professional conduct 
and etiquette and a code of ethics fo r practitioners of Homoeopathy.  
(2) Regulations made by the Central Council under sub -section ( 1) may specify which violations 
thereof shall constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional 
misconduct, and such provision s hall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force.  
25. Removal of names from the Central Register of Homoeopathy. —(1) If the name of any person 
enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy is removed therefrom in pur suance of any power conferred 
by or under any law relating to registration of practitioners of Homoeopathy for the time being in force in 
any State, the Central Council shall direct the removal of the name of such person from the Central 
Register of Homoeo pathy . 
(2) Where the name of any person has been removed from a State Register of Homoeopathy on any 
ground other than that he is not possessed of the requisite medical qualifications or where any application 
by the said person for restoration of his name to the State Register of Homoeopathy has been rejected, he 
may appeal in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions, including conditions as to the 
payment of a fee, as may be prescribed, to the Central Government whose decision, which shall be g iven 
after consulting the Central Council, shall be binding on the State Government and on the authorities 
concerned with the preparation of the State Register of Homoeopathy.  
1[25A. Provisional registration for practice. —If the courses of study to be undergone for obtaining 
a recognised medical qualification in homoeopathy include a period of training after a person has passed 
the qualifying examination and before such qualification is conferred on him, any such person shall, on 
application made by him  in this behalf, be granted provisional registration in a State Register of 
Homoeopathy by the Board concerned in order to enable him to practice homoeopathy in an approved 
institution for the purpose of such training and for no other purpose for the perio d aforesaid.]  
26. Privileges of persons who are enrolled on the Central Register of Homoeopathy. —(1) 
Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act regarding practice of Homoeopathy by 
persons possessing certain recognised medical qualifi cations, every person whose name is for the time 
being borne on Part I of the Central Register of Homoeopathy shall be entitled according to his 
qualifications to practise Homoeopathy, in any part of India and to recover in due course of law in respect 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28-1-2003 ). 12 of such practice any expenses, charges in respect of medicaments or other appliances or any fees to which 
he may be entitled.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 15, any person whose name is for the time 
being borne on Part II of the Central Register of Homoeopathy, may practise Homoeopathy in any State, 
other than the State where he is enrolled on the State Register of Homoeopathy, with the previous 
approval of the Government of the State where he intends to practise.  
27. Registratio n of additional qualifications. —(1) If any person whose name is entered in the 
Central Register of Homoeopathy obtains any title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in 
Homoeopathy, which is a recognised medical qualification, he shall, on applic ation made in this behalf in 
the prescribed manner, be entitled to have an entry stating such other title, diploma or other qualification 
made against his name in the Central Register of Homoeopathy either in substitution for or in additio n to 
any entry pr eviously made.  
(2) The entries in respect of any such person in a State Register of Homoeopathy shall be altered in 
accordance with the alterations made in the Central Register of Homoeopathy.  
28. Persons enrolled on Central Register of Homoeopathy to noti fy change of place of residence 
or practice. —Every person registered in the Central Register of Homoeopathy shall notify any transfer of 
the place of his residence or practice to the Central Council and to the Board concerned, within ninety 
days of such tr ansfer, failing which his right to participate in the election of members to the Central 
Council or a Board shall be liable to be forfeited by order of the Central Government either permanently 
or for such period as may be specified therein.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Information to be furnished by Central Council and publication thereof. —(1) The Central 
Council shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts, and other information to 
the Central Government as that Government may require.  
(2) The Central Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy, abstract 
or other information furnished to it under this section or under section 18.  
30. Commission of inquiry. —(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Central Government that the 
Central Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may 
refer the particulars of the complaint to a commission of inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom 
shall be appointe d by the Central Government, one being a Judge of a High Court, and one by the Central 
Council, and such commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Central 
Government as to the truth of the matters charged in the complaint , and in case of any charge of default or 
of improper action being found by the commission to have been established, the commission shall 
recommend the remedies, if any, whic h are in its opinion necessary.  
(2) The Central Government may require the Central  Council to adopt the remedies so recommended 
within such time as, having regard to the report of the commission, it may think fit, and if the Central 
Council fails to comply with any such r equirement, the Central Govern ment may amend the regulations 
of the Central Council, or make such provision or order or take such other steps as may seem necessary to 
give effect to the recommendations of the commission.  
(3) A commission of inquiry shall have power to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance of 
witnesses and the production of documents, and shall have all such other necessary powers for the 
purpose of any inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a civil court under th e Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) . 
31. Protection of action taken i n good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government, the Central Council or a Board or any committee thereof or any officer or 
servant of the Government or the Central Council or the Board or the committee aforesai d for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
32. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  13 (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expir y of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modi fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
33. Power to make regulations. —1[(1)] The Central Council may, with the previous sanct ion of the 
Central Government, 2[make , by notification in the Official Gazette , regulations] generally to carry out 
the purposes of this Act, and, without prejudice to the generality of this p ower, such regu lations may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner of election  of the President and the Vice -President of the Central Council;  
(b) the management of the property of the Central Council and the mainten ance and audit of its 
accounts;  
(c) the resignation of members of t he Central Council;  
(d) the powers and duties of the  President and Vice -President;  
(e) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Central Council and the committees thereof, 
the times and places where such meetings are to be held, and the conduct of busi ness thereat and the 
number of members ne cessary to constitute a quorum;  
(f) the functions of the committees constituted under section 9;  
(g) the tenure of office, and the powers and duties of the Registrar and other officers and servants 
of the Central Council;  
3[(ga) the form of the scheme, the particulars to be given in such scheme, the manner in which the 
scheme is to be preferred and the fee payable with the scheme under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 12A;  
(gb) any other factor under clause  (g) of sub -section ( 7) of section 12A;]  
(h) the qualifications, appointment, powers and duties of, and procedure to be followed by, 
inspectors and visitors;  
(i) the courses and period of study of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of 
examin ation and the standards of proficiency therein to be obtained, in any University, Board or 
medical institution for grant of re cognised medical qualification;  
(j) the standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for education in 
Homoeopathy;  
(k) the conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of examiners and the conditions of 
admission to such examinations;  
(l) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed b y 
practitioners of Ho moeopathy;  
(m) the particulars to be stated, and the proof of qualifications to be given in applications for 
registratio n under this Act.  
(n) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which a n appeal under section 25 may be 
preferred;  
(o) the fees to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act; and  
(p) any matter for which under this Act provision may be made by regulations.  
                                                           
1. Section  33 re -numbered as section ( 1) thereof by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15-3-1984 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 2 and The Schedule ibid., for “make regulations” (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).   
3. Ins. b y Act 51 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 28 -1-2003 ).  14 1[(2) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the ses sion or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in  making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be 
made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previous ly done under that regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15-3-1984 ). 15 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( l)(a)] 
1. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine the number of 
seats allocated in the Central Council of Homoeopathy in each State on the following basis, namely: — 
(a) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy system exceeds 
100 but  does not exceed 10,000  ..    1 seat s. 
(b) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy system exceeds 
10,000 but does not exceed 20,000  ..    2 seats.  
(c) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register  of Homoeopathy system exceeds 
20,000 but does not exceed 30,000  ..    3 seats.  
(d) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy system exceeds 
30,000 but does not exceed 40,000  ..    4 seats.  
(e) Where the number of persons en rolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy  system exceeds 
40,000  ..    5 seats.  
2. For every subsequent election to the Central Council under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of            
section 3, the Central Government shall, by notification  in the Official Gazette, determine the number of 
seats allocated in the Central Council of Homo eopathy on the basis laid down i n paragraph 1 above.16 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 13)  
RECOGNISED MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS IN HOMOEOPATHY GRANTED B Y UNIVERSITIES , BOARDS OR 
MEDICAL  INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 3984  dated 31 -7-1985.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 2502  dated 21 -8-1990.  
3. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 2501 dated 1 -8-1990.   Name of University, Board or Medical 
Institution  Recognised medical 
qualification  Abbreviation 
for 
registration  Remarks  
1 2 3 4 
ANDHRA PRADESH     
1. Andhra Provincial 
Homoeopathic Medical College, 
Gudivada.  Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Medicine.  D.H.M.  April, 1949 to 
March, 1969.  
2. Dr. Gururaju Government 
Homoeopathic Medical College, 
Gudivada.  Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  D.H.M.S.  From April, 1970 
onwards.  
3. Board of Indian Medicine, 
Hyderabad.  Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  D.H.M.S.  From October, 
1971.  
1[3A.  The Homoeopathic Medical 
College, Rajahmundry (A.P.)  Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  D.H.M.S.  From March, 
1973 to 
December, 1986.]  
BIHAR     
4. Bihar State Board of 
Homoeopathic Medicine.  Diploma in Medicine and 
Surgery.  D.M.S.  Since 1961.  
 Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  D.H.M.S.  From 1971 
onwards.  
DELHI     
5. Board of Homoeopathic System 
of Medicine, Delhi.  Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Science.  D.H.S.  From 1965 to 
1970 -71. 
 Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  D.H.M.S.  From 1971 
onwards.  
KARNATAKA     
6.The Homoeopathic Medical 
College, Belgaum.  Licentiate of the Court of 
Examiners in Homoeopathy.  L.C.E.H.  From June 1971 
to December, 
1971  
7. Court of Examiners in 
Homoeopathic Education, 
Bangalore.  Licentiate of the Court of 
Examiners in Homoeopathy.  L.C.E.H.  From January, 
1973.  
2[7A. The Karnataka Board of 
Homoeopathic System of 
Medicine.  Bachelor of Homoeopathic 
Medicine & Surgery.  B.H.M.S.  From 1985 
onwards.]  
KERALA     
8. Board of Examiners in 
Homoeopathy, Government of 
Kerala.  Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Medicine.  D.H.M.  From 1962 
onwards.  
9. Royal College of Homoeopathic 
Physicians, Ernakulam.  Licentiate of Royal College 
of Homoeopathic 
Physicians.  L.R.C.H.P.  Up to 1966 -67. 
3[9B. University of Kerala.  Bachelor of Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  B.H.M.S.  From 1989 to 
1990.]  17 1 2 3 4 
MADHYA PRADESH     
10. The Board of Homoeopathic 
and Biochemic Systems of 
Medicine, Madhya Pradesh.  Diploma in Homoeopathy 
and Biochemistry.  D.H.B.  From 1960 
onwards  
MAHARASHTRA     
11. The Court of Examiners of 
Homoeopathic and Biochemic 
Systems of Medicine, Bombay.  Licentiate of the Court of 
Examiners in Homoeopathy.  L.C.E.H.  From December 
1961 onwards.  
12. Court of Examiners in 
Homoeopathy.  Fellow of the Court of 
Examiners in Homoeopathy.  F.C.E.H  In May, 1958 
only.  
ORISSA     
13. Orissa Board of Homoeopathic 
Medicine, Bhubaneswar.  Diploma in Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  D.H.M.S.  From 1972 
onwards.  
UTTAR PRADESH     
14. State Board of Homoeopathic 
Medicine, U.P., Lucknow.  Graduate of Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  G.H.M.S.  In 1961 to 1963.  
 Bachelor of Medicine and 
Surgery.  B.M.S.  From 1958 to 
1960 and from 
1970 onwards.  
 Certificate of Homoeopathic 
Practice.  C.H.P.  .. 
15. Agra University, Agra.  Graduate of Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  G.H.M.S.  From 1965 to 
1967.  
16. Kanpur University, Kanpur.  Graduate of Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  G.H.M.S.  From 1967 
onwards.  
17. National Homoeopathic 
Medical College and Hospital, 
Lucknow.   H.L.M.S.  From 1923 to 
1936.  
  H.M.D  From 1925 to 
1942.  
  H.M.B.  From 1924 to 
1949.  
  B.M.S.  From 1950 to 
1957.  
18. Homoeopathic Medical  
College, Lucknow.   H.M.B.  From 1931 to 
1936.  
WEST BENGAL     
19. The Council of Homoeopathic 
Medicine, West Bengal.  Diploma in Medicine and 
Surgery.  D.M.S.  From 1965 
onwards.  
20. General Council and State 
Faculty of Homoeopathic 
Medicine, West Bengal.  Diploma in Medicine and 
Surgery.  D.M.S.  From 1943 to 
1964.  
21. Calcutta Homoeopathic 
Medical College, Calcutta.  Bachelor of Homoeopathic 
Medicine.  H.M.B.  Up to 1936.  
 Bachelor of Medicine and 
Bachelor of Surgery.  B.M.B.S.  From 1936 to 
1942.  18  1 2 3 4 
22. Bengal Allen Homoeopathic 
Medical College, Calcutta.  Bachelor of Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  B.H.M.S.  Up to 1942.  
 Master of Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  M.H.M.S.  Up to 1942.  
 Licentiate in Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  L.H.M.S.  Up to 1942.  
23. Dunham Homoeopathic   
Medical College, Calcutta.  Member of Dunham College 
of Homoeopathy.  M.D.C.H.  Up to 1942.  
24. Ashutosh Homoeopathic 
Medical College, Calcutta..  Practitioner of Rational 
System of Medicine.  P.R.S.M.  Up to 1942.  
 Practitioner of Healing Art.  P.H.A.  Up to 1942.  
25. Herring Homoeopathic 
Medical College, Calcutta.  Licentiate of the Rational 
Homoeopathic Society.  L.R.H.S  Up to 1942.  
26. Regular Homoeopathic 
Medical College, Calcutta.  Licentiate in Homoeopathic 
Medicine and Surgery.  H.L.M.S.  Up to 1942.  
27. Central Homoeopathic College, 
Calcutta.  .. H.L.M.S. 
H.M.B.  1910.  
1910.  
28. Bengal Homoeopathic Medical 
College, Calcutta.  Bachelor of Homoeopathic 
Medicine.  H.M.B.  Up to 1942.  19 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 14)  
QUALIFICATIONS GRANTED BY MEDICAL  INSTITUTIONS OUTSIDE  INDIA  
 
Name of University, Board 
or Medical Institution  Recognised medical 
qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  Remarks  
1 2 3 4 
1. Faculty of Homoeopathy, 
London.  Diploma of the Faculty of 
Homoeopathy . D.F. Hom  .. 
2. Faculty of Homoeopathy, 
London.  Member of the Faculty of 
Homoeopathy.  M.F.  Hom.  .. 
3. Faculty of Homoeopathy, 
London.  Fellow of the Faculty of 
Homoeopathy.  F.F. Hom.  .. 
 
--------------------------The North-Eastern Hill University Act, 1973--------------------------
1 
 THE NORTH -EASTERN HILL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1973  
___________  
ARRANGMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University.  
4. Objects . 
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University open  to all classes, castes and creed.  
8. Visitor . 
9. Chief Rector.  
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor.  
13. The Pro -Vice -Chancellors.  
14. Deans of Schools.  
15. The Registrar.  
16. The Finance Officer.  
17. Other officers.  
18. Authorities of the University.  
19. The Court.  
20. The Executive Council.  
21. The Academic Council.  
22. Other authorities of the University.  
23. Planning Board.  
24. Power to make Statutes.  
25. Statutes how made.  
26. Ordinances.  
27. Regulations.  
28. Annual report.  
29. Annual accounts.  
30. Conditions of service of employees.  
31. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
32. Right to appeal.  
33. Provident and pension funds.  
34. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
35. Constitution of Committees.  
36. Filling of casual Vacancies.  
37. Proceedings of Universit y authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
38. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
39. Mode of proof of University record.  
40. Power to remove difficulties.  
41. Transitional provisions.  
42. Completion of courses of students in colleges or Institutions affiliated to the University.  
 THE SCHEDULE.  
  2 
 THE NORTH -EASTERN HILL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1973  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1973  
 [26th May , 1973 .]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University for the hill areas of the 
North -Eastern region.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University for the 
benefit of the people of the hill areas of the North -Eastern region and to develop the intellectual, academic 
and cultural background of the said people;  
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution, resolutions have been 
passed by the Legislatures of the States of Meghalaya and Nagaland to the effect that the setting up of a 
Central University for the hill areas of the North -Eastern region shall be regulated by Parliament by law;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -fourth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the North -Eastern Hill 
University Act, 1973.  
(2) It extend s to the 1[State of Meghalaya]  and the 2[State of Arunachal Pradesh ]. 
(3) It shall  come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the co ntext otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Acad emic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as ac ademic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(d) “Chancellor ”, “Vice -Chancellor ” and “Pro-Vice -Chancellor ” mean, resp ectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(e) “College ” means a College maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the Unive rsity;  
(f) “Court ” means the Court of the University;  
(g) “Department ” means a Department of Studies, an d includes a Centre of Studies;  
(h) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University, and includes teachers and  other 
staff of the University;  
(i) “Executive Council ” means the Execu tive Council of the University;  
(j) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, College 
or Institution, provided, maintained o r recognised by the University;  
(k) “Institution ” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitt ed 
to the  privileges of, the University;  
(l) “North -Eastern region ” means the North -Eastern region of India comprising the 1[State of 
Meghalaya] and the 2[State of Arunachal Pradesh ]; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1989, s. 48, for “States of Meghalaya and Nagaland” (w.e.f. 6 -9-1994).  
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 2000, s. 47, for “Union territories of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram” (w.e.f. 2 -7-2001).  
3. 19th July, 1973, vide notification No . S.O. 223(E), dated 19th July, 1973, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,                       
sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (m) “Principal ” means the Head of a College or an Institution, and inclu des where there is no 
Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, and, in the absence of the 
Principal or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(n) “recognised teachers ” means such persons as are re cognised by the University for the purpose 
of imparting instruction in a College or an Institution admitted to th e privileges of the University;  
(o) “School ” means a Schoo l of Studies of the University;  
(p) “Statutes ”, “Ordinances ” and “Regulations ”, mean,  respectively, the Statutes, Ordinances and 
Regulations of the Universi ty for the time being in force;  
(q) “teachers of the University ” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any College 
or Institution maintained by the University and are designated  as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(r) “University ” means the North -Eastern Hill University.  
3. The University. —(1) There  shall be established a University by the name of “North -Eastern Hill 
University ”. 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Shillong and it shall have campuses in the 1[State of 
Meghalaya] ; it may also establish campuses at such other places within its j urisdiction as it may deem fit.  
(3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the 
Executive Council and the Academic Council and all persons who m ay hereafter become such officers or 
members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body 
corporate by the name of “North -Eastern Hill University ”. 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a commo n seal, and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects. —The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance knowledge by 
providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem fit; to pay 
special a ttention to the improvement of the social and economic conditions and welfare of the people of 
the hill areas of the North -Eastern region and, in particular, their intellectual, academic and cultural 
advancement.  
5. Powers of the University .—The University  shall have  the following powers, namely: — 
(1) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time,  determine and to make provision for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(2) to take such academic steps as would contribute to the improvement of the economic 
conditions and welfare of the people of the hill are as of the North -Eastern region;  
(3) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certi ficates 
to, and confer degrees and other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions  for good and suffici ent cause;  
(4) to organise and to undertake extra -mural studies and extension services;  
(5) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(6) to provide instruction, including correspondence and such other cours es, to such persons as 
are not members of the U niversity, as it may determine;  
(7) to institute principalships, professorships, readerships, lecturerships, and other teaching or 
academic posts required by the University and to appoint persons to such princ ipalships, 
professorships, readerships , lecturerships or other posts;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1989, s. 48, for “States of Meghalaya and Nagaland” (w.e.f. 6 -9-1994).  
 4 
 (8) to recognise persons for imparting instruction in any College or Institution admitted to the 
privileges of t he University;  
(9) to appoint persons working in any other University or o rganisation as teachers of the 
University for a specified period;  
(10) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts an d to make appointments thereto;  
(11) to co-operate or collaborate with any other University or authority in such manner and for 
such purposes a s the University may determine;  
(12) to establish such campuses, centres, specialised laboratories or other units for research and 
instruction as are, i n the opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(13) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(14) to establish and maintain Co lleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(15) to admit to its pri vileges Colleges and Institutions not maintained by the University; to 
withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes; and to recognise Halls not maintained by the University and to withdraw any such 
recognition;  
(16) to declare a college, an Institution or a Department as an autonomous College or an 
Institution or a Department, as the case may be;  
(17) to determine standards for admission into the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(18) to demand and receive pay ment of fees and other charges;  
(19) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(20) to make special arrangements in respect of women students as the University may consider 
desirable;  
(21) to regulate and enforce discipline among the employees and students of the University and 
take such disciplinary measures in this reg ard as may be deeme d necessary;  
(22) to make arrangements for promoting the health and ge neral welfare of the employees;  
(23) to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of property, movable or immovable, including trust and 
endowment properties for the purposes of the University;  
(24) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
(25) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainme nt of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisdiction .—(1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the 1[State of Meghalaya] and 
the 2[State of Arunachal Pradesh] . 
(2) No College or Institution situated within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the University shall 
be compulsorily affiliated to the University, and affiliation shall be granted by the University only to such 
Colleges or Institutions as may agree to acce pt the Statutes and Ordinances.  
(3) Any College or Institution admitted to the p rivileges of the University shall cease to be associated 
with, or be admitted to the privi leges of, any other University.  
(4) No College or Institution situated within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the University, but 
not admitted to its privileg es, shall be associated with, or be admitted to the privileges of, any other 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1989, s. 48, for “State s of Meghalaya and Nagaland” (w.e.f. 6 -9-1994).  
 2. Subs. by Act 8 of 2000, s. 47, for “Union territories of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram” (w.e.f. 2 -7-2001).  
 5 
 University except with the previous approval of the Government of the State in which, or the 
Administrator of the Union territory in which, such College or Institution is situate.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste, or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
admitted therein, as a teacher or student, or to hold any office t herein, or to graduate thereat:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making speci al 
provisions for admission of students of the weaker sections of the people in the North -Eastern region and, 
in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
8. Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be  the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment, and of any College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its  privileges; and also of the examinations, teaching and 
other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in 
respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, Colleges or 
Institutions.  
(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice of his intention to cause an in spection or inquiry to be 
made, — 
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University, 
College or Institution maintaine d by it, or  
(b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the University,  
and the University or the management, as the case may be, s hall have the right to make such 
representations to the Visitor, as  it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or in quiry as is referred to in                      
sub-section ( 2).  
(5) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University or the 
management, as the case may be, shall be entitled to appoint a representa tive who shall have the right to 
be present and be heard  at such inspection or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry, and the Vice -Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive Council the views of the Visitor 
with such advice as the Visitor may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned through the Vice - 
Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his v iews thereon and such advice as 
he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall communicate through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it is prop osed to take or has been taken upon the 
result  of such inspection or inquiry.  
(9) Where the Executive Council or the management does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any expla nation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or management, issue such directions as he may think fit 
and the Executive Council or management, as the case may be, sha ll comply with such directions.  
(10) Without prejudice to the foregoin g provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this A ct, the Statutes or 
Ordinances:  6 
 Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the University t o show cause why 
such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider 
the same.  
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
9. Chief Rector .—The Governor of the 1[State of Meghalaya] shall be the Chief Rector of the 
University.  
10. Officers of the University. —The following shall be t he officers of the University: — 
(1) The Chancellor;  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) The Pro -Vice -Chancellors;  
(4) The Deans of Schools;  
(5) The Registrar;  
(6) The Finance Officer; and  
(7) Such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor. —(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office,  be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for conferring 
degrees.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University, and 
shall exercise general supervision and control o ver the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the  authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of  the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the acti on taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor who se decision thereon shall b e final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the 
Executive Cou ncil within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action t aken by the  
Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other po wers and perform such other functions as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or Ordinances.  
13. The Pro -Vice -Chancellors. —Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
14. Deans of Schools. —Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such man ner as may  be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1989, s. 48, for “States of Meghalaya and Nagaland” (w.e.f. 6 -9-1994).  
 7 
 (2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as 
may be pres cribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Finance Officer. —The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Authorities of the University. —The following shall be the authorities of the University: — 
(1) The Court;  
(2) The Executive Council;  
(3) The Academic Council;  
(4) The Boards of Schools; and  
(5) Such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University.  
19. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be  
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers and fu nctions, 
namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes  of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and  development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the  audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the V isitor in respect of any matter which may be  referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Executive Council. —(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal ex ecutive body of the 
Universi ty. 
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
duties shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University an d shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and Ordinances, co -ordinate and 
exercise general supervision over the acade mic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
duties shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. Other authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Boards of 
Schools and of such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the 
Univer sity, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. Planning Board. —(1) There shall be constituted a Planning Board of the University which shall 
advise generally on the planning and development of the University and keep under review the standard 
of education and research in the University.  
(2) The P lanning Board shall consist of — 
(a) The Vice -Chancellor,  who shall be the Chairman, and  
(b) not more than eight persons of high academic standing who shall be appointed in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  8 
 (3) The Visitor may determine a date with effect from which the Planning Board shall stand 
dissolved.  
24. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be  constituted from time to time;  
(b) the election and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, the 
filling of vacancies of members, and all other matters relative to those authorities and other bodies for 
which it may be nec essary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the U niversity and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers of the University and other acade mic staff and their emoluments;  
(e) the  appointment of teachers and other academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specified period f or undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fu nd, the manner of termination of s ervice and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing sen iority of service of employees;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the establishment and recognition of Students ’ Union or associations of teachers, aca demic 
staff or other employees;  
(k) the pa rticipation of students in  the affairs of the University;  
(l) the conferment of honora ry degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates a nd other academic distinctions;  
(n) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(o) the maintenance of  discipline among the students;  
(p) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Ha lls, Colleges and Institutions;  
(q) the conditions under which Colleges and Institutions may be admitted to the privileges of t he 
University and the  withdrawal of such privileges;  
(r) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University; and  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, provided by the Statutes.  
25. Statutes how made .—(1) The first Statutes are  those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make , amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall  be consi dered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the approval of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Execu tive Council 
for con sideration.  9 
 (4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has b een assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1) during the period of three 
years immediately afte r the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years make, within one  year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
26. Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances ma y 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University a nd their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be cha rged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions of award of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, includin g the term of office and of appointment and the duties of 
examining bodies, examiners a nd moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline a nd teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for the m; 
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision  has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards  of Studies, Special Centres, specialised 
laboratories and other Committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities including 
learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of a ny other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of Colleges and Ins titutions  established by the University;  
(p) the supervision and management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the pr ivileges of the 
University; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be prov ided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  10 
 27. Regulations .—1[(1)] The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
2[(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published in the Official 
Gazette.  
(3) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Ac t shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in t wo or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation  or both houses agree that th e Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation  should not be made , the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation  shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be withou t prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.]  
28. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meetin g. 
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
3[(3) A copy  of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.]  
29. Annual accounts. —(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the Univers ity shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months be audited by the Comptroller  and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The annual accounts when audited shall b e published in the Gazette of India and a copy of the 
accounts together with the report of the Comptroller and Auditor -General shall be submitted to the Court 
and the Visitor along with the observa tions of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made b y the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
4[(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the report of Comptroller and Auditor -General, 
shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall , as soon as may be, cause the same to be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament.]  
30. Cond itions of service of employees. —(1) Every employee s hall be appointed under a written 
contract which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furni shed to the employee 
concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request o f the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor. The decision of  the Tribunal shall be final, and no  suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of 
the matters decided by the Tribunal. Every such request shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration 
upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (2 of 1940).  
31. Proce dure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
                                                           
1. Section 27 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
2. Ins. by  s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 2008, s. 8 (w.e.f. 5 -12-2008).  
4. Ins. by s. 9,  ibid. (w.e.f. 5-12-2008).  11 
 may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Ex ecutive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of                        
sub-section ( 2) of section 30 shall,  as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
32. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal, within such time as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the 
University or of the Principal or the management of any College or Institution, as the case may be, and 
thereupon the Executive Coun cil may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
33. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such pension or provident fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in s uch 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall ap ply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
34. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies. —If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose dec ision thereon shall be 
final.  
35. Constitution of Committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Commit tees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other persons (if any) as the authority in each case may 
think fit.  
36. Filling of casual Vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex-officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as conveniently may be, 
by the person or body who appointed, elected or co -opted the member whose place has bec ome vacant 
and the person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or 
body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
37. Proceedings of University authoriti es or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalidated merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
38. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or employee of the University for anything, which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or Ordinances.  
39. Mode of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by th e University, if certi fied by the 
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice,  order, proceeding 
or resolution, documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any 
other law for the time being in force.  
40. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to  be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  12 
 Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
41. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act and the Statute — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed  by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three year ’s; 
(c) the  first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty members 
and eleven members respectively, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold office for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first Academic Council shall be const ituted on the expiry of a period of six months from 
the commencement of this Act and during the said period of six months, the powers of the Academic 
Council shall be performed by the Planning Board constituted under section 23;  
(e) the first Academic Coun cil shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and shall hold office for a term of three years :  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated 
shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated would 
have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
 42. Completion of courses of students in Colleges or Institutions affiliated to the              
University .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in the Statutes or the Ordinances, any 
student of a College or Institution, who, immediately before the admission of such College or Institution 
to the privileges of the North -Eastern Hill University, was studying for a degree, diploma or certificate of 
the Gauhati  University , shall be permitted by the North -Eastern Hill University to complete his course for 
that degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may be, and the North -Eastern Hill University and s uch 
College or Institution shall provide for the instruction and examination of such student in accordance with 
the syllabus of studies of the Gauhati University.  
 
  13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 25 ( 1)] 
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall  be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall  hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his  office and shall be eligible for re -appointment  for not more than another term : 
Provided that notwithstanding  the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appoi nted and enters upon his office : 
Provided further that the  Visitor may direct that a Vice -Chancellor, whose ter m of office has expired,  
shall continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one  year, as may be specified in 
the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything  contained in clause ( 2), a person appointed as Vice -Chancellor shall, if 
he comp letes the age of sixty -five years during the term of his office or any  extension thereof, retire from 
office.  
(4) The emoluments and other  terms and conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as 
follows: — 
(i) There shall be paid to the  Vice -Chancellor a salary of two thousand and five hundred rupees 
per mensem and  he shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence  throughout 
his term of office and no charge shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor  personally in respect of the 
maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall  not be entitled to the benefits of the University Provident Fund:  
Provided that where  an employee  of— 
(a) the University or College  or Institution maintained by, or affiliated to, it; or  
(b) any other University or  College or Institution maintained by, or affiliated to, that 
University,  
is appointed as  Vice -Chancellor, he shall be allowed to continue to contribute to the provident  fund to 
which he is a subscriber, and the contribution of t he University shall  be limited to what he had been 
contributing immediately before his appointment  as Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall  be entitled to travelling allowances at such rate s as may be fixed 
by the  Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall  be entitled to leave on full pay for one -eleventh of the period spent 
by him on  active service.  
(v) The Vice -Chancellor shall  also be entitled, on medical grounds or otherwise, to leave without 
pay for a  period not exceeding three months during the term of his office:  
Provided that such leave may be  converted into leave on full pay to the extent to which he is entitled 
to leave  under sub -clause ( iv). 
(5) If the office of the  Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation o r otherwise or if he  
is unable to perform his duties owing to absence, illness or any other cause,  the Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if 
there is more than one Pro -Vice -Chancellor, the  senior -most Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancello r until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the existing                        
Vice -Chancellor  attends to the duties of his office, as the ca se may be : 
Provided that if a  Pro-Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior most Professor  shall perform  the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor.  
  14 
 2. Powers and duties of the  Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall  be ex-officio  
Chairman of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council  and the Finance Committee and 
shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside  at the Convocations of the University held for conferring 
degrees. The  Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at and, to address, any meeting  of any 
authority or other body of the University, but shall not be ent itled to  vote thereat unless he is a member of 
such authority or body.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the  Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, these Statutes, the Ordinances and 
the regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all powers necessary to ens ure such observance.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall  have the power to convene or cause to be convened meetings of the 
Court, the  Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee.  
3. Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—(1) Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor  shall be appointed by the Executive 
Council on the recommendation s of the  Vice -Chancellor : 
Provided that where the  recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council,  the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person  recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend  another person to the Executive Council : 
Provided further that the  Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a  professor to discharge t he duties of Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own  duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a  Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council,  but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the  term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier, and he shall be  eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a  Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five years.  
(3) The emoluments and other  terms and conditions of service of a pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be  prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall  assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the  Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and s hall also exercise such  powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the  Vice -Chancellor.  
4. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be a  whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The emoluments and other  terms and conditions of service of the registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances;  
Provided that the Registrar  shall retire on a ttaining the age of sixty years : 
Provided further that a  Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of six ty years, continue  
in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until  the expiry of a period of one 
year whichever is earlier.  
(3) When the office of the  Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is , by reason of illness, absence 
or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the  office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for  the purpose.  
(4)(a) The Registrar shall have  power to take disc iplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding  teachers and academic staff , as may be specified in the orders of the Executive  Council and to 
suspend them pending inquiry , to administer warnings to them or to  impose on them the penalty of 
censure  or the withholding of increment:  
  15 
 Provided that no such penalty  shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable  opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard  to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the  Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties  specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry  discloses that a punishment beyond the powers of the Registrar is 
called for,  the Registrar shall, upon conclusio n of the inquiry, make a report to the  Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall  lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing  any penalty.  
(5) The Registrar shall be ex-officio  Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and 
the Boards  of Schools, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities.  He shall be    
ex-officio  Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(6) It shall be the duty of the  Registrar, — 
(a) to be the custodian of the  records, the common seal and such other property of the U niversity 
as the  Executive Council  shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices  convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council,  the Boards of Schools, the Boards of Studies, the Boards of Examiners and of any  
Committees appointed by the authorities of  the University;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all  the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the  Boards of Sch ools and of any Committees appointed by the authorities of the  
University;  
(d) to conduct the official  correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council;  
(e) to arrange for and  superintend the examinations of the University in accordance with the 
manner  prescribed by the Ordinances ; 
(f) to supply to the Visitor,  copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as  soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University  in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign powers 
of attorney  and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other  duties as may be specified in these Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations  or as may be required, from time to time, by the Executive Council or the                  
Vice -Chancellor.  
5. Finance Officer. —(1) The Finance Officer shall  be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The emoluments and other  terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be 
such as may be  prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that a Finance Officer  shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that the  Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age  of sixty 
years,  continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office  or until the expiry 
of a period of one year whichever is earlier.  
(3) When the office of the  Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason  of 
illness,  absence  or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the  duties of the office 
shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor  may appoint for the purpose.  
(4) The Finance Officer shall  be ex-officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee but shall not be 
deemed to be  a member of such Committee.  
  16 
 (5) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general  supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its  
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other  financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may  be prescribed by these Statutes or the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Finance  Officer shall not incur any expenditure or make any investment exceeding 
ten thousand rupees without the previous approval of the Executive Council.  
(6) Subject to the control of  the Executive Cou ncil, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the  property and investments of the University including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits  fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for a  year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purposes for which  
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the  preparation  of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentation  to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on  the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the  collection of reve nue and advise on the  methods of collection 
employed ; 
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are  maintained up -to-date 
and that stoc k-checking is conducted, of equipment and other  consumable materials in all offices, 
Special Centres, speciali sed laboratories,  Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) call for explanation for  unauthorised expenditure and for other financial irregularities and 
suggest  disciplinary ac tion against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office,  Centre, laboratory, College or Institution maintained by the 
University, any  information or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his  
duties.  
(7) The receipt of the Fi nance  Officer or of the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by the  
Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient  discharge for payment of 
such money.  
6. Deans of Schools of Studies .—(1) Every Dean of a School of  Studies shall be appointed by the 
Vice -Chancellor from among the professors in  the School for a period of three years and he shall be 
eligible for  re-appointment:  
Provided that a Dean on  attaining the age of sixty years sha ll cease to hold office as such:  
Provided further that if at any  time there is no Professor in a School, the Vice -Chancellor or a            
Pro-Vice -Chancellor if authorised by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, shall  exercise the powers of the 
Dean of the School.  
(2) When the office of  the Dean  is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause,  unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be  performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The De an shall be the Head  of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the  standards of teaching and research in the School. The Dean shall have such other  
functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
  17 
 (4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to  vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
7. Heads of Departments .—(1) In the case of Departments  which have more than one Professor, the 
Head of the Department shall be  appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the   
Vice -Chancellor  from among  the Professors.  
(2) In the case of Departments  where there is on ly one Professo r, the Executive  Council shall have the 
option  to appoint , on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, either the Professor or  a Reade r as the 
Head of the Department:  
Provided that it shall be open to a  Professor or Reader to decline the offer of appointment as the Head 
of the  Department.  
(3) A person appointed as the  Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a period of three 
years and  shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(4) A Head of a Department may  resign his office at any time dur ing his tenure of office.  
(5) A Head of a Department  shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
8. Deans of Students ’ Welfare .—(1) Every Dean of Students ’ Welfare shall be appointed from 
amongst the teachers of the University , not below  the rank of a Reader , by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of the  Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) Every Dean appointed under  clause ( 1) shall be a whole -time officer and shall hold office for a 
term of  three years shall be eligible for re-appointment:  
Provided that the Executive  Council may, if it is considered necessary, appoint on the 
recommendation of the  Vice -Chancellor, a teacher , not below the rank of a Reader , to discharge the  duties 
of the Dean of Students ’ Welfare in addition to his duties as such  teacher, and in such a case, the 
Executive Council may sanction a suitable  allowance to be paid to him.  
(3) A person who is appointed  as a Dean of Students ’ Welfare shall continue to hold his lien on his  
substanti ve post and shall be eligible to all the benefits that would have  otherwise accrued to him, but for 
his appointment as the Dean of Students ’ Welfare.  
(4) When the office of a Dean  of Students ’ Welfare is vacant or when the Dean of Students ’ Welfare 
is, by reason of illness or absence or any other cause , unable to perform  the duties of  his office, the duties 
of the office shall be performed by such person as the  Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The duties and powers of a  Dean of Students ’ Welfare shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. Proctors .—(1) Every Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation  
of the Vice -Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as  may be assigned to him 
by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) Every Proctor shall hold  office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
10. Librarians .—(1) Every Librarian shall be  appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of the Selection  Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
officer of  the University.  
(2) Every Librarian shall  exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  
  18 
 11. Meetings of the Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on  a date to be fixed 
by the Executive Council unless some other date has been  fixed by the Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the  Court, a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year,  together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet , as audited , and the 
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of  receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial es timates 
referred  to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days  before  the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Twelve members of the Court  shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
(5) Special meetings of the  Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the                      
Vice -Chancellor, or , if there is no Vice -Chancello r, by a Pro -Vice -Chancellor, or  if there is no                      
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, by the Registrar.  
12. Quorum for meetings of the  Executive Council. —Five members of the Executive  Council shall 
form a quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council.  
13. Powers and functions of  Executive Council. —(1) The Executive Council shall  have the 
management and administration of the revenue  and property of the  University and the conduct of all 
administrative affairs of the University not  otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions  of this Act, these Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council 
shall, in  addition to all other powers vested in it, ha ve the following powers, namely :— 
(i) to create teaching and  academic posts , to determine the number and emoluments of such posts 
and to  define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers,  and oth er 
academic staff and Principals  of Colleges and Institutions maintained  by the University : 
Provided that no action shall  be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number, 
qualifications and  the emoluments  of teachers and academic staff otherwise th an after  consideration 
of the recommendation s of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such  Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may be necessary,  
and Principals  of Colleges an d Institutions maintained by the University on the  recommendation of 
the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to  fill up temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial  and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manner  prescribed by the Ordinance s; 
(iv) to grant leave of absence  to any officer of the University, other than the Chancellor and the  
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the  functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce  discipline among employees in accordance with these Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the  finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that purpose, to appoint su ch agents as it  may think 
fit; 
(vii) to fix limits on the  total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the  
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
  19 
 (viii) to invest any money  belonging to the University, includin g any unapplied income in such 
stocks , funds,  shares or securities as it shall, from time to time, think fit, or in the  purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such  investments from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept  transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings,  premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the  work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry  out and cancel contra cts on behalf of the University;  
(xii) to entertain,  adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees  
and students of the University, who may, for any reason feel aggrieved;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and  moderators and, if  necessary to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments  and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal  for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such sp ecial  arrangements as may be necessary for the residence and discipline of 
women  students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its  powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellors, the Registrar 
or the  Finance Officer or such other employee or authority of the  University or to a  Committee 
appointed by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute  fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; and  
(xviii) to exercise such other  powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or 
imposed on it by this Act, or these Statutes.  
14. Quorum for meetings of the  Academic Council .—Nine members of the Academic  Council 
shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Academic Council.  
15. Powers of the Academic  Council .—Subject to this Act, these  statutes and the  Ordinances, the 
Academic Council shall, in addition to all  other powers vested in it, have  the following powers, 
namely: — 
(a) to exercise general  supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions  regarding methods of instruction, co -operative teaching among Colleges and  Institutions, 
evaluation of research or improvements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -School  co-ordination, to establish or appoint Committees or Boards, for 
taking up  projects on an inte r-School basis;  
(c) to consider matters of  general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations  and rules consistent with the se Statutes and the Ordinances 
regarding the  academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences admissions, award  of 
fellowships and studentships, fee concessions, corporate life and attendance.  
16. The Planning Board .—(1) The members of the Planning  Board shall be appointed by the Visitor 
and shall hold office for such period as  he may determine.  
(2) The Planning Board shall,  in addition to all other powers vested in it by this Act, have the right to  
advise the Executive Council and the Acade mic Council on any academic matter.  20 
 (3) On the date determined by  the Visitor under sub -section ( 3) of section 23, this Statute shall cease 
to have effect.  
17. Schools of Studies and  Departments .—(1) The University shall have  such Schools of studies as 
may be specified by the Ordinances.  
(2) Every School shall have a  School Board. The members of the first school Board shall be 
nominated by the  Executive Council and shall hold office for a period of three years.  
(3) The powers and functions of  a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings  of a School Board and the quorum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed  by the Ordinances.  
(5)(a) Each School shall  consist of such Departments as may be a ssigned to it by  the Ordinances.  
(b) No Department shall be  established or abolished except by these Statutes:  
Provided that the Executive  Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of  Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of th e University as the  Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
(c) Each Department shall  consist of  the following members , namely: — 
(i) teachers of the Department;  
(ii) persons conducting  research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School or  Deans of the Schools concerned;  
(iv) honorary professors, if  any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may  be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions of 
the Ordinances.  
18. Boards of Studies .—(1) Each Department shall have  two Boards of Studies, one for                     
Post-graduate Studies and the other for  under -graduate studies.  
(2) The constitution of a Board  of Post -graduate Studies and the term of office of its members shall be  
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The  functions of a Board of  Post-graduate Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for 
various  degrees and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the  concerned School 
Board in the manner prescribed by the Ordinanc es:— 
(a) course s of studies and  appointment of examiners for post -graduate courses, but excluding 
research  degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors  of research; and  
(c) measures for the  improvement of the standard of post -graduate teaching and research : 
Provided that the above  functions of a Board of Post -graduate Studies shall, during the period of three 
years  immediately after the commencement of this Act, be performed by the  Department.  
(4) The constitution and  functions of a Board of Under -graduate Studies and the term  of office of its  
members shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
19. Finance Committee .—(1) The Finance Committee shall  consist of the following members, 
namely: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) A Pro -Vice -Chancellor appointed  by the Executive Council;  
  21 
 (iii) Three persons nominated  by the Executive Council , out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the  Executive  Council; and  
(iv) Three persons nominated by  the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance  Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the  Finance Committee, other than ex-officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance  Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall  meet at least twice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutini se proposals for expenditure.  
(6) The annual accounts and the  financial estimates of the University prepared b y the  Finance  Officer 
shall be  laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter  submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(7) The Finance Committee shall  recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring  expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University  (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
20. Selection Committees. —(1) There shall be Selection  Committees for making recommenda tions 
to the Executive Council for appointment  to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Librarian and 
Principals of  Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for  appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist  of the Vice -Chancellor, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor appointed by the Executive  Council, a 
nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the corresponding  entry in column 2 of the said Table : 
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned, if he is a 
Professor.  
  (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University,  
nominated by the Executive Council, out of a panel of names 
recommended by the Academic Council for their special 
knowledge of or interest in the subject with which the Professor 
will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The H ead of the Department concerned . 
  (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the University,  
nominated by the Executive Council, out of a panel of names 
recommended by the Academic Council for their special 
knowledge of or interest in the subject with which the Reader or 
Lecturer will be concerned.  
  22 
 1 2 
Librarian  
 (i) Two persons not in the service of the University, 
who have special knowledge of the subject of Library 
Science/Library Administration to be nomi nated by the 
Executive Council.  
 (ii) One person, not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
Principal of College  
or Institution maintained by the 
University  
 
 
 
 Three persons not in the service of the University of 
whom two shall be nominated by the Executive Council 
and one by the Academic Council for their special 
knowledge of or interest in a  subject in which instruction 
is being provided by the College or Institution . 
NOTE 1.—Where the appointment is being  made for an inter -disciplinary  project, the head  of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
NOTE 2.—The professor to be nominated  shall be a Professor concerned  with the  speciality for 
which the selection is being made and that the Vice -Chancellor  shall consult the Head of the 
Department and the Dean of School before  nominating the professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in  his absence, the senior -most Pro -Vice -Chancellor, shall preside at 
the meetings  of a Selection Committee.  
(4) The meetings of a Selection  Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor or in his 
absence, by the  senior -most Pro -Vice-Chancellor.  
(5) The procedure to be  followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be 
laid down  in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Executive Council is  unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selection 
Committee, it shall  record its  reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary  posts shall be mad e in the manner indicated below :— 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is  for a duration longer than one academic session, it shall be 
filled on the  advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in  the 
foregoing clauses : 
Provided that if the  Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to  
fill the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a pur ely temporary basis by a  local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a period not  exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy  is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy 
shall be made  on the recommendation of a  local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of  
the School concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the  Vice -Chancellor : 
Provided that if the same  person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the 
Department, the  Selection  Committee may contain two  nominees of the Vice -Chancellor : 
 Provided further that in case of sudden casual  vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the  Dean may, in consultation with  the Head of the Department concerned, 
make a temp orary appointment for a month  and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar 
about such appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed  temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular  Selection 
Committee  for appointment under these Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary  
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or  a regular 
Selection Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the  case may be.  23 
 21. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in Statute 20, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high  academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of Professor  or Reader or any other academic post in University, as the case may be, on s uch 
terms and conditions as it deems fit, and on the person agreeing to do so,  appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may  appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or  organisation for undertaking a joint proj ect in accordance with the manner laid  down in the 
Ordinances.  
22. Appointment for a fixed  tenure .—The Executive Council may  appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute  20 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.  
23. Recognised teachers. —(1) The qualifications of  recognised teachers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the  recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
in the  Ordin ances.  
(3) No teacher shall be  recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee  constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition   of a teacher shall be determined by Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may,  by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than               
two-thirds of the  members present and voting, with draw recognition from a teacher : 
Provided that no such  resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to the  person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be  specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his  objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them, have  been considered by the Academic Council.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an  order of withdrawal under clause ( 5) may, within three months from 
the date of  communication to him of such order, appeal to the Executive Council which may  pass such 
orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
24. Committees. —Any authority of the University  may appoint as many standing or special 
committees as it may deem fit, and may  appoint to such committees persons wh o are not members of such 
authority. Any  such committee may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to subsequent  
confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
25. Terms and conditions of  service of University teachers .—(1) All the teachers of the  University 
shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be governed  by the terms and conditions of service 
as specified in these Statutes, the  Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher of the  University shall be appointed on a written contract, the form of which shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances. A copy of the contract shall be deposited with the  Registrar.  
26. Seniority lists .—(1) Whenever, in accordance  with these Statutes, any person is to hold an office 
or be a member of an  authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority  shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person  in his grade, and, in accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive  Council may, from t ime to time, prescribe.  
  24 
 (2) It shall be the duty of the  Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect of each class of persons to 
whom  the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list  in accordance with 
the provisions of c lause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have  equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative  
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on  his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person,  submit the matter  to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
27. Removal of teachers .—(1) Where there is an  allegation of misconduct against a teacher, or a 
member of the academic staff,  the Vice -Chancellor may, if he thinks fit, by order in writing, place the  
teacher under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive Council the  circumstan ces in which 
the order was made : 
Provided that the Executive  Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke  such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the terms of his contract of service or of his appointment, 
the Executive Council shall be entitled to remove a teacher or a member of the  academic staff on the 
ground of misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the  Executive Council shall not be entitled to remove a teacher or a member of 
the academic staff except for good cause and after giving three months ’ notice in  writing or on payment 
of three months ’ salary in lieu of notice.  
(4) No teacher or a member of  the academic staff shall be removed under clause ( 2) or under              
clause ( 3) until  he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action  proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher or  a member of the academic staff shall require a two -thirds majority of 
the members of the Executive Council present and voting.  
(6) The removal of a teacher or  a member of the  academic staff shall take effect from the date on 
which the  order of removal is made : 
Provided that where a teacher  or a member of the academic staff is under suspension at the time of his  
removal, the removal shall take effect from the date on which he w as placed  under suspension.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything  contained in these Statutes, a teacher or a member of the academic staff 
may resign by giving three months ’ notice in writing to the Executive Council or on  payment of three 
months ’ salary in lieu thereof.  
28. Removal of employees other  than teachers of the University. —(1) Notwithstanding anything  
contained in the terms of his contract of service or of his appointment, an  employee, other than a teacher 
or a member of the academic sta ff, may be removed  by the authority which is com petent to appoint the 
employee — 
(a) if he is of unsound mind or  is a deaf-mute or suffers from contagious leprosy;  
(b) if he is an undischarged  insolvent;   
(c) if he has been convicted by  a court of law of any offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect  thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months;  
(d) if he is otherwise guilty  of misconduct:  
Provided that no employee shall  be removed from his office unless a resolution to that effect is passed 
by the  Executive Council by a majority of two -thirds of its members present and voting.  
(2) No employee shall be  removed under clause ( 1) until he has been given a reasonable opportunity 
of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in  regard to him.  25 
 (3) Where the removal of such  employee is for a reason other than that specified in sub -clause ( c) or 
sub-clause ( d) of clause ( 1), he shall be given three months ’ notice in writing  or paid three months ’ salary 
in lieu of such notice.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything  contained in these Statutes, an employee , not being a teacher or a 
member of the  academic staff, shall be enti tled to resign, — 
(i) if he is a permanent  employee, only after giving three months ’ notice in writing to the 
appointing  authority or paying to the University three months ’ salary in lieu thereof;  
(ii) if he is not a permanent  employee, only after giving one month ’s notice in writing to the 
appointing  authority or  paying to the University one  month ’s salary in lieu thereof:  
Provided  that such resignation  shall take effect from the date on which the resignation is accepted by 
the appointing authority.  
29. Honorary degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may,  on the recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and 
voting, make  proposals to the Visitor for the  conferment of honorary degrees : 
Provided that in case of  emergency, the Executive Council may , on its own, make such proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may,  by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members  present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any  honorary degree 
conferred by the University.  
30. Withdrawal of degrees,  etc.—The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less  than  two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or  academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any  person by the U niversity for g ood 
and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such  resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that  person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in  the notice why such a resolution 
should  not be passed and until his objections,  if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered  by the Executive Council.  
31. Maintenance of discipline  among students of the University .—(1) All powers relating to  
discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the University  shall vest in the                         
Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may  delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to a Proctor and to 
such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the  generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking  such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline,  the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in the exercise of hi s powers, by order, direct that  any student or students be expelled, or rusticated, 
for a specified period, or  be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or  
Department of the University for a stated period, or be punished wit h fine for  an amount to be specified in 
the order, or be debarred from taking an  examination or examinations conducted by the University, 
College, Institution or  a Department for one or more years, or that the results of the student or  students 
concerned i n the examination or examinations in which he or they have  appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Principals of Colleges,  Institutions, Heads of Special Centres, Deans of Schools of Studies 
and Heads of  teaching Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all  such 
disciplinary powers over the students in their respective Colleges,  Institutions, Special Centres, Schools 
and teaching Departments in the  University as may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges,  
Institutions, Special Centres, Schools and teaching in the Departments.  26 
  
(5) Without prejudice to the  powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Principals and other persons specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the  University . The 
Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Heads of Special Centres,  Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of 
teaching Departments in the University  may also make the supplementary rules as they deem necessary 
for the aforesaid  purposes. Every student sha ll be supplied with a copy of the rules made by the  
University and a copy of the supplementary rules shall be supplied to the  students concerned.  
(6) At the time of admission,  every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he  
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and  other authorities of the 
University.  
32. Maintenance of discipline  among students of Colleges, etc. —All powers relating to  discipline 
and disciplinary action in relation to student s of a College or an  Institution, not maintained by the 
University, shall vest in the Principal of  the College or Institution, as the case may be, in accordance with 
the procedure  prescribed by the Ordinances.  
33. Admission of Colleges , etc., to the privileges of the University. —(1) Colleges and other  
Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University may be admitted  to such privileges of the 
University as the Executive Council may decide on the  following conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every su ch College or  Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing Body, 
consisting of not  more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive Council and including, among  
others, two teachers of the University to be nominated by the Executive Council  and three 
representatives of the teaching staff of whom the Principal of the  College or Institution shall be one. 
The procedure for appointment of members of  the Governing Body and other matters affecting the 
management of a College or an  Institution shall  be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided that the said  condition shall not apply in the case of Colleges and Institutions 
maintained by  Government which shall, however, have an Advisory Committee consisting of not  
more than fifteen  persons which shall co nsist of, among others, three teachers  including the Principal 
of the College or Institution, and two teachers of the  University nom inated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) Every such College or  Institution shall satisfy the Executive Council on  the following  matters, 
namely: — 
(a) The suitability and  adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and  adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of their service;  
(c) the arrangements for the  residence, welfare, discipline and supervision of students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial  provision made for the continued maintenance of the College or 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are  essential for the maintenance of the st andards of University 
education.  
(iii) No Colleg e or Institution  shall be admitted to any privileges o f the University except on the 
commendation of the Academic Council made after considering the report of a  Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by the Academic Council.  
(iv) Colleges  and Institutions  desirous of admission to any privileges of the University shall be 
required to  intimate their intention to do so in writing so as to reach the Registrar not  later than the 
15th August, prece eding the year from which permission applied for  is to have effect.  27 
 (v) A College or an Institution  shall not, without the previous permission of the Executive 
Council and the  Academic Council, suspend  instruction in any subject or course of study which  it is 
authorised to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the teaching  staff and Principals of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the 
privileges of  the University shall be made in the mann er prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided that nothing in this  clause shall apply to Colleges and Institution s maintained by 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of  the administrative and other non -academic staff of every College or 
Institution,  referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may  be laid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this  clause s hall apply to Colleges and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every College or  Institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall be inspected at  least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed by the Academic  Council, and the report of 
that Committee shall be submitted to the Academic  Council, which shall forward the same to the 
Executive Council with such  recommendations as it may deem fit to make. The Executive Council, after  
considering the report and the recommendat ions, if any, of the Academic Council,  shall forward a copy of 
the report to the Governing Body of the College or  Institution with such remarks, if any, as it may deem 
fit, for suitable action.  
(5) The Executive Council may,  after consulting the Academic C ouncil, withdraw any privileges 
granted to a  College or Institution, at any time it considers that the College or Institution  does not satisfy 
any of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the College or  Institution was admitted to such 
privileges : 
Prov ided that before any  privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the College or 
Institution  concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Executive Council  why such action 
should not be taken.  
(6) Subject to the conditions  set forth in  clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as  may be considered necessary;  
(ii) the procedure for the  admission of Colleges and Institutions to the privileges of the University 
and for the withdrawal of those privileges.  
34. Convo cations .—Convocations of the University  for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be held in such manner  as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
35. Acting Chairman of meetings .—Where no provision is made for  a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the  University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President or Chairman  so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among  
themselves to preside at such meeting.  
36. Resignation .—Any member, other than an ex-officio  member of the Court , the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any  other authority of the University or any Committee of such 
authority may resign  by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as  soon as 
such letter is received by the Registrar.  
37. Disqualifications .—(1) A person shall be  disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any of the  authorities of the University — 
(a) if he is of unsound mind or  is a deaf -mute or s uffers from contagious leprosy;  
(b) if he is an undischarged  insolvent;  
  28 
 (c) if he has been convicted by  court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect  thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as  to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications  mentioned in clause  (1), the question shall be referred for the decision of the  Visitor and 
his decision shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall  lie in any civil court against such decision.  
38. Resid ence condition for  membership and office .—Notwithstanding anything  contained in these 
Statutes, no person who is not ordinarily resident in India  shall be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any  authority of the University.  
39. Membership of authorities  by virtue of membership of other bodies .—Notwithstanding 
anything  contained in these Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University or is  a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member  of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a particular appointment  shall  hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues 
to be a  member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular  appointment, as the 
case may b e. 
40. Alumni Association .—(1) There shall be an Alumni  Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for  membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni  Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he 
has been a  member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of the  election and is a 
graduate of the University of at  least five years ’ standing: 
Provided that the condition  relating to the completion of one year ’s membership shall not apply in 
the case  of the first election.  
41. Ordinances how made. —(1) The first Ordinances made  under sub -section (2) of section 26 may 
be amended, repealed or added to at any time by  the Executive Council in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of  the matters enumerated in section 26, other than those enumerated in  
clause ( n) of sub-section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the Executive Council unless a draft of  such 
Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall  not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic  Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draf t to the  Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with  any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council  has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic  Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the  original draft 
is re-affirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the  members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the  Academic Council,  the draft may be sent back to the Executive 
Council which  shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the  Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the  Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the  date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University  within four 
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of  any such Ordinance and he shall, as 
soon as possible, inform the Executive  Council about his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The 
Visitor may, after  receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending  the 
Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, an d his decision shall be final.  
  29 
 42. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the  University may make Regulations consistent with this 
Act, and these Statutes and  the Ordinances :— 
(a) laying down the procedure  to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a  quorum;  
(b) providing for all matters  which are required by this Act, these Statutes or the Ordinances to be  
prescribed by Regulations;  
(c) providing for all other  matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointe d by 
them and  not provided for by this Act, these Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the  University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the  
members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the business to b e considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of  meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may  direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify, of any 
Regulation made  under this Statute or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
43. Delegation of powers. —Subject to the provisions of  this Act and these Statutes, any officer or 
authority of the University may  delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under 
his or its respective control and subject to th e condition that overall  responsibility for the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall continue to  vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
 
