--------------------------The All-India Services (Amendment) Act, 1975--------------------------
1 
 THE ALL -INDIA SERVICES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1975  
ACT NO. 23 OF 1975  
[9th May, 1975.]  
An Act further to amend the All -India Services Act, 1951.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short ti tle.—This Act may be called the All -India Services (Amendment) Act, 1975.  
2. [Amendment of section 3. ] Rep. by the Repealing  and Amending Act, 1978 (38 of 1978), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule (w.e.f. 26-11-1978).  
3. Validation. —No rule made, or purporting to have been made, with retrospective effect, under 
section 3 of the principal Act before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be invalid or ever 
to have been invalid merely on the ground that such rule was made with retrospective effect and 
accordingly every such rule and any action taken or thing done thereunder shall be as valid and effective 
as if the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, were in force at all material 
times when such  rule was made or action or thing was taken or done.  
--------------------------The All-India Services Regulations (Indemnity) Act, 1975--------------------------
1 
 THE ALL -INDIA SERVICES REGULATIONS (INDEMNITY) ACT, 1975  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1975  
[6th May, 1975 .] 
An Act to grant indemnity in respect of the failure to lay before Parliament certain  regulations 
made under the All -India Services Act, 1951, and for certain other matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the Rep ublic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the All -India Services Regulations (Indemnity) Act, 1975.  
2. Indemnity .—The Central Government and all officers responsible for the laying of any regulation 
made before the commencement of this Act under or in pursuance  of any rule made under the All -India 
Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951), are, and each of them is, hereby freed, discharged  and indemnified from 
and against all consequences, whatsoever, if any, incurred or to be incurred by them or the Central 
Government or any such officer by reason of any omission in this behalf to lay such regulation before 
Parliament and every such regula tion shall for all purposes be deemed to have been duly laid before 
Parliament and shall have effect and shall be deemed always to have had effect accordingly.  
3. [Amendment of section 3 of Act 61 of 1951 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending                       
Act, 1978 (38 of 1978), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 26-11-1978). 
--------------------------The Delhi Sales Tax Act, 1975--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI SALES TAX ACT, 1975                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
INCIDENCE AND LEVY OF TAX  
3. Incidence of tax.  
4. Rate of tax.  
5. Power of Administrator to prescribe points at which goods may be taxed.  
6. Burden of proof.  
7. Tax -free goods.  
8. Certain sales and purchases not liable to tax.  
CHAPTER III  
SALES TAX AUTHORITIES AND APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
 9. Sales tax authorities.  
10. Delegation of Commissioner’s powers.  
11. Power to transfer proceedings.  
12. Disputes regarding territorial jurisdiction.  
13. Appellate Tribunal.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION, AMENDMENT AND CANCELLATION  
14. Registration.  
15. Voluntary registration.  
16. Provisional registration.  
17. Special registration.  
18. Security from certain class of dealers.  
19. Amendment of certificate of registration.  
20. Cancellation of certificate of registration.  
CHAPTER V  
RETURNS, ASSESSMENT, RECOVERY AND REFUND OF TAX  
21. Periodical payment of tax and filing of returns.  
22. Collection of tax only by registered dealers . 
23. Assessment.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Turnover escaping assessment.  
25. Payment and recovery of tax.  
26. Continuation of certain recovery proceedings.  
27. Interest.  
28. Special mode l of recovery.  
29. Lump sum payment of tax.  
30. Refund.  
31. Set -off. 
CHAPTER VI  
LIABILITY IN SPECIAL CASES  
32. Liability in case of transfer of business.  
33. Liability in case of company in liquidation.  
34. Liability of partners of firm to pay tax.  
35. Liability of guardians, trustees, etc.  
36. Liability of Court of Wards, etc . 
37. Liability in other cases.  
CHAPTER VII  
LIABILITY TO PRODUCE ACCOUNTS AND SUPPLY OF INFORMATION  
38. Accounts.  
39. Memoranda of sales.  
40. Information to be furnished regarding change of business.  
41. Production and inspection of accounts and documents and search of premises.  
42. Power of Commissioner and other authorities to take evidence on oath, etc.  
CHAPTER VIII  
APPEAL S, REFERENCE AND REVISION  
43. Appeals.  
44. Non -appealable orders.  
45. Statement of case to the High Court.  
46. Revision of orders prejudicial to revenue.  
47. Revision of other orders.  
48. Rectification of mistakes.  
49. Determination of disputed questions.  
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
50. Offences.  
51. Offences by companies.  3 
 SECTIONS  
52. Cognizance of offences.  
53. Investigation of offences.  
54. Composition of offences.  
55. Imposition of P enalty.  
56. Penalty for concealment of sales or furnishing inaccurate particulars or making false 
representations . 
57. Penalty for contravening provisions regarding collection of tax by dealers.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
58. Service of notice when family is disrupted or firm is dissolved.  
59. Service of notice in the case of discontinued business.  
60. Appearance before any authority in proceedings.  
61. Change of an incumbent of an office.  
62. Extension of period of limitation in certain cases.  
63. Returns, etc. , to be confidential.  
64. Setting up of check -posts and barriers.  
65. Publication of names, etc. , of dealers whose certificates of registration are cancelled.  
66. Exemptions.  
67. Bar of suits in civil courts.  
68. Transfers during pendency of proceedings void.  
69. Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973 , not to apply to certain  offences.  
70. Application of the provisions of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 for purposes of recovery 
of sales tax recoverable as arrears of land revenue.  
71. Power to make rules.  
72. Rules to be laid before  Parliament . 
73. Repeal and saving s. 
74. Removal of difficulties.  
75. Transitional provisions.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
 
  4 
  THE DELHI SALES TAX ACT, 1975  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1975  
[7th August, 1975 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the levy of tax on sale of goods in the Union 
territory  of Delhi . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Sales Tax        
Act, 1975.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the  Union territory  of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Administrator may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of Delhi appointed by the President under        
article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 13;  
(c) “business ” includes — 
(i) any trade, commerce or manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade, 
commerce or manufacture whether or not such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or 
concern is carried on with a motive to make gain or profit and whether or not any gain or profit 
accrues from such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern; and  
(ii) any transaction in connection with, or incidental or ancillary to, such trade, commerce, 
manufacture, adventure or concern;  
(d) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Sales Tax appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 9;  
(e) “dealer ” means any person who carries on business of selling goods in Delhi  and includes — 
(i) the Central Government or a State Government carrying on such business;  
(ii) an incorporated society (including a co -operative society), club or association which sells 
or supplies goods, whether or not in the course of business, to its members for cash or  for 
deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration;  
(iii) a manager, factor , broker, commission agent, del credere  agent , or any  mercantile agent, 
by whatever name called, and whether of the same description as hereinbefore  mentioned or not, 
who sells goods belonging to any principal whether disclosed or not; and  
(iv) an auctioneer who sells or auctions goods belonging to any principal, whether disclosed 
or not and whether the offer of the intending purchaser is accepted by  him or by the principal or a 
nominee of the principal;  
(f) “Delhi ” means the  Union territory  of Delhi;  
(g) “goods ” includes all materials, articles, commodities and all  other  kinds of moveable property, 
but does not include newspapers, actionable claims, stocks,  shares, securities or money;  
                                                           
1. 21st October, 1975,  vide Delhi Administrator notification No. F . 4-61-1975 - F in (General) ( i), dated 10 th October, 1975, 
Published in Delhi, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, dated 10 th October, 1975, Part IV. 
 5 
 (h) “manufacture ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,  means producing, 
making, extracting, altering, ornamenting, finishing or  otherwise processing, treating or adapting any 
goods, but does not include any such process or mode of manufacture as may be prescribed;  
(i) “Official Gazette ” means the Delhi Gazette;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules  made under this Act;  
(k) “registered ” means registered under this Act;  
(l) “sale”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,  means any transfer of 
property in goods by one person to  another  for cash  or for deferred payment or for  other  valuab le 
consideration, and includes — 
(i) a transfer of goods on  hire-purchase or  other  system of payment by instalments, but does 
not include a mortgage or hypothecation of , or a charge or pledge on , goods;  
(ii) supply of goods by a society (including a co -operative society), club, firm or any 
association to its  members for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration 
or other  valuable consideration, whether or not in the course of business; and  
(iii) transfer of goods by an auctioneer referred to in  sub-clause ( iv) of clause ( e); 
(m) “sale price ” means the amount payable to a dealer as consideration for the sale of any goods, 
less any sum allowed as cash discount according to the practice normally  prevailing in trade, but 
inclusive of any sum charged for anything done by the dealer in respect of goods at the time of or 
before the delivery thereof  other  than the cost of freight or delivery or the cost of installation in cases 
where such cost is sepa rately charged;  
(n) “tax” means sales tax payable under this Act;  
(o) “turnover ” means the aggregate of the amounts of sale price receivable, or, if a dealer so 
elects, actually received by the dealer, in respect of any sale of goods made during any prescribed 
period in any year after deducting the amount of sale price, if any, refunded by the dealer to a 
purchaser in respect of any goods purchased and returned by the purchaser within the prescribed 
period:  
Provided that an election as aforesaid once made  shall not be altered except with the permission 
of the Commissioner and on such terms and conditions as he may think fit to impose;  
(p) “year” means the financial year.  
CHAPTER II  
INCIDENCE AND LEVY OF TAX  
3. Incidence of tax .—(1) Every dealer whose turnover during the year immediately preceding the  
commencement of this Act exceeds the taxable quantum and every denier who at the  commencement of 
this Act, is registered or is liable to pay tax under the  Central Sales Tax Act,  1956  (74 of 1956) , shall be  
liable to pay tax under this Act on all sales  effected by  him on or after such  commencement.  
(2) Every dealer to whom sub -section ( 1) does not apply, shall — 
(i) with effect from the date immediately following  the day on which  his turnover calculated  from 
the commencement of any year first exceeds within such year the taxable  quantum, be liable to pay 
tax under this Act on all sales effected by  him after that day;  
(ii) if he becomes liable to pay tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) or is 
registered as a dealer under the said Act at any time after the commencement of this Act, be liable to 
pay tax on all sales  effected by him or on his behalf within Delhi on or after the date he becomes so 
liable or is registered under the said Act, whichev er is earlier.  
  6 
 (3) Every dealer who has become liable to pay tax under this Act  shall continue to be so liable until 
the expiry of three  consecutive years during each of which  his turnover has failed to exceed the taxable 
quantum and such further period after the date of such expiry as may be prescribed and on the expiry of 
such further  period  his liability to pay tax  shall cease:  
Provided that any dealer may, after the expiry of one year following the year in which his turnover 
has failed to exceed the t axable quantum, apply for the cancellation of his certificate of registration, and 
on such cance llation, his liability to pay tax shall cease:  
Provided further that in respect of any goods  purchased by any dealer before the date of such 
cancellation and remaining  unsold or unutilised for the purpose for which they were purchased, he  shall 
be liable to pay so much of tax as would have been  payable had he not been registered as a dealer on the 
date of purchase of such  goods.  
(4) Every dealer whose liability  to pay tax under this Act has ceased under sub -section ( 3), shall, if 
his turnover calculated from the commencement of any year again exceeds the taxable quantum on any 
day within such year, be liable to pay such tax with effect from the date immediately following the day on 
which his turnover first exceeds the taxable quantum, on all sales effected by him after that day.  
(5) Any dealer whose certificate of registration has been cancelled under sub -section ( 3) of       
section 20, shall —  
(a) if his turnover calculated from the date of cancellation of such certificate exceeds  the taxable 
quantum on any day within the year; or  
(b) if his turnover calculated from the commencement of any  subsequent  year, exceeds the 
taxable qua ntum on any day within the year,  
be liable to pay tax under this Act with effect  from the date immediately following the day on which such 
turnover again first  exceeds the taxable quantum on all sales effected by  him after that day of goods 
imported by  him from outside Delhi or manu factured by  him in Delhi or purchased by  him without 
payment of tax leviable under this Act.  
(6) No  dealer who deals exclusively i n one or more classes of goods specified in the  Third 
Schedule  shall be liable to pay any  tax under this Act.  
(7) For  the purposes of this Act, “taxable quantum ” means,  — 
(a) in relation to any dealer who import s for sale  any goods into Delhi.  .     .      .     .     Nil, 
(b) in relation to any dealer who manufactures goods for sale regardless of the  value of goods 
manufactured  .              .          .          .              .              .           .             .            . Rs.    30,000.00,  
(c) in relation to any other dealer   .            .              .           .             .            . Rs. 1,00,0 00.00:  
Provided that if the Administrator is of opinion  that having regard to the difficulty in maintaining 
accounts or for any  other  sufficient cause  the taxable quantum in respect of any  class of dealers falling 
under clause ( b) should  be increased, the Administrator may, by notification in the O fficial Gazette,  fix in 
respect of such class of dealers  such taxable quantum , not exceeding rupees one lakh, as may be  specified 
in the notification.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of  computation  of taxable quantum under  sub-section  (7), the 
turnover of all sales effected by a dealer  shall be taken into account irrespective of whether such  sales are 
taxable under this Act or not . 
4. Rate of tax .—(1) The  tax payable by a dealer under this Act  shall  be levied — 
(a) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of  the goods specified in the First Schedule, at the 
rate of twelve paise in the  rupee;  
(b) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of  the goods specified in the Second Schedule, at 
such rate no t exceeding  four paise in rupee as the Central Government may, from time  to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, determine;  7 
 (c) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of  any food or  drink served for  consumption in a 
hotel or restaurant or part thereof, with which a cabaret,  floor  show or similar  entertainment is 
provided therein, at the rate of forty paise in the rupee;  
(d) in the case of taxable turnover in respect of any other goods, at the rate of seven paise in the  
rupee:  
Provided that the Administrator may with the previous approval of the Central Government and by 
notification in the Official Gazette, add  to, or omit from, or  otherwise amend, the First  Schedule or  the 
Second Schedule , either retrospectively or  prospectively, and thereupon the First Schedule or , as the case 
may be, the Second Schedule, shall  be de emed to be amended accordingly:  
Provided further that no such amendment  shall be made retrospectively if it would have the effect of  
prejudicially affecting the interests of any dealer:  
Provided also that in respect of any goods or class  of goods  the Administrator is of the opinion that it 
is expedient in  the interest of the general public so to do, he may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and by notification in the  Official Gazette, direct that the tax in respect of taxable 
turnover of such  goods or class of goods  shall , subject  to such conditions as may be specified, be levied at 
such modified rate not  exceeding the rate applicable under this sec tion, as may be specified in the  
notification.  
(2) For  the purposes of this Act, “taxable turnover ” means that part of a dealer’ s turnover during the 
prescribed  period in any year which rema ins after deducting therefrom, — 
(a) his turnover during that period on — 
(i) sale of goods, the point of sale at which such  goods  shall be taxable is  specified by 
the Administrator under section  5 and in respect of which due tax is  shown to the satisfaction of 
the Commissioner to have been  paid;  
(ii) sale of goods de clared tax -free under section  7; 
(iii) sale of goods not liable to tax under section  8; 
(iv) sale of goods which are proved to the  satisfaction of the Commissioner to have been 
purchased within a period of  twelve months prior to the date of registration of  the dealer 
and subjected to tax under the  Bengal  Finance (Sales Tax) Act,  1941  (Bengal Act VI of 1941) , as 
it was then in force, or under this Act;  
(v) sale to a registered dealer — 
(A) of goods of the class or classes specified in  the certificate of regis tration of such 
dealer, as being intended for use by  him as raw materials in the manufacture in Delhi of any  
goods,  other  than goods specified in  the Third Schedule , or newspapers, — 
(1) for sale by  him inside Delhi; or  
(2) for sale by  him in the course of  inter-State trade or commerce, being a sale 
occasioning, or effected by  transfer of documents of title to such goods during the 
movement of such goods  from Delhi; or  
(3) for sale by  him in the course of export  outside India being a sale occasioning the 
movement of such goods from Delhi,  or a sale effected by transfer of documents of title 
to such goods effected  during the movement of such goods from Delhi, to a place outside 
India and  after the goods have crossed the customs frontiers of India; or  
(B) of goods of the class or classes specified in the certificate of registration of  such 
dealer as being intended for resale by  him in Delhi, or for sale by  him in the course of      
inter-State trade or commerce or in the course of export  outside India in the m anner specified 
in sub-item (2) or sub-item (3) of item ( A), as the case may be; and  8 
 (C) of containers or  other  materials , used for the packing of goods, of the class or classes 
specified in  the certificate of registration of such dealer,  other  than goods specified in the 
Third Schedule, intended for sale or resale;  
(vi) such  other  sales as are exempt from payment of tax under section  66 or as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that no deduction in respect of any sale  referred to in  sub-clause ( iv) shall be allowed 
unless the goods, in respect of which  deduction is claimed, are proved to have been sold by the dealer 
within a  period of twelve months from the date of  his registration and the claim for such deduction is 
included in the return  required to be furn ished by the dealer in respect of the said sale:  
Provided further that no deduction in respect of any sale referred to  in sub -clause ( v) shall be 
allowed unless a true declaration duly filled and signed by the registered dealer to whom the goods 
are sold and containing the prescribed particulars in the prescribed form obtainable from the 
prescribed authority is furnished in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time, by the 
dealer who sells the goods:  
Provided also that where any goods are purcha sed by  a registered dealer for any of the 
purposes  mentioned  in sub-clause ( v), but are not so utilised by  him, the price of the goods so 
purchased  shall be allowed to be deducted from the turnover of the  selling dealer but  shall be included 
in the  taxable  turnover of the purchasing dealer; and  
(b) the tax collect ed by the dealer under this Act  as such and  shown separately in 
cash memoranda or bills, as the case may be.  
5. Power of Administrator to prescribe points at which goods may be taxed .— Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the  Administrator  may, by notification in the Official Gazette and  subject 
to such conditions, if any, as may be specified  therein, specify the point of sale at which any goods or 
class of goods may be  taxed , and on the issue of such notification, the points of sale in relation to  any 
such goods or class of goods  other  than the point of sale so notified,  shall  be exempt from payment of tax 
under this Act:  
Provided that no such exemption  shall be allowed unles s a true declaration duly filled and signed by 
the registered dealer by whom the  goods are sold and containing the prescribed particulars in the 
prescribed form  obtainable from the prescribed authority is furnished  in the prescribed manner and within 
the p rescribed time, by the dealer who  purchases the goods:  
Provided further that the  Administrator may, if he is of opinion that it is necessary in the public 
interest  so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt,  subject to such restrictions and 
conditions as may be  specified therein, any dealer or class of dealers from furnishing a declaration  under 
the first proviso.  
6. Burden of proof .—The burden of proving that in respect of any sale effected by a dealer he is not 
liable to pay tax under this Act, shall lie on  him. 
7. Tax-free goods .—(1) No tax sh all be payable under this Act on the sale of goods spec ified in the 
Third Schedule sub ject to the conditions and exceptions, if any, set out therein.  
(2) The  Administrator may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and by notification 
in the Official Gazette,  add to, or omit from, or other wise amend, the Third Schedule either 
retrospectively or prospectively, and thereupon the Third Schedule shal l be deemed to be amended 
accordingly:  
Provided that no such amendment sh all be made retrospectively if it would have the effect of 
prejudicially affecting the interests of any dealer.  
  9 
 8. Certain sales and purchases not liable to tax .—Nothing  in this Act or the rules made 
thereunder  shall be deemed to impose, or authorise the imposition of a tax on any sale or purchase of any 
goods when suc h sale or purchase takes place — 
(i) in the course of inter -State trade or commerce; or  
(ii) outside Delhi ; or 
(iii) in the course of the import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of 
India.  
Explanation. —Sections  3, 4, and  5 of the Central Sales Tax Act,  1956  (74 of 1956)  shall apply for 
determining whether or not a particular sale or purchase takes place in the manner indi cated in clause ( i), 
clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) of this section.   
CHAPTER III  
SALES TAX AUTHORITIES AND APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
9. Sales tax authorities .—(1) For carrying out the purposes of this Act, the  Administrator shall 
appoint a person to be the Commissioner of Sales Tax.  
(2) To assist the Commissioner in the execution of  his functions under this Act, the Administrator 
may appoint as many Additional Commissioners of Sales Tax, Sales Tax Officers and such other persons 
with such designations as the Administrator thinks necessary.  
(3) The Commissioner  shall have jurisdiction over the whole of Delhi and  the other  persons  appointed 
under  sub-section ( 2) shall have jurisdiction over such areas as the Commi ssioner  may specify.  
(4) The Commissioner and  other  persons appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall exercise such powers 
as may be conferred, and perform such duties as may be required, by or under this Act.  
10. Delegation of Commissioner’ s powers .—Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be 
prescribed, the Commissioner may, by  order in writing, delegate any of  his powers under this Act except 
those under sub -section ( 3) of section  9 and sub-section ( 1) of section  52 to any person appointed  
under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9: 
Provided that the power s of the Commissioner under clauses ( i) to ( vi) (both inclusive)                        
of sub-section ( 3) of section  41 shall not be delegated to any person lower in rank than that of a Sales Tax  
Officer, and those under  sub-section ( 1) of section  49 shall not be delegated to any person  other  than an 
Additional Commissioner of Sales Tax appointed under  sub-section (2) of section  9. 
11. Power to transfer proceedings .—(1) The Commissioner may, by  order in writing, transfer any 
proceedings or class of proceedings under any provision of this Act from any person appointed 
under   sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to any  other  person so appointed whether or not such  other  person has 
jurisdiction in respect of the area  to which such proceedings or class of proceedings relate, and the 
Commissioner may likewise transfer any such proceedings (including a proceeding already transferred 
under this section) from any such person to  himself.  
(2) The person to whom any p roceeding is transferred under  sub-section ( 1) shall proceed to dispose 
it of as if it had been initiated by  himself.  
(3) The transfer of a proceeding  shall not render necessary the reissue of any notice already issued 
before such transfer and the person t o whom the proceeding is transferred may, in  his discretion, continue 
it from the stage at which it was left by the person from whom it was transferred.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “proceedings ” in relation to any person whose name 
is sp ecified in any  order issued thereunder,  means all proceedings under this Act in respect of any year 
which may be pending on the date of such  order or which may have been completed on or before such 
date, and includes also such proceedings which may be comm enced after the date of such  order in respect 
of any year.  
  10 
 12. Disputes regarding territorial jurisdiction .—(1) No person  shall be entitled to call in question 
the jurisdiction of any sales tax authority appointed under section  9, not being an appellate authority, after 
the expiry of ninety days from the date of receipt by that person of any notice under this Act issued by 
such sales tax authority.  
(2) Any objection  as to the jurisdiction of any such sales tax authority may be raised within the period  
aforesaid by  submitting a  memorandum to the authority concerned who  shall refer the question to the 
Commissioner and the Commissioner  shall after giving the person raising the objection a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, make an  order determining the question and  his decision in this behalf  shall 
be final.  
13. Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The  Central Government  shall, as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, constitute an Appellate Tribunal consisting of one or more  members, as it 
thinks fit, t o exercise the powers and discharge the functions conferred on the Appellate Tribunal by or 
under this Act:  
Provided that where the Appellate Tribunal consists of one  member, that  member  shall be a person 
who has held a civil judicial post for at least ten  years or who has been a  member of the  Central Legal 
Service (not below Grade  III) for at least three years or who has been in practice as an advocate for at 
least ten years, and where the Appellate Tribunal consists of more than one  member, one 
such membe r shall be a person qualified as aforesaid.  
(2) Where the number of  members of the Appellate Tribunal is more than one, the  Central 
Government shall appoint one of those  members to be the Chairman of the Appellate Tribunal.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of  sub-section ( 1), the qualifications and  other  conditions of service of 
the member or  members constituting the Appellate Tribunal and the period for which such  member 
or members  shall hold office,  shall be such as may be determined by the  Central Governmen t. 
 (4) Any vacancy in the  membership of the Appellate Tribunal  shall be filled up by the  Central 
Government as soon as practicable.  
(5) Where the number of  members of the Appellate Tribunal is more than one and if the  members 
differ in opinion on any point, the point  shall be decided according to the opinion of the  majority, if there 
is a majority, but if the  members are equally divided, the decision of the Chairman of the Appellate 
Tribunal thereon  shall be final.  
(6) Subject to the previous sanction of the  Central Government , the Appellate Tribunal  shall, for the 
purpose of regulating its procedure and disposal of its business, make regulations consistent with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
(7) The regulations made under  sub-section ( 6) shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
(8) The Appellate Tribunal  shall, for the purpose of discharging its functions, have all the powers 
which are vested in the Commissioner under section  42 and any proceeding before the Appellate 
Tribu nal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the  meaning of sections  193 and 228, and for 
the purposes of section  196 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the Appellate Tribunal  shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of sec tion 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974).  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION,  AMENDMENT AND CANCELLATION  
14. Registration .—(1) No dealer shall, while being liable to pay tax under section 3, carry on 
business as a dealer unless he  has been registered and possesses a certificate of registration.  
(2) Every dealer required by sub -section ( 1) to be registered shall make an application for registration 
within such time, in such manner and to such authority, as may be prescribed.  
  11 
 (3) If the said authority is satisfied that the application is in order, it shall, in accordance with such 
rules as may be prescribed, register the applicant within the prescribed period and grant him a certificate 
of registration in the prescribed form which shall specify the goods or class of goods for the purposes of 
sub-clause ( v) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 : 
Provided that if the said authority is of opinion that the application is not in order, it shall, by an order 
passed within the said  period and for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the application:  
Provided further that no goods or class of goods in respect of which the 1[point of sale ] has been 
specified by the  Administrator under section 5  shall be specified in a certificate  of registration, and where 
a notification is issued under that section subsequent to the grant of any certificate of registration in 
respect of any goods or class of goods specified in a certificate, if the said certificate shall be deemed to 
have been am ended to omit the references to such goods or class of goods.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the goods or class of goods to be specified in 
a certificate of registration granted under sub -section ( 3) of this section or sub -sectio n (2) of section 16  
shall not include goods referred to in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 4.  
15. Voluntary registration .—(1) Any dealer, other than a dealer who deals exclusively in one or 
more classes of goods specified in the  Third Schedule, whose turnover  during a year exceeds twenty -five 
thousand rupees may, notwithstanding that he may not be liable to pay tax under section 3, apply for 
registration under this section.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections  (2), (3) and ( 4) of section 14  shall, as far as may be, apply in 
relation to registration of dealers under this section.  
(3) Every dealer who has been registered under this section shall, for so long as his registration 
remains in force, be liable to pay tax under this Act.  
(4) The registration of a dealer under this section shall be in force for a period of not less than three 
complete years and shall remain in force thereafter unless cancelled under the provisions of this Act.  
16. Provisional registratio n.—(1) Any person who intends to establish a business in Delhi for the 
purpose of manufacturing goods of a value exceeding thirty thousand rupees per year, may, 
notwithstanding that he is not required to be registered under section 14, apply for provisiona l registration 
in such manner and to such authority as may be prescribed.  
(2) If the said authority, after making such inquiry as it may consider necessary, is satisfied as to the 
bona fide  intention of the person making the application, it may, subject to  such restrictions and 
conditions as it may impose, grant a provisional certificate of registration on such person furnishing such 
security as it may consider necessary and shall specify in such certificate the goods or class of goods for 
the purposes of s ub-clause ( v) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4.  
(3) Every person who has been granted a provisional certificate of registration under this section 
shall, for so long as such certificate is in force, be liable to pay tax under this Act.  
(4) A provisional certificate of registration granted under this section shall be in force for such period 
as may be specified therein.  
(5) The authority prescribed under sub -section ( 1) may, on application made in this behalf in the 
prescribed manner and subjec t to such restrictions and conditions as it may impose, extend, from time to 
time, the period specified in the provisional certificate of registration.  
(6) The provisions of section 18 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to security required to be 
furnished under sub -section ( 2) of this section.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the Second Schedule , for “points of sale” (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  12 
 (7) If a person, who has been granted a provisional certificate of registration under this section, fails 
without sufficient cause to establish a business within the period specified in such certificate or fails to 
comply with any of the restrictions or conditions subject to which such certificate was granted, he shall be 
liable to pay a penalty equal to one and a half times the amount of tax which would have been payable 
had he not been so registered under this section.  
17. Special registration .—(1) No dealer shall, while being liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 3, carry on business as a dealer unless he has obtained a special certificate of registration.  
(2) Every dealer required to be registered under sub -section ( 1) shall make an application for 
registration within such time, in such manner and to such authority, as may be prescribed.  
(3) If the said authority is satisfied that the application is in order, it shall, in accordance with such 
rules as may be prescribed, grant a special certificate of registration to the applicant in the prescribed 
form:  
Provided that the said authority shall not specify in any such certificate the goods or class of goods 
for the purposes of sub -clause ( v) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4.  
18. Security from certain class of dealers .—(1) The Commissioner may, if it appears to him to be 
necessary so to do for the proper realisation of the tax, composition money or other dues payable under 
this Act  or for the proper custody and use of the forms referred to in the second proviso to clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 4, or the first proviso to section 5, as the case may be, impose, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing as a condition of the gran t of the certificate of registration under section 14, section 15 
or section 17 to a dealer or of the continuance in effect of such certificate granted to any dealer, a 
requirement that the dealer shall furnish in the prescribed manner and within such time  as may be 
specified in the order such security or, as the case may be, such additional security as may be so specified, 
for all or any of the aforesaid purposes.  
(2) No dealer shall be required to furnish any security or additional security under sub-section ( 1) 
unless he has been given an opportunity of being heard and the amount of security or additional security 
that may be r equired to be furnished, shall ,— 
(a) in the case of a dealer liable to pay tax under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 who has applied for 
the grant of a certificate of registration under section 14, be such amount as the Commissioner may, 
having regard to the nature and size of the business of such dealer, determine for the payment of the 
tax for which the dealer may be or become  liable under this Act;  
(b) in a case where security is to be given for the proper custody and use of the forms referred to 
in sub -section ( 1), be the amount of tax determined by the Commissioner which is likely to be saved 
by a dealer by the issue of such  forms;  
(c) in any other case, not exceed the tax payable, in accor dance with the estimate of the 
Commissioner on the taxable turnover of the dealer,  
for the year in which such security or additional security is required to be furnished.  
(3) Where the secu rity or additional security furnished by a dealer is in the form of a security bond 
and the surety dies or becomes insolvent, the dealer shall, within thirty days of the occurrence of such 
event, inform the authority granting the certificate of registratio n and shall, within ninety days of such 
occurrence, execute a fresh surety bond.  
(4) The Commissioner may by order, for good and sufficient cause, and after giving the dealer an 
opportunity of being heard, forfeit the whole or any part of the security furn ished by a dealer.  
(5) Where, by reason of an order under sub -section ( 4), the security furnished by any dealer is 
forfeited in whole or is rendered insufficient, he shall furnish a fresh security of the requisite amount or, 
as the case may be, shall make up the deficiency in such manner and within such period as may be 
specified in the order.  13 
 19. Amendment of certificate of registration .—(1) The Commissioner may, after considering any 
information furnished under this Act or  otherwise received and after making such inquiry as he may deem 
fit, amend from time to time any certificate of registration.  
(2) An amendment of the certificate of registration made under  sub-section ( 1) shall take effect :— 
(a) in the case of a change in the name, ownership or place of business, or opening of a new place 
of business, from the date of contingency which necessitates the amendment whether or not 
information in that behalf is furnished within the time prescribed under section  40; 
(b) in the case of any addition or modific ation in the description of any goods or class of goods in 
the certificate of registration, from the date of the contingency if information in that behalf is 
furnished within the time prescribed under section  40 and from the date of receipt of request for such 
addition or modification by the Commissioner, in any  other  case;  
(c) in the case of deletion of any goods or class of goods, from the date of  order of deletion:  
Provided that the Commissioner  shall, before amending on  his own motion a certificate of 
registration, give the dealer affected by such amendment a reasonable opportunity of being heard:  
Provided further that where in consequence of a change in the ownership of a business the liability to 
pay tax of a dealer ceases, the amendment of the certifi cate of registration  shall take effect from the date 
on which information in respect of such change is furnished under section  40. 
(3) Any amendment of a certificate of registration under this section shall be without prejudice to any 
liability for tax or penalty imposable, or for any prosecution for an offence under this Act.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where a registered dealer — 
(a) effects a change in the name of  his business; or  
(b) is a firm and there is a change in the co nstitution of the firm without dissolution thereof; or  
(c) is a trustee of a trust and there is a change in the trustees thereof; or  
(d) is a guardian of a ward and there is a change in the guardian; or  
(e) is a  Hindu undivided family and the business of such family is converted into a partnership 
business with all or any of the co -parceners as partners thereof,  
then, merely by reason of any of the circumstances aforesaid, it shall not be necessary for the dealer, or 
1[the firm which changed the constituti on] or the new trustees, or the new guardian, or as the case may be, 
the partners of such partnership business, to apply for a fresh certificate of registration and on information 
being furnished in the manner required by section 40 the certificate of regi stration shall be amended.  
20. Cancellation of certificate of registration .—(1) Where — 
(a) any business in respect of which a certificate of registration has been granted to a dealer under 
this Act, is discontinued; or  
(b) in the case of transfer of business by a dealer, the transferee already holds a certificate of 
registration under this Act; or  
(c) a dealer has ceased to be liable to pay tax under this Act,  
the Commissioner may cancel the certificate of registration of such  dealer or the transferor, as the case 
may be, from such date as may be specified by him:  
Provided that in a case referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b), the certificate of registration  shall be 
deemed to be inoperative with effect from the date of discontinuance or transfer of the business, as the 
case may be, and in a case referred to in clause ( c), from the date on which the dealer’ s liability to pay tax 
has ceased, notwithstanding the fact that the  order of cancellation is passed or that the part iculars of the 
dealer regarding cancellation are published, as required by section  65, in the Official Gazette, after the 
aforesaid date:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the Second Schedule , for “the firm who changed constitution” (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  14 
 Provided further that where a dealer has failed to furnish information regarding discontinuance of  his 
business as req uired by section  40, the Commissioner  shall before cancelling the certificate from any 
specified date, publish in the Official Gazette, a notice of  his intention so to do for the information of the 
dealer and  shall hear objections, if any, of the dealer be fore passing the  order.  
(2) A dealer registered under section 15 may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of that 
section, apply in the prescribed manner not later than six months before the end of a year to the 
Commissioner for cancellation of his certificate of registration and the Commissioner shall, unless the 
dealer is liable to pay tax under section 3, cancel the certificate of registration accordingly, and such 
cancellation shall take effect from the end of the year.  
(3) Notwithstanding an ything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Commissioner may at any 
time for reasons to be recorded in writing and after giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard, cancel 
the certificate of registration held by such dealer from such date as the  Commissio ner may specify in this 
behalf — 
(a) if the dealer has failed to pay any tax (including any penalty) due from him under any 
provisions of this Act; or  
(b) if the dealer holds or accepts or furnishes or causes to be furnished a declaration for the 
purposes of sub -clause (v) of clause (a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 or section 5 which he knows or 
has reason to believe to be false; or  
(c) if the dealer wh o has been required to furnish the security under the provisions of section 18 
has failed to furnish such security; or  
(d) if the dealer contravenes or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act; or  
(e) if the dealer has been convicted of an offence  under this Act or under the Bengal Finance 
(Sales Tax) Act, 1941 (Bengal Act VI of 1941) , as then in force in Delhi; or  
(f) if there is any other reason which in the opinion of the Commissioner warrants such 
cancellation.  
(4) (a) If an order of cancellati on passed under sub -section ( 3) is set aside as a result of an appeal or 
other proceeding under this Act, the certificate of registration of the dealer shall be restored and he shall 
be liable to pay tax as if his certificate had not been cancelled.  
(b) If any dealer whose certificate of registration has been restored under clause ( a) satisfies the 
Commissioner that tax has been paid by such dealer on sale of goods made to  him during the period  his 
certificate of registration was inoperative which, but for the cancellation of such certificate he would not 
have paid, then the amount of such tax  shall be adjusted or refunded in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) Every dealer who applies for cancellation of his registration shall surrender with his applicati on 
the certificate of registration granted to him and every dealer whose registration is cancelled otherwise 
than on the basis of his application shall surrender the certificate of registration within seven days of the 
date of communication to him of the o rder of cancellation.  
(6) If a dealer fails to surrender his certificate of registration as provided in sub -section ( 5), the 
Commissioner may, by an order in writing and after giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard, 
direct that the dealer shall pa y, by way of penalty, a sum not exceeding twenty -five rupees for every day 
of default.  
(7) The cancellation of a certificate of registration shall not affect the liability of any person to pay tax 
due for any period prior to the date of such cancellation, whether such tax is assessed before the date of 
cancellation but remains unpaid or is assessed thereafter notwithstanding that he is not liable to pay tax 
under this Act.  
(8) Where by any order passed under this Act it is found that any person registered a s a dealer ought 
not to have been so registered, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, such person shall be 
liable to pay tax for the period commencing with the date of his registration and ending with the date of 
such order, as if he were a dealer.  
  15 
 CHAPTER V  
RETURNS, ASSESSMENT, RECOVERY AND REFUND OF TAX  
21. Periodical payment of tax and filing of returns .—(1) Tax payable under this Act  shall be paid 
in the manner hereinafter provided at such intervals as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every registered dealer and every  other  dealer who may be required so to do by the Commissioner 
by notice served in the prescribed manner  shall furnish such returns of turnover by such dates and to such 
authority as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every registered dealer  required to furnish returns under  sub-section (2) shall  pay into a 
Government Treasury  or the Reserve  Bank of India or in such  other  manner as may be prescribed, the full 
amount of tax due from  him under this Act according to such return, and  shall where such payment is 
made into a Government Treasury or the Reserve  Bank of India furnish along with the return a  receipt 
from such Treasury or B ank showing the payment of such amount.  
(4) If any registered dealer discovers any mistake or error in any return fu rnished by  him, he may at 
any time, before the expiry of three months next following the last date prescribed for furnishing of the 
return, furnish a revised return, and if the revised return  shows a  higher amount of tax to be due than 
was shown in the ori ginal return, it  shall be accompanied by a receipt  showing payment in the manner 
provided in  sub-section ( 3) of the excess amount.  
(5) Every return under this section  shall be signed and verified — 
(a) in the case of an individual, by the individual  himself , and where the individual is absent from 
India by the individual concerned or by some person duly authorised by  him in this behalf and where 
the individual is  mentally incapacitated from attending to  his affairs, by  his guardian or by 
any other  person com petent to act on  his behalf;  
(b) in the case of a  Hindu undivided family, by a Karta , and where the  Karta is absent from India 
or is mentally incapacitated from attending to  his affairs, by any  other  adult  member of such family;  
(c) in the case of a company or local authority, by the principal officer thereof;  
(d) in the case of a firm, by any partner thereof, not being a minor;  
(e) in the case of any  other  association, by any  member of the association or the principal officer 
thereof; and 
(f) in the case of any  other  person, by that person or by some person competent to act on  his 
behalf.  
(6) For the purposes of  sub-section ( 5) of this section and section  59 the expression “principal 
officer ” shall have the  meaning assigned to it under clause ( 35) of section  2 of the Income -Tax 
Act, 1961  (43 of 1961).  
22. Collection of tax only by registered dealers .—(1) No person who is not a registered dealer  shall 
collect in respect of any sale of goods by  him in Delhi any amount by way of tax under this Act, and no 
registered dealer  shall make any such collection except in accordance with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-section ( 1), a dealer who has been permitted by the 
Commissioner to make a lum p sum payment under section  29 shall not collect any sum by way of tax on 
the sale of goods if made during the period of which such lump sum payment relates.  
23. Assessment .—(1) The  amount of tax due from a registered dealer  shall  be assessed separately fo r 
each year during which he is liable to pay the tax:  
Provided that when such dealer fails to furnish a  return relating to any period of a year by the 
prescribed date, the  Commissioner may, if he thinks fit, assess the tax due from such dealer  separately for 
that period or any  other  period of such year:  16 
 Provided further that the Commissioner may,  subject to such conditions as may be prescribed and for  
reasons to be recorded in writing, ass ess the tax due from any dealer for a part of a year.  
(2) If the Com missioner is satisfied that the returns furnished in respect of any  period are correct and 
complete, he  shall  assess the amount of tax due from the dealer on the basis of such returns.  
(3) (a) If the Commissioner is not  satisfied that the returns furnished  in respect of any period are 
correct and  complete and he thinks it necessary to require the presence of the dealer or  the production of 
further evidence, he  shall  serve on such dealer in the prescribed manner a notice requiring  him on a date 
and at a plac e specified therein either to  attend and produce or cause to be produced all evidence on which 
such dealer  relies in support of  his returns, or to produce  such evidence as is specified in the notice.  
(b) On the date specified in the notice, or as soon  as m ay be thereafter, the Commissioner  shall,  after 
considering all the evidence which may be produced, assess the amount of  tax due from the dealer.  
(4) If a dealer fails to comply with the terms of any notice issued under  sub-section ( 3), the 
Commissioner  shall assess to the best of  his judgment the amount of  tax, if any,  due from  him. 
(5) If a dealer fails to furnish returns in respect of any period by the prescribed  date, the 
Commissioner  shall, after giving the  dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, assess to the best 
of his judgment the amount of tax, if any, due from  him. 
(6) If, upon information which has come into  his possession, the Commissioner is satisfied that any 
dealer who has been liable  to pay tax under this Act in respect of any pe riod, has failed to get  himself 
registered under section  14 or section  17, as  the case may be, the Commissioner  shall  proceed in such 
manner as may be prescribed to assess to the best of  his judgment the amount of tax due from the dealer 
in respect of such  period and all  subsequent  periods and in making such assessment  shall  give the dealer a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, and the Commissioner  may, if he is satisfied that the default was 
made without reasonable cause,  direct that the dealer  shall pa y, by way of  penalty, in addition to the 
amount of the tax so assessed, a sum not exceeding  twice that amount.  
(7) No assessment under the provisions of  sub-sections ( 1) to (5) shall  be made after the expiry of 
four years, and no assessment under the provisions  of sub-section ( 6) shall be made after the expiry of six 
years from the end of  the year in respect of which or part of which the tax is assessable:  
Provided that where such assessment is made  in consequence of  or to give effect to, any  order  of an 
appellate or revisional authority or of a court, the period of  four years  or six years, as the case may 
be, shall  be reckoned from the date of such  order  and further that the provisions of  sub-section  (1) of 
section  24 regarding time limit for servic e of notice  shall  not apply for assessment made under this 
proviso.  
(8) Any  assessment made under this section  shall  be without prejudice to any prosecution for an 
offence under this Act.  
24. Turnover escaping assessment .—(1) Where after a dealer has been assessed under section  23 for 
any year or part thereof, the Commissioner has reason to believe that the whole or any part of the turnover 
of a dealer in respect of any period has escaped assessment to tax or has been under -assessed or has been 
assessed at a rate lower than the rate at which it is assessable, or any deduction has been wrongly made 
therefrom, the Commissioner may — 
(a) within six years from the date of final  order of assessment, in a case where the dealer has 
concealed, omitted or failed to di sclose fully the particulars of such turnover; and  
(b) within four years from the date of final  order of assessment, in any  other  case,  
serve a notice on the dealer and after giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard and making such 
inquiry as he considers necessary, proceed to determine to the best of  his judgment, the amount of tax due 
from the dealer in respect of such turnover, and the provisions of this Act  shall, so far as may be, apply 
accordingly.  17 
 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, production before the Commissioner of account books 
or other  evidence from which material evidence could with due diligence have been discovered by the 
Commissioner will not necessarily amount to disclosure within the  meaning  of this section.  
(2) No  order of assessment, reassessment or re -computation  shall be made under  sub-section ( 1), 
after— 
(a) the expiry of four years or, as the case may be,  six years  as specified in  sub-section ( 7) of     
section 23 ; or 
(b) the expiry of one year from the date of service of notice under  sub-section ( 1), 
whichever is later.  
25. Payment and recovery of tax .—(1) The amount of tax — 
(a) due where returns have been furnished without the receipt  showing full payment thereof; and  
(b) assessed, reassessed or re -computed for any period under section  23 or section  24, less the 
amount if any , already paid by the dealer in respect of the said period,  
shall together with any penalty that may be directed to be paid under any of the provisions  of this 
section,  sub-section ( 6) of section  23, section  55, section  56 or section  57 be paid by the dealer or the 
person liable therefor into a Government Treasury or the Reserve  Bank of India or in such  other  manner 
as may be prescribed within thirty day s from the date of service of notice of demand issued by the 
Commissioner for this purpose:  
Provided that where the Commissioner has reason to believe that it will be detrimental to revenue if 
the full period of thirty days aforesaid is allowed, he may dir ect that the sum specified in the notice of 
demand  shall be paid within such period being a period less than the period of thirty days aforesaid, as 
may be specified by  him in that notice.  
(2) On an application made before the expiry of the due date under  sub-section ( 1), the Commissioner 
may, in respect of any particular dealer or person and for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the 
time for payment or allow payment by instalments or grant stay,  subject to such conditions as he may 
think fit to imp ose in the circumstances of the case.  
(3) If the amount of tax and penalty, if any, is not paid within the time specified in  sub-section ( 1) or 
extended under  sub-section ( 2), as the case may be, the dealer or the person liable therefor  shall be 
deemed to be in default in respect of that amount.  
(4) In a case where payment by instalments is allowed under  sub-section ( 2) and the dealer or the 
person liable for such payment commits default in paying any one of the instalments within the time fixed 
under that  sub-section, the dealer or the person aforesaid  shall be deemed to be in default in respect of the 
whole of the amount then outstanding and the  other  instalment or instalments  shall be deemed to have 
been due on the same date as the instalment actually in default.  
(5) When a dealer or a person is in  default or is deemed to be in  default in making payment of tax and 
penalty, if any, he  shall, in addition to the amount of arrears payable under the foregoing  sub-sections, be 
liable to pay, by way of penalty, an amount which in the case of a continuing default may be increased, 
from time to time, so however, that total amount of penalty does not exceed the amount in arrears:  
Provided that before levying any such penalty, the dealer or the person aforesaid  shall  be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(6) Where as a result of any final  order the amount of tax and penalty, if any, with respect to the 
default, in the payment of which the penalty was levied, has been wholly reduced, the penalty levied  shall 
be cancelled and the amount of penalty paid  shall be refunded.  
  18 
 (7) Any amount of tax or penalty in respect of which a dealer or person is in default, or any 
composition money due under section  29 or section  54 which remains unpaid,  shall be recoverable  as an 
arrear of land revenue:  
Provided that where security,  other  than in the form of surety bond, has been furnished by a dealer 
under  sub-section ( 2) of section  16 or section  18, the Commissioner may, for good and sufficient reasons 
in writing, realise  any amount of tax or penalty or composition money remaining unpaid as aforesaid or 
part thereof by  ordering forfeiture of the whole or any part of the security.  
26. Continuation of certain recovery proceedings .—Where any notice of demand in respect of any  
tax or penalty or any  other  amount payable under this Act  (hereafter in this section referred to as 
“government dues ”) is served upon any dealer, and any appeal, revision application or  other  proceeding is 
filed or taken in respect of such go vernment dues , then,— 
(a) where such government dues are enhanced in such appeal, revision or  other  proceeding, the 
Commissioner  shall serve upon the dealer  another  notice of demand only in respect of the amount by 
which such government dues are enhanced and any recove ry proceedings in relation to such 
government dues as are covered by the notice of demand served upon  him before the disposal of such 
appeal, revision application or proceeding may, without the service of any fresh notice of demand, be 
continued from the s tage at which such proceedings stood immediately before such disposal;  
(b) where such government dues are reduced in such appeal, revision or proceeding ,— 
(i) it shall not be necessary for the Commissioner to serve upon the dealer a fresh notice of 
demand;  
(ii) the Commissioner  shall give intimation of such reduction to  him and to the appropriate 
authority with whom recovery proceedings are pending;  
(iii) any recovery proceedings initiated on the basis of the notice of demand served upon  him 
before the disp osal of such appeal, revision application or proceeding may be continued in 
relation to the amount so reduced from the stage at which such proceedings stood immediately 
before such disposal.  
27. Interest .—(1) If any dealer fails to pay the tax  due as required by  sub-section (3) of section  21, 
he shall, in addition to the tax (including any penalty) due, be liable to pay simple interest on the amount 
so due at one per cent . per month from the date immediately following the last date for  submissi on of the 
return under  sub-section ( 2) of the said section for a period of one month, and at one and a half per cent . 
per month thereafter for so long as he continues to make default in such payment or till the date of 
completion of assessment under sectio n 23, whichever is earlier.  
(2) When a dealer or a person is in default or is deemed to be in default in making the payment of tax, 
he shall, in addition to the amounts payable under section  23 or section  24, be liable to pay simple interest 
on such amount  at one per cent . per month from the date of such default for a period of one month, and at 
one and a half per cent . per month thereafter for so long as he continues to make default in  the payment of 
the said amount.  
(3) Where as a result of any final order the amount of tax (including any penalty) due or in default is 
wholly reduced, the amount of interest, if any, paid  shall be refunded, or if such amount is varied, the 
interest due  shall be calculated accordingly:  
Provided that where any amount  of tax payable is enhanced by any such  order, interest  shall be 
payable on the amount by which the tax is enhanced after the expiry of a period of three months from the 
date of the  order:  
Provided further that where the realisation of any amount remains s tayed by the  order of any court or 
authority and such  order is  subsequently vacated, interest  shall be payable also for any period during 
which such  order remained in operation.  
(4) The interest payable under this section  shall be deemed to be tax due unde r this Act.  19 
 28. Special mode l of recovery .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or contract to 
the contrary, the Commissioner may, at any time or from time to time, by notice in writing, a copy of 
which  shall be forwarded to the dealer at  his last known ad dress, require — 
(a) any person from whom any amount of money is due, or may become due, to a dealer on 
whom notice has been served under  sub-section ( 1) of section  25, or  
(b) any  person who holds or may,  subsequently hold money for or on account of such dealer,  
to pay to the Commissioner, either forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held or within the 
time specified in the first  mentioned notice (but not before the money becomes due or is held as aforesaid) 
so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the amount due by the dealer in respect of the arrears of tax 
and penalty under this Act, or the whole of the money when it is equal to or less than that amount.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this  sub-section, the amount of money due to a dealer from, or 
money held for or on account of a dealer by, any person,  shall be calculated by the Commissioner after 
deducting therefrom such claims (if any) lawfully  subsisting, as may have fallen due for payment by such 
dealer to such person.  
(2) The Commissioner may amend or revoke any such notice or extend the time for making any 
payment on pursuance of the notice.  
(3) Any person making any payment in compliance with a notice under th is section  shall be deemed 
to have made the payment under the authority of the dealer, and the receipt thereof by the 
Commissioner  shall constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the liability of such person to the extent 
of the amount specified in the  receipt.  
(4) Any person discharging any liability to the dealer after receipt of the notice referred to in this 
section,  shall be personally liable to the Commissioner to the extent of the liability discharged or to the 
extent of the liability of the deal er for tax and penalty, whichever is less.  
(5) Where a person to whom a notice under this section is sent, proves to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the dealer or that he does not hold 
any money for or on account of the dealer, then, nothing contained in this section  shall be deemed to 
require such person to pay any such sum or part thereof, as the case may be, to the Commissioner.  
(6) Any amount of money which the aforesaid person is required to pay to the Commissioner, or for 
which he is personally liable to the Commissioner under this section  shall, if it remains unpaid, be 
recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.  
(7) The Commissioner may apply to the court in whose custody there is money belon ging to the 
dealer for payment to  him of the entire amount of such money or if it is more than the tax and penalty, if 
any, due, an amount sufficient to discharge such tax and the penalty.  
29. Lump sum payment of tax .—The Commissioner may, in such circumst ances and  subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed, permit any dealer to pay in lieu of the amount of tax payable by  him 
under the provision of this Act, a lump sum determined in the prescribed manner, by way of composition.  
30. Refund .—(1) If any p erson satisfies the Commissioner that the amount of tax paid by  him or 
on his behalf for any year exceeds the amount payable by  him under this Act for that year, he  shall, on 
making a claim in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner, be e ntitled to refund of the 
excess either by cash payment or at  his option by deduction of such excess from the amount of tax and 
penalty (if any) due in respect of any  other  period:  
Provided that the Commissioner  shall first apply such excess towards the rec overy of any amount in 
respect of which a notice under section  25 has been issued and  shall then refund the balance, if any.  
Explanation. —When  no assessment is made, the due tax paid under section  21 by the dealer  shall be 
deemed to be the tax payable under this Act.  
  20 
 (2) Where on account of death, incapacity, insolvency, liquidation or  other  cause a person is unable to 
claim or receive any ref und due to  him, his legal representative or the trustee or guardian or receiver, as 
the case may be,  shall be entitled to claim or receive such refund for the benefit of such person or  his 
estate.  
(3) No claim for refund under  sub-section ( 1) shall be allo wed unless it is made within a period of 
twelve months from the date of the  order giving rise to a claim for such refund, and the 
Commissioner  shall, except as  otherwise provided in this Act, refund any amount which becomes due to a 
dealer in the prescribe d manner:  
Provided that the Commissioner may allow a claim for refund to be made after the expiry of the said 
period but not later than twelve months from such expiry, if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause 
for not making such claim within that  period.  
(4) Where an amount required to be refunded by the Commissioner to any person as a result of 
any order passed in appeal or  other  proceedings under this Act is not so refunded to  him within ninety 
days from the date of  his claim under  sub-section ( 3), such person  shall be entitled to be paid simple 
interest on such amount at one per cent . per month from the date immediately following the expiry of the 
period of ninety days for a period of one month and at one and a half per cent . per month, thereaft er for so 
long as the refund is not made.  
Explanation. —If the delay in making the refund during any of the periods referred to in            
this sub-section is attributable to the person making the claim, whether wholly or in part, the period of the 
delay  attributable to  him shall be excluded from the period for which interest is payable.  
(5) Where any question arises as to the period to be excluded for the purposes of calculation of 
interest under  sub-section ( 4), such question  shall be determined by the Commissioner whose decision 
thereon  shall be final.  
(6) Where an  order giving rise to a refund is the  subject  matter of an appeal or further proceeding or 
where any  other  proceeding under this Act is pending and the Commissioner is of opinion that the gran t 
of the refund is likely to adversely affect the revenue, the Commissioner may withhold the refund till such 
time as the Commissioner may determine.  
(7) In any claim for refund, it  shall not be open to the dealer to question the correctness of any 
assessm ent or  other  matter decided which has become final and conclusive or ask for a review of the same 
and the dealer  shall not be entitled to any relief on such claim except refund of tax wrongly paid or paid in 
excess.  
(8) Any tax levied and collected under this Act in respect of sale in Delhi of any declared goods 
which are  subsequently sold in the course of inter -State trade or commerce,  shall be reimbursed to the 
person making the sale on the course of inter -State trade or commerce, in such manner and  subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of  sub-section ( 8), “declared goods ” means goods declared by 
section  14 of the Central Sales Tax Act,  1956  (74 of 1956) to be of special importance in inter -State trade 
or commerce.  
31. Set-off.—(1) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that delay beyond the prescribed period has 
occurred in the grant of a certificate of registration to a dealer and that such delay was not wholly due to 
any fault, omission or negligence on the part of the dealer, the amount of tax, if any, paid on sales of 
goods made to such dealer which would not have been payable but for the delay in the grant of a 
certificate of registration as aforesaid,  shall be adjusted against any amount payable by the dealer und er 
this Act:  
Provided that— 
(a) in case the amount of tax so paid by the dealer exceeds  his liability to pay any amount under 
this Act, the adjustment  shall be made to the extent of such liability and the balance  shall be refunded 
to the dealer; and  21 
 (b) in case there is no liability to pay any amount under this Act, the entire amount of tax 
paid shall be refunded to the dealer:  
Provided further that the dealer  shall not be entitled to any such adjustment or refund in respect of the 
goods which are not speci fied in the certificate of registration granted to  him. 
(2) No application for adjustment or refund of tax under this section  shall be entertained unless it is 
made within three months from the date on which a certificate of registration is granted to the dealer.  
CHAPTER VI  
LIABILITY IN SPECIAL CASES  
32. Liability in case of transfer of business .—(1) Where a dealer, liable to pay tax under this Act, 
transfers  his business in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease, leave or licence,  hire or in any other  manner 
whatsoever, the dealer and the person to whom the business is so transferred  shall jointly and severally be 
liable to pay the tax (including any penalty) due from the dealer up to the time of such transfer, whether 
such tax (including any penalty) has been assessed before such transfer, but has remained unpaid or is 
assessed thereafter.  
(2) Where the transferee or the lessee of a business referred to in  sub-section ( 1) carries on such 
business either in  his own name or in some  other  name, h e shall be liable to pay tax on the sale of goods 
effected by  him with effect from the date of such transfer and  shall, if he is an existing dealer, apply 
within the prescribed time for amendment of  his certificate of registration.  
33. Liability in case of  company in liquidation .—(1) Every  person — 
(a) who is a liquidator of any company which is being wound up whether under the  orders of a 
court or  otherwise; or  
(b) who  has been appointed the receiver of any assets of a company  (hereinafter referred to as the 
“liquidator ”), 
shall, within thirty days after he has become such liquidator, give notice of  his appointment as such to the 
Commissioner.  
(2) The Commissioner  shall, after making such inquiries or calling for such information as he may 
deem fit, notify the liquidator within three months from the date on which he received notice of the 
appointment of the liquidator, the amount which , in the opinion o f the Commissioner , would be sufficient 
to provide for any tax (including any penalty) which i s then, or is likely thereafter  to become , payable by 
the company.  
(3) The liquidator  shall not part with any of the assets of the company or the properties in  his hand 
until he has been notified by the Commissioner under  sub-section ( 2) and on being so notified, the 
liquidator  shall set aside an amount equal to the amount notified and, until he so sets aside such amount, 
he shall not part with any of the assets of  the company or the properties in  his hand:  
Provided that nothing contained in this  sub-section  shall debar the liquidator from parting with such 
assets or properties in compliance with any  order of a court or for the purpose of the payment of the tax 
and penalty, if any, payable by the company under this Act or for making any payment to secured 
creditors whose debts are entitled under law to priorit y of payment over debts due to G overnment on the 
date of liquidation or for  meeting such costs and expenses o f the winding up of the company as are in the 
opinion of the Commissioner reasonable.  
(4) If the liquidator fails to give notice in accordance with  sub-section ( 1) or fails to set aside the 
amount as required by  sub-section ( 3) or parts with any assets of the company or the properties in  his 
hand in contravention of the provision s of that  sub-section, he  shall be personally liable for the payment 
of the tax and penalty, if any, which the company would be liable to pay under this Act:  
Provided that if the am ount of any tax and penalty, if any, payable by the company is notified 
under  sub-section ( 2), the personal liability of the liquidator under this  sub-section  shall be to the extent of 
such amount.  22 
 (5) Where there are more liquidators than one, the obligat ions and liabilities attached to the liquidator 
under this section  shall attach to all the liquidators jointly and severally.  
(6) When any private company is wound up and any tax and penalty, if any, assessed under this Act 
on the company for any period, w hether before or in the course of or after its liquidation, cannot be 
recovered, then every person who was director of the private company at any time during the period for 
which the tax is due,  shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of such  tax and penalty, if any, 
unless he proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that non -recovery cannot be attributed to any 
gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on  his part in relation to the affairs of the company.  
(7) The provisions of this section  shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in any  other  law for the time being in force.  
(8) For the purposes of this section, the expressions “company ” and “private company ” shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them under clauses ( i) and ( iii) of sub-section ( 1) of section  3 of the 
Companies Act,  1956  (1 of 1956).  
34. Liability of partners of firm to pay tax .—Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, where 
any firm is liable to pay any tax (including any p enalty) under this Act, the firm and each of the partners 
of the firm  shall be jointly and severally liable for such payment:  
Provided that where any such partner retires from the firm, he  shall intimate the date of  his retirement 
to the Commissioner by a notice in that behalf in writing and he  shall be liable to pay tax (including any 
penalty) remaining unpaid at the time of  his retireme nt and any tax (including any penalty) due up to the 
date of  his retirement though unassessed on that date:  
Provided further that if no such intimation is given within fifteen days from the date of retirement, the 
liability of the partner under the first p roviso  shall continue until the date on which such intimation is 
received by the Commissioner.  
35. Liability of guardians, trustees, etc. —Where the business in respect of which tax is payable 
under this Act is carried on by, or is in the charge of any guar dian, trustee or agent of a minor 
or other  incapacitated person on  his behalf and for the benefit of such minor or  other  incapacitated person, 
the tax (including any penalty)  shall be levied upon and recoverable from such guardian, trustee or agent, 
as the  case may be, in like manner and to the same extent as it would be assessed upon and recoverable 
from any such minor or  other  incapacitated person, if he were of full age and of sound mind and if he 
were conducting the business  himself, and  all the provisi ons of this Act  shall, so far as may be, apply 
accordingly.  
36. Liability of Court of Wards, etc. —Where the estate or any portion of the estate of a dealer 
owning a business in respect of which tax is payable under this Act is under the control of the Co urt of 
Wards, the Administrator -General, the Official Trustee or any receiver or manager (including any person, 
whatever be  his designation, who in fact manages the business) appointed by or under any  order of a 
court, the tax (including any penalty)  shall  be levied upon and be recoverable from such Court of Wards, 
Administrator -General, Official Trustee, receiver or manager in like manner and to the same extent as it 
would be assessable upon and be recoverable from the dealer if he were conducting the busi ness himself; 
and all the provisions of  this Act  shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.  
37. Liability in other cases .—(1) Where a dealer is a firm or an association of persons or a  Hindu 
undivided family, and such firm, association or fa mily has disco ntinued business — 
(a) the tax payable under this Act, by such firm, association or family up to the date of such 
discontinuance may be assessed as if no such discontinuance had taken place; and  
(b) every person who was at the time of such discontinuance a partner of such firm , or a member 
of such association or family,  shall, notwithstanding such discontinuance, be liable jointly and 
severally for the payment of tax assessed and penalty imposed and payable by such firm, association 
or family, whether such t ax (including any penalty) has been assessed prior to or after such 
discontinuance, and  subject as aforesaid, the provisions of this Act  shall, so far as may be, apply as if 
every such person or partner or member were  himself a dealer : 23 
 Provided that where the partner of a firm liable to pay such tax (including any penalty) dies, the 
provisions of  sub-section ( 4) shall, so far as may be, apply.  
(2) Where a change has occurred in the constitution of a firm or association, the partners or  members 
of the firm o r association as it existed before and as it exists after its re -constitution , shall, without 
prejudice to the provisions of section  34, jointly and severally be liable to pay any tax (including any 
penalty) due from such firm or association for any period  before its re -constitution.  
(3) The provisions of  sub-section ( 1) shall, so far as may be, apply where the dealer, being a firm or 
association of persons, is dissolved or where the dealer , being a  Hindu undivided family, has effected 
partition with respec t to the business carried on by it and accordingly references in that  sub-section to 
discontinuance  shall be construed as references to dissolution or, as the case may, to partition.  
(4) Where a dealer liable to pay  tax under this Act dies, than — 
(a) if the business carried on by the dealer is continued after  his death by  his legal representative 
or any  other  person, such legal representative or  other  person , shall be liable to pay the tax (including 
any penalty) due from the dealer under this Act, whethe r such tax (including any penalty) has been 
assessed before  his d eath but has remained unpaid, or  is assessed after  his death;  
(b) if the business carried on by the dealer is discontinued after  his death,  his legal 
representative  shall be liable to pay out  of the estate of the deceased, to the extent the estate is capable 
of meeting the charge, the tax (including any penalty) due from the dealer under this Act, whether 
such tax (including any penalty) has been assessed before  his death but has remained unpa id, or is 
assessed after  his death,  
and the provisions of this Act  shall, so far as may be, apply to such legal representative or  other  person as 
if he were the dealer  himself.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this  sub-section and section  40, “legal representative ” has 
the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 11) of section  2 of the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908).  
CHAPTER VII  
LIABILITY TO PRODUCE ACCOUNTS AND SUPPLY OF INFORMATION  
38. Accounts .—(1) Every dealer liable to pay tax under this Act, and every  other  dealer on whom a 
notice has been served to furnish returns under  sub-section ( 2) of section  21 shall keep at  his place of 
business a true account of the value of goods bought and sold by  him, and if the Commissioner considers 
that such  account is not sufficiently clear and intelligible to enable  him to make a proper check  of the 
returns referred to in that sub-section, he may require such dealer by notice in writing to keep such 
accounts (including records of purchases and sales) and as  may be specified therein.  
(2) The Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct any class of registered 
dealers generally to keep such accounts (including records of purchases and sales) as may be specified in 
the notification  subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed.  
39. Memoranda of sales .—If a registered dealer — 
(a) sells goods to  another  registered dealer, or  
(b) makes sales in the course of inter -State trade or commerce, or  
(c) sells any goods exceeding  ten rupees  in value in any one transaction to any  other  person,  
he shall issue to the purchaser a bill or cash  memorandum serially numbered, signed and dated by  him 
or his servant, manager or agent and  showing therein  his name and address and such  other  partic ulars as 
may be prescribed and he  shall keep a duplicate or copy of such bill or cash  memorandum duly signed 
and dated and preserve it for a period of not less than five years from the end of the year unless any 
proceedings in respect of that year are pend ing in which case they  shall be preserved till the final decision 
in those proceedings:  
  24 
 Provided that if in respect of any goods or class of goods or any dealers or class of dealers, 
the Administrator is of the opinion that it is not practicable to issue  any bills or cash  memoranda for sale 
of goods exceeding  ten rupees  in value in any one transaction to any  other  person, he may, by notific ation 
in the Official Gazette, — 
(i) specify such amount exceeding  ten rupees  in value as the amount for the issue of such bills or 
cash memoranda;  
(ii) exempt such goods or class of goods or dealers or class of dealers from the operation of this 
section.  
40. Information to be furnished regarding change of business .—If any dealer to whom the 
provisions of  sub-section ( 2) of section  21 apply — 
(a) sells or  otherwise disposes of  his business or any part of  his business or any place of business, 
or effects or comes to know of any  other  change in the ownership of the busines s; or 
(b) discontinues  his business or changes  his place of business or warehouse, or opens a new place 
of business; or  
(c) changes the name or nature of  his business, or effects any change in the goods or class of 
goods in which he carries on  his business  and which is or are specified in  his certificate of 
registration; or  
(d) enters into partnership or  other  association in regard to  his business,  
he shall, within the prescribed time, inform the prescribed authority accordingly, and if any such dealer 
dies, his legal representative  shall in like manner inform the said authority.  
41. Production and inspection of accounts and documents and search of premises .—(1) The  
Commissioner may,  subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, require any  dealer — 
(a) to produce before him such books of accounts, registers or documents,  
(b) to furnish such information relating to the stock of goods of, or purchases, sales or deliveries 
of go ods by, the dealer or any other information relating to his business,  
as may be deemed necessary, for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) (a) All books of accounts, registers  and documents relating to the stock of goods of, or purchases, 
sales and  deliveries of goods by, any dealer, and  
(b) All goods kept in any place of business or  warehouse of any  dealer,  
shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the Commissioner and the  Commissioner may take 
or cause to be taken such copies or extracts of the said  books of accounts, registers or documents and such 
inventory of the goods found  as appear to  him necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) Where  the Commissioner, upon information in  his possession or  otherwise, has rea sonable 
grounds to  believe that — 
(a) any person to whom a notice under this Act was issued to produce,  or cause to be produced, 
any books of accounts or  other  documents has omitted or failed  to produce or caused to be produced 
such books of accounts or  other  documents , as required by such notice, or  
(b) any person to whom a notice as aforesaid has been or might be  issued, will not, or           
would not  produce or cause to be produced any books of  accounts or  other  documents which          
will be useful for, or relevant to, any proceedings under the  Bengal Finance (Sales Tax)                   
Act, 1941 (Bengal  Act VI of  1941), as it was in force in Delhi, or under this Act,  
(c) books of accounts, register s or documents of any dealer may be  destroyed, mutilated,      
altered, falsified or secreted or any sales by that  dealer have been or may be suppressed , with a      
view to evade or  attempt to evade payment of tax due under the  Bengal Finance                            
(Sales Tax) Act,  1941  (Bengal Act VI of 1941) , as it  was in force in Delhi, or under this Act,  25 
 the Commissioner or any  other  person appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9, if so auth orised by 
the Commissioner may , — 
(i) enter and search any building or  place  where  he has reason to suspect that books of accounts 
and other  documents  or the sale proceeds are  kept;  
(ii) break open the lock of any door, box, locker, safe, almirah or  other  receptacle for exercising 
the powers conferred by clause ( i) where the keys thereof are  not available;  
(iii) seize any such books of accounts or  other  documents or any inventory of goods  as appear to  
him necessary for the purposes of this Act;  
(iv) place marks of identification on any books of accounts or  other  documents or make or cause 
to be made extracts or copies therefrom;  
(v) make a note o r any inventory of any such money or go ods found as a result of such search ; 
(vi) seal the premises including the office,  shop,  godown, box, locker, safe, almirah 
or other  receptacle if the owner or the  person in occupation or in charge of such office,  shop, godown, 
box, locker, safe, almirah o r other  receptacle  leaves the place or is not available or fails or refuses to 
open it when called  upon to do so . 
(4) The  Commissioner may requisition the services of any police officer or any public  servant, or of 
both to assist  him for all or any of the purposes specified in  sub-section  (3). 
(5) Where  the Commissioner seizes any books of accounts or  other  documents,  he shall give the 
dealer or the person present on  his behalf, as the case may be, a receipt for the same and obtain 
acknowledgement  of the re ceipt so given to  him: 
Provided that if the dealer or person from whose custody the books of  accounts 
or other  documents  are seized refuses  to give an acknowledgement, the Commissioner may leave the 
receipt at the  premises and record this fact:  
Provided further that the dealer or person aforesaid may file objections before the Commissioner  
against such search, seizure or inventory w ithin seven days of such search  seizure or inventory.  
(6) The  Commissioner  shall keep in  his custody the books of ac counts, registers or  documents seized 
under  sub-section ( 3) for such period not later than the completion of all the  proceedings under this Act in 
respect of years for which those books of  accounts, registers or documents are relevant, as he considers 
necessary, and  thereafter  shall return the same to the dealer or any  other  person  from whose custody or 
power they were seized:  
Provided that the Commissioner may, before returning such books of  accounts or  other  documents as 
aforesaid, place or cause to b e placed such  marks of identification thereon as appear to  him to be 
necessary:  
Provided further that the Commissioner may, before returning the book s of accounts 
and other  documents, require that the dealer or the person, as the  case may be,  shall give a written 
undertaking that the books of accounts  and other  documents  shall be presented whenever required by any 
competent  authority for any proceedings under this Act.  
(7) Save  as otherwise  provided in this section, every search or seizure made under this 
section  shall  be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Code of  Criminal 
Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) , relating to searches or seizures made under that Code.  
(8) The  Commissioner ma y, for the purposes of this Act — 
(a) require any person, including a banking company, post office or  any officer thereof, to furnish 
information in relation to such points or matters  or to furnish statements of accounts and affairs 
verified in the manner  specified by  him, giving information in relation to such p oints or  matters as 
in his opinion will be useful for, or relevant to, any  proceeding under this Act;  
  26 
 (b) require any person — 
(i) who transports or holds in custody, for delivery to or on behalf  of any dealer any goods to 
give any information likely to b e in his possession in respect of such goods or to permit 
inspection thereof, as the  case may be;  
(ii) who maintains or has in  his possession any books of accounts, registers or  documents 
relating to the business of a dealer to produce such books of  accounts, registers or documents for 
inspection.  
42. Power of Commissioner and other authorities to take evidence on oath, etc. —(1) The 
Commissioner or any person appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to assist  him shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908) , when trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining  him on oath or affirmation;  
(b) compelling the production of accounts and documents; and  
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses,  
and any proceeding under this Act before the Commissioner or any person appointed                          
under sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to assist  him shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of sections  193 and 228 and for the purposes of section  196 of the Indian                        
Penal Code  (45 of 1860).  
(2) Subject to any rule made in this behal f, any authority referred to in  sub-section ( 1) may impound 
and retain in its custody for such period as it thinks fit , any books of accounts or  other  documents 
produced before it in any proceedings under this Act:  
Provided that a person appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to assi st the Commissioner  shall 
not— 
(a) impound any books of accounts or  other  documents without recording  his reasons for so 
doing; or  
(b) retain in  his custody any such books or documents for a period exceeding thirty days,  
without obtaining the approval of the Commissioner therefor.  
CHAPTER VIII  
APPEAL S, REFERENCE AND REVISION  
43. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any  order, not being an  order  mentioned in 
section  44 passed under this Act or the rules made thereunder, may  appeal to the prescribed authority:  
Provided that where an  order, not being an  order  mentioned in section  44 or made under section  47 is 
passed by the Commissioner, the person aggrieved may appeal therefrom to the Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) The Commissioner or any person aggrieved by an  order passed in appeal by the prescribed 
authority may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such  order.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of section  62, no appeal  shall be entertained unless it is filed within sixty 
days from the date of service of the  order appealed against.  
(4) Every appeal filed under this section  shall be in the prescribed form and  shall be verified in the 
prescribed manner and in the case of an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal filed by any person  other  than 
the Commissioner,  shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty rupees.  
(5) No appeal against an  order of assessment with or without penalty or against an  order imposing the 
penalty  shall be entertained by an appellate authority unless such appeal is accompanie d by a satisfactory 
proof of the payment of tax with or without penalty or, as the case may be, of the payment of the penalty 
in respect of which the appeal has been preferred:  27 
 Provided that the appellate authority may, if it thinks fit, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
entertain an appeal against such  order — 
(a) without payment of the tax and penalty, if any, or as the case may be, of the penalty, on the 
appellant furnishing in the prescribed manner security for such amount as it may direct, or  
(b) on proof of payment of such smaller sum, with or without security for such amount of tax or 
penalty which remains unpaid, as it may direct:  
Provided further  that no appeal  shall be entertained by the appellate authority unless it is satisfied that 
such amo unt of tax as the appellant may admit to be due from  him has been paid.  
(6) The appellate authority may, after giving the appellant  an opportunity of being heard ,— 
(a) confirm, reduce, enhance  or annul the assessment (including any penalty imposed), or  
(b) set aside the assessment (including any penalty imposed) and direct the assessing authority to 
make a fresh assessment after such further inquiry as may be directed, or  
(c) pass such  order as it may think fit.  
(7) Save as provided in section  45, an  order  passed by Appellate Tribunal on appeal  shall be final.  
44. Non-appealable orders .—No appeal and no application f or revision  shall lie against — 
(a) a notice issued under this Act calling upon a dealer for assessment or asking a dealer to  show 
cause as to why he  should not be prosecuted for an offence under this Act; or  
(b) an  order pertaining to the seizure or retention of books of accounts, register 
and other  documents; or  
(c) an order sanctioning prosecution under this Act; or  
(d) an interim  order passed in the course of any proceedings under this Act.  
45. Statement of case to the High Court .—(1) Within sixty days from the date of an  order passed by 
the Appellate Tribunal under  sub-section ( 6) of section  43, the dealer or the Commissi oner may, by 
application in writing, and accompanied, where the application is made by a dealer, by a fee of fifty 
rupees, require the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the  High Court any question of law arising out of such  
order, and,  subject to the  other  provisions contained in this section, the Appellate Tribunal  shall, within 
one hundred and twenty days of the receipt of such application , draw up a statement of the case and refer 
it to the  High Court:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the dealer or the Commissioner was 
prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the application within the period hereinbefore specified, 
allow it to be presented within a further period not exceeding thirty days.  
(2) If the Appellate Tribu nal refuses to state the case which it has been required to do, on the ground 
that no question of law arises, the dealer or the Commissioner, as the case may be, within thirty days of 
the communication of such refusal either withdraw  his application (and i f he does so, any fee paid  shall be 
refunded), or apply to the  High Court against such refusal.  
(3) If upon receipt of an application under  sub-section ( 2), the  High Court is not satisfied as to the 
correctness of the decision of the Appellate Tribunal, it  may require the Appellate Tribunal to state the 
case and refer it, and on receipt of such requisition, the Appellate Tribunal  shall state the case and refer it 
accordingly.  
(4) If the  High Court is not satisfied that the statement in a case referred to  it are sufficient to enabl e it 
to determine the questions  raised thereby, the Court may refer the case back to the Appellate Tribunal for 
the purpose of making such additions thereto or alternations therein as it may direct in that behalf.  
(5) The  High Court  upon the hearing of any such case  shall decide the question of law raised thereby, 
and shall deliver its judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded, 
and shall send to the Appellate Tribunal a copy of such judgment under the seal of the Court and the 
signature of the Registrar, and the Appellate Tribunal  shall dispose of the case accordingly.  28 
 (6) Where a reference is made to the  High Court under this section, the costs [which  shall not include 
the fee referred to in  sub-section ( 1)] shall be in the discretion of the Court. 
(7) The payment of the amount of tax and penalty (if any) due in accordance with the  order of the 
Appellate Tribunal in respect of which an application has been made under  sub-section ( 1) shall not be 
stayed pending the disposal of such application or any reference made in consequence thereof but if such 
amount is reduced as a result of such reference, the excess tax paid  shall be refunded in accordance with 
the provisions of section  30. 
46. Revision  of orders prejudicial to revenue .—The Commissioner may call for and examine the 
records of any proceeding under  this Act and if he considers that any  order passed therein by any person 
appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to assist  him, is erroneo us in  so far as it is prejudicial to the 
interest s of revenue, he may, after giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard and after making or 
causing to be made such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass such  order thereon as the circumstances of 
the case  justify, including an  order enhancing or modifying the assessment and penalty (if any) imposed 
or cancelling the assessment and penalty (if any) imposed and directing a fresh assessment:  
Provided that a final  order under this section  shall be made before the expiry of five years from the 
date of the  order sought to be revised.  
47. Revision of other orders .—(1) In the case of any  order , other  than an  order referred to in 
section  44 or to which section  46 applies, passed by a person appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section  9 to assist  him, the Commissioner may, either on  his own motion or on an application filed in 
accordance with such rules as may be prescribed, call for the record  of any proceeding under this Act in 
which any such  order has been passed an d may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made 
and, subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass such  order s thereon , not being an  order prejudicial to 
the dealer, as he thinks fit:  
Provided that the Commissioner  shall not revise an y order under this  sub-section ,— 
(a) where an appeal against the  order is pending before the appellate authority under     
section  43; or  
(b) where, if such appeal lies, the time within which it may be filed has not expired,  or 
(c) where in the case of the second appeal, the dealer has not waived  his right of appeal.  
(2) The Commissioner  shall not on  his own motion revise any  order under this section after the expiry 
of two years from the date of the  order sought to be revised.  
(3) In the case of an application for  revision under this section by the dealer, the application  shall be 
made within two years from the date on which the  order in question was communicated to  him or the date 
on which he  otherwise comes to know of it, whichever is earlier.  
48. Rectification o f mistakes .—(1) The Commissioner or any person appointed                   
under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to assist  him, may at any time within two years from the date               
of any  order passed by the Commissioner or by that person, as the case  may be, on  his own motion, 
rectify any mistake apparent from the record , and shall within a like period , rectify any such mistake 
which has been brought to  his notice by any person affected by such  order:  
Provided  that no such rectification  shall be made,  if it has the effect of enhancing the tax or reducing 
the amount of refund, unless the Commissioner or the person appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section  9 to assist  him, as the case may be, has given notice in writing to the person likely to be affect ed 
by the  order of  his intention to do so and has allowed such person a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard.  
(2) The provisions of  sub-section ( 1) shall apply to the rectification of a mistake by an appellate 
authority under section  43 as they apply to t he rectification of a mistake by the Commissioner.  
  29 
 (3) Where any matter has been considered and decided in any proceeding by way of appeal or 
revision relating to an  order referred to in  sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), the authority passing 
such order may, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, amend 
the order under  sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), as the case may be, in relation to any matter  other  than 
the matter which has been s o considered and decided.  
(4) Where any such rectification has the effect of reducing the amount of the tax or penalty, the 
Commissioner  shall, in the prescribed manner, refund any amount due to such person.  
(5) Where any such rectification has the effect of enhancing the amount of the tax or penalty or 
reducing the amount of the refund, the Commissioner  shall recover the amount due from such person in 
the manner provided for in Chapter V.  
(6) Save as provided in the foregoing  sub-sections, and  subject to s uch rules as may be prescribed, 
any assessment made or  order passed under this Act or the rules made thereunder by any person 
appointed under section  9 or by the Appellate Tribunal may be reviewed by such person or by the 
Appellate Tr ibunal, as the case ma y be, suo motu  or upon  an application made in that behalf.  
(7) Before any  order is passed under  sub-section ( 6) which is likely to affect any person adversely, 
such person  shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
49. Determination of disputed questions .—(1) If any question arises,  otherwise than in proceedings 
before a court, or before the Commissioner has commenced assessment or reassessment of a dealer under 
section  23 or 24, whether for the purposes of this Act, — 
(a) any  person, society, club or association or any firm or any branch or department of any firm is 
a dealer; or  
(b) any particular thing done to any goods amounts to or results in the manufacture of goods 
within the  meaning of that term as given in clause  (h) of section  2; or 
(c) any transaction is a sale, and if so, the sale price therefor; or  
(d) any particular dealer is required to be registered; or  
(e) any tax is payable in respect of any particular sale, or if the tax is payable, the rate thereof,  
the Commis sioner  shall, within such period as may be prescribed, make an  order determining such 
question.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this  sub-section, the Commissioner  shall be deemed to have 
commenced assessment or reassessment of a dealer under section  23 or section  24, when the dealer is 
served with any notice by the Commissioner  under section  23 or section  24 as the case may be.  
(2) The Commissioner may direct that the determination  shall not affect the liability of any person 
under this Act as respects any  sale effected prior to the determination.  
(3) If any such question arises from any  order already passed under this Act or under the  Bengal 
Finance (Sales Tax) Act,  1941  (Bengal Act VI of  1941) , as then in force in Delhi, no such question  shall 
be entertained for determination under this section; but such question may be raised in appeal against, or 
by way of revision of such  order.  
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
50. Offences .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) holds, gives, produces or accepts a declaration under the second proviso to  clause ( a)             
of sub-section ( 2) of section  4, or under the first proviso to section  5, which  he knows or has reason to 
believe to be false; or  
(b) carries on business as  a dealer without obtaining a certificate of registration  as required 
under  sub-section ( 1) of section  14 or sub-section ( 1) of section  17; or  30 
 (c) not being a registered dealer, represents when purchasing goods that he is a  registered      
dealer or;  
(d) being a registered dealer, represents when purchasing any goods or class of  goods not covered 
by his certificate of  registration, that such goods or class of goods are covered by such  certificate; or  
(e) fails to comply with the provisions of  sub-section  (5) of section  20; or  
(f) fails to  submit any return as  required by  sub-section ( 2) of section  21 by the prescribed date 
or submits a false return; or   
(g) not being a registered dealer, collects any amount by way of tax under this Act  or make any 
collectio n of such tax  otherwise  than in accordance with this Act or the rules made thereunder; or  
(h) fails to keep a true  account of the value of goods bought or sold by  him as required by 
section  38, or  fails when required so to do under that section, to keep an y account or record  of 
purchases or sales specified in any notice or notification referred to in  that section; or  
(i) fails or neglects to issue cash memorandum or bills as required under section 39; or  
(j)  knowingly  maintains or produces incorrect accounts, registers or documents or  knowingly 
furnishes incorrect information; or  
(k) neglects to furnish any information required by section  40; or  
(l) refuses to comply with any requirements made of  him under section  41; or 
(m) closes  his place of business with  a view to preventing inspection under section  41; or  
(n) obstructs or prevents any officer making inspection, search or seizure under section  41, or 
performing any functions under section  64, as the case may be; or  
 (o) being the owner or person in charge of a goods vehicle fails, neglects or  refuses to comply 
with any of the requirements contained in section  64; or  
(p) aids or abets any person in the commission of any offence specified in clauses  (a) to ( o), 
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to six  months or with fine, 
or with both , and where the offence is a continuing one,  with a daily fine not exceeding two hundred 
rupees during the period of the  continuance of the offence : 
Provided that no prosecution for an offence under this Act  shall  be instituted in respect of the same 
facts in respect of which a penalty has  been imposed under  sub-section ( 6) of section  20, sub-section (6) 
of section  23, section  55, section  56 or section 57: 
Provided further that a person  shall not be deemed to have  committed an offence under clause ( b) if 
he had applied for registration under  this Act in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section  (2) of 
section  14, or  sub-section ( 2) of section  17, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-section ( 1), if any person commits an offence under 
clause ( a) or clause ( f) or clause ( j) or clause ( l) or clause ( m) or clause  (o) of that  sub-section and the 
court is  satisfied that the offence has been committed wilfully, he  shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term  which may extend to six months and with fine, and where the offence is a  
continuing one, with a daily fine not exceeding three hundred rupe es during the  period of the continuance 
of the offence.  
51. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company , shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and  shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this  sub-section  shall rend er any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without  his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence . 31 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of , or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any  
director, manager, secretary or  other  officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary 
or other  officer  shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and  shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of  this section ,— 
(a) “company ” means a body  corporate, and include s a firm or  other  association of        
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm,  means a partner in the firm.  
52. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court  shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act or 
rules made thereunder except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner, and no court inferior to 
that of a Metropolitan Magistrate  shall try any such offence . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in t he Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) , all 
offences punishable under this Act or rules made thereunder  shall be cognizable and bailable.  
53. Investigation of offences .—(1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, the 
Commissioner may authorise either generally or in respect of a particular case or class of cases any 
person appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to assist  him to investigate all or any of the offences 
punishable under this Act.  
(2) Every person so authorised  shall,  in the conduct of such investigation exercise the powers 
conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) , upon an officer in charge of a police 
station for the investigation of a cognizable offence.  
54. Composition of offences .—(1) Subject t o such conditions as may be prescribed, the 
Commissioner may accept, from any person alleged to have committed an offence under section  50 or 
under any rules made under this Act, either before or after the commencement of any proceedings against 
such perso n in respect of such offence, by way of composition for such offence, a sum not exceeding   
five thousand rupees or where the offence alleged to have been committed is under any of the                 
clauses ( a), (b), (c), (d) and ( f) of that section, not  exceeding three times the amount of the tax which 
would thereby have been avoided, whichever is  higher.  
(2) On payment in full of such sum as may be determined by the Commissioner                    
under  sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) no proceedings  shall be comm enced against such person as aforesaid; and  
(b) if any proceedings have already been commenced against such person as aforesaid, such 
proceedings  shall not be further proceeded with.  
55. Imposition of Penalty .—(1) If a dealer fails without reasonable cause  to furnish any return by the 
prescribed date as required under  sub-section ( 2) of section  21, or to pay the tax due according to the 
return as required by  sub-section ( 3) of that section, the Commissioner may after giving the dealer an 
opportunity of bein g heard, direct that the dealer  shall pay, by way of penalty, in addition to the amount of 
tax payable, a sum not exceeding twice that amount or where no tax is payable a sum not exceeding two 
thousand rupees.  
(2) The penalties specified under  sub-section (1) may be imposed by the Commissioner 
notwithstanding the fact that assessment proceedings have not been initiated against the dealer under 
section  23. 
56. Penalty for concealment of sales or furnishing inaccurate particulars or making false 
representatio ns.—(1) If the Commissioner or any person appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to 
assist  him, in the course of any proceedings under this Act, is satisfied that a dealer has conceal ed the 
particulars of  his sales  or has furnished inaccurate particu lars of  his sales, he may, after giving the dealer a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, direct that the dealer  shall pay, by way of penalty, in addition to 32 
 the amount of tax payable, a sum not exceeding two and a half times the amount of tax which woul d 
thereby have been avoided.  
(2) If a person commits an offence under clause ( a) of section  50, the Commissioner or any person 
appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to assist  him may, after giving that person a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard,  by order in writing, impose upon such person by way of penalty, a sum not 
exceeding two and a half times the amount of tax which would thereby have been avoided.  
(3) If a person purchasing goods commits an offence under clause ( c) or clause ( d) of section  50, the 
authority which granted  him, or, as the case may be, is competent to grant  him a certificate of registration 
under this Act, may , after giving  him a reason able opportunity of being heard  by order in writing impose 
upon  him by way of penalty, a sum  not exceeding two and a half times the tax which could have been 
levied under this Act in respect of the sale to  him of the goods, if the offence had not been committed.  
57. Penalty for contravening provisions regarding collection of tax by dealers .—If an y person 
acts in contravention of the provisions of section  22, he  shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding two and 
a half times the tax wrongly collected:  
Provided that the Commissioner  shall not impose such penalty unless the person concerned has been 
given an opportunity of being heard.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
58. Service of notice when family is disrupted or firm is dissolved .—(1) Where a  Hindu undivided 
family has been partitioned, notice s under this Act  may be served on the person who was the last manager 
of the  Hindu family, or if such person cannot be found, then on all adults who were  members of the  Hindu 
family, immediately before the partition.  
(2) Where a firm or an association of persons is dissolved,  notices under this Act may be served on 
any person who was a partner (not being a minor) of the firm, or  member of the association, as the case 
may be, immediately before its dissolution.  
59. Service of notice in the case of discontinued business .—Where a n assessment is to be made in 
respect of business which has been discontinued, a notice under this Act  shall be served in the case of a 
firm or an association of persons on any person who was a  member of such firm or association at the time 
of its disconti nuance or in the case of a company on the principal officer thereof.  
60. Appearance before any authority in proceedings .—(1) Any person, who is entitled or required 
to attend before any authority in connection with any proceedi ngs under this Act, may atten d,— 
(a) by a perso n authorised by hi m in writing in this behalf, being a relative or  a person regularly 
employed by hi m; or  
(b) by a legal practitioner or chartered accountant who is not disquali fied by or under                     
sub-section ( 2); or 
(c) by a sales tax practitioner who possesses the prescribed qualifications and is entered in the  list 
which the Commissioner sh all maintain in that behalf, and who is not disquali fied by or under       
sub-section ( 2). 
(2) The Commissioner may, by ord er in wr iting and for reasons to be recorded therein, disqualify for 
such period as is stated in the ord er from attending before any such authority any legal practitioner, 
chartered accou ntant or sales tax practitioner — 
(i) who has been removed or dismissed from Government service; or  
(ii) who being a legal practitioner or chartered accountant is found guilty of misconduct in 
connection with any proceedings under this Act by an authority empowered to take dis ciplinary 
action against the me mbers of the profession to  which he belongs; or  
(iii) who being a sales tax  practitioner is found guilty of such misconduct by the Commissioner.  33 
 (3) No order of disqualification sh all be made in respect of any particular person unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of b eing heard.  
(4) Any person against whom any ord er of disqualification is made under this section may, within one 
month of the da te of communication of such ord er, appeal to the  Administrator to have the ord er 
cancelled.  
(5) The order of the Commissioner sh all not take effect until one month of the making thereof or 
when an appeal is preferred, until the appeal is decided.  
(6) The Commissioner may at any time suo motu  or on an application made to hi m in this behalf, 
revoke any ord er made against any person under sub -section ( 2) and thereupon such person sh all cease to 
be disqualified.  
61. Change of an incumbent of an office .—Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this Act 
the Commissioner or any person appointed under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to ass ist him, ceases to 
exercise jurisdiction and is succeeded by  another  who has and exercises jurisdiction, the person so 
succeeding may continue the proceeding from the stage at which the proceeding was left by  his 
predecessor:  
Provided that the dealer conce rned may demand that before the proceeding is so continued, the 
previous proceeding or any part thereof be reopened or that before any  order of assessment is passed 
against  him, he be re -heard.  
62. Extension of period of limitation in certain cases .—(1) An Appellate authority may admit an 
appeal under section  43 after the period of limitation laid down in that section, if the appellant satisfies 
the appellate authority that he has sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within such period.  
(2) In computing the period laid down under sections  43, 45, 46 and 47, the provisions of 
sections  4 and 12 of the Limitation Act,  1963  (36 of 1963) , shall, so far as may be, apply.  
(3) In computing the period of limitation presc ribed by or under any provision  of this Act, or the rules 
made thereunder,  other  than section  43, 45, 46 or 47, any period during which any proceeding is stayed by 
an order or injunction of any court  shall be excluded.  
63. Returns, etc. , to be confidential .—(1) All particulars contained in any statement made, return 
furnished or accounts or documents produced in accordance with this Act , or in any record of evidence 
given in the course of any proceedings under this Act,  other  than proceedings before a criminal 
court,  shall, save as provid ed in  sub-section ( 3), be treated as confidential, and notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Evidence Act,  1872  (1 of 1872) , no court  shall, save as aforesaid, be entitled to 
require any servant of the Government to produce before it any such st atement, return, account, document 
or record or any part thereof, or to give evidence before it in respect thereof.  
(2) If, save as provided in  sub-section ( 3), any servant of the Government discloses any of the 
particulars referred to in  sub-section ( 1), he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
six months, and  shall also be liable to fine.  
(3) Nothing in this section  shall apply to the disclosure — 
(a) of any of the particulars referred to in  sub-section ( 1) for the purposes of investig ation or 
prosecution under this Act or the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860) or any  other  enactment for the time 
being in force; or  
(b) of such facts to an officer of the Central Government or any State Government as may be 
necessary for verification of such facts or for the purpose s of enabling that Government to levy or 
realise any tax imposed by it; or  
(c) of any such particulars where such disclosure is occasioned by the lawful employment under 
this Act of any process for the service of any notice or the recovery of any demand; or  
  34 
 (d) of any such particulars to a civil court in any suit or proceeding to whi ch the Government or 
any sales tax authority is a party and which relates to any matter arising out of any proceeding under 
this Act or under any  other  law for the time being in force authorizing any sales tax authority to 
exercise any powers thereunder; o r 
(e) of any such particulars by any public servant where the disclosure is occasioned by the lawful 
exercise by  him of  his powers under the Indian Stamp Act,  1899  (2 of 1899), to impound an 
insufficiently stamped document; or  
(f) of any such particulars t o the Reserve  Bank of India as are required by that Bank to enable it to 
compile financial statistics of international investment and balance of payment; or  
(g) of any such particulars to any officer appointed  by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India for purpose of audit of tax receipts or refunds; or  
(h) of any such particulars relevant to any inquiry into a charge of misconduct in connection with 
income -tax proceedings against a legal practitioner or chartered accountant, to the authority 
empowered  to take disciplinary action against  members of the profession to which he belongs; or  
(i) of such particulars to the officers of the Central Government or any State Government for 
such other  purpose s, as the  Administrator may by general or special  order direct.  
64. Setting up of check -posts and barriers .—(1) The  Admini strator  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, set up check -posts or barriers, or both, at any place in Delhi with a view to preventing 
evasion of tax and other dues payable under this Act.  
(2) The owner or person in charge of a good s vehicle sh all carry with hi m a goods vehicle record, a 
trip sh eet or a log book, as th e case may be, and a bill of sale or a delivery note containing such 
particulars as may be prescribed in respect of the goods carried in the goods vehicle and produce the same 
before any officer in charge of a check -post or barrier or any other officer as may be empowered by the  
Administrator in this behalf.  
(3) The owner or person in charge of a goods vehic le entering or leaving Delhi sh all also file a 
declaration containing such particulars in the p rescribed form obtainable from the  prescribed authority 
and in such manner as may be prescribed, before the officer in charge of a check -post or barrier or before 
the other officer empowered as aforesaid:  
Provided that where the owner or person in charge of a goods vehicle after filing a declaration at the 
time of enter ing Delhi that the goods are me ant to be carried to a place outside Delhi, fails, without 
reasonable cause, to carry such goods outside Delhi with in the prescribed period, he sh all, in addition to 
the payment of tax, if any, be liable to a penalty not exceeding two and a half times the tax that would 
have been payable had the good s been sold inside Delhi or one thousand rupees, whichever is more.  
(4) At every check -post or barr ier, or at any other place when  so required by an officer empowered by 
the Administrator in this behalf, the dr iver or any other person in charge of a goods vehicle shall stop the 
vehicle and keep it stationary so long as may be required by the officer in charge of the check -post or 
barrier or the officer empowered as aforesaid  to search the goods vehicle or part thereof, examine the 
contents therein and inspect all records relating to the goods carried, which a re in the possession of such 
driver or  other person in charge, who shall, if so required, give hi s name and address and  the name and 
address of the owner of the vehicle as well as those of the consignor and consignee of the goods.  
(5) If on an examination of the contents in a goods vehicle or the inspection of records relating to the 
goods carried, any officer empowered by  the Administrator in this behalf has reason to believe that the 
owner or person in charge of such goods vehicle is  attempting to evade payment of the tax due under this 
Act, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and after hearing the owner or pers on in charge of the 
goods vehicle, detain the goods  and the goods so detained shall not be allowed to be transported unless 
the owner, or his agent or the person in charge of the goods vehicle furnishes to the satisfaction of such 
officer security in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed for an amount not exceeding one 
thousand rupees or the amount of tax payable if such goods were sold in Delhi, whichever is more.  35 
 (6) Where the security required to be  furnished under sub -section ( 5) is not furn ished within the 
prescribed period such goods sh all be dis posed of in such manner and sub ject to such conditions as may 
be prescribed.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “goods vehicle ” shall include a motor vehicle, vessel, 
boat, animal and any other form of conveyance.  
65. Publication of names, etc. , of dealers whose certificates of registration are cancelled .—The 
Commissioner  shall, at intervals not exceeding three months, publish in the Official Gazette such 
particulars as may be prescribe d of dealers whose certificates of registration are cancelled under the 
provisions of this Act.  
66. Exemptions .—(1) If the  Administrator is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public 
interest so to do, he may , with the previous approval of the Central Government,  exempt, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, and sub ject to such conditions, if any, as he may impose, any specified class of 
sales by any specified class of dealers from payment of the whole or any part of the tax payable under  this 
Act. 
(2) If in respect of any sales which are exemp t from payment of tax under sub -section ( 1), a brea ch of 
any of the conditions sub ject to which such exemption was granted, is committed, the dealer  responsible 
for such breach sh all be liable to pay  tax in respect of all such sales as if no such exemption had been 
granted.  
67. Bar of suits in civil courts .—No suit  shall be brought in any civil court to set aside or modify 
any assessment made or any  order passed under this Act or the rules made thereu nder and no prosecution, 
suit or  other  proceeding  shall lie against the Government or any officer of the Government for anything in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
68. Transfers during pendency of proceed ings void .—Where, during the pendency of any 
proceeding under this Act, any person creates a charge on or parts with the possession by way of sale, 
mortgage, gift or exchange or any  other  mode of transfer whatsoever, of any of  his assets in favour  of 
any other  person, such charge or transfer  shall be void as against any claim in respect of any tax or 
any other  sum payable by such person as a result of the completion of the said proceedings.  
69. Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 , not to apply to certain  
offences .—Nothing in Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 (2 of 1974) , shall     
apply to — 
(i) any offence punishable under this Act; or  
(ii) any  other  offence which under the provisions of that Code, may be tried  along with such 
offence,  
and every offence referred to in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) may be taken cognizance of by the court having 
jurisdiction under this Act as if the provisions of that Chapter were not enacted.  
70. Application of the provisions of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 for purposes of recovery 
of sales tax recoverable as arrears of land revenue .—For the purposes of recovery of any amount 
recoverable as arrears of land revenue under this Act, the provisions of the Delhi Land Reforms 
Act, 1954  (Delhi Act  8 of 1954) , as to recovery of arrears of land revenue  shall, notwithst anding anything 
contained in that  Act or in any  other  enactment, be deemed to be in force throughout Delhi and the 
provisions of  the Revenue Recovery Act,  1890  (1 of 1890) , shall have effect accordingly.  
71. Power to make rules .—(1) The  Administrator may make rules for  carrying out the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of  the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the further period after the date of expiry of three consecutive years referred  to                 
in sub-section ( 3) of section  3 for which liability to pay tax of a dealer  shall  continue;  
  36 
 (b) the particulars to  be contained in a declaration under  sub-clause  (v) of clause ( a)                    
of sub-section ( 2) of section  4, or  under section  5, as the case may be, the  form of such declaration, 
the authority from whom such forms  shall  be obtainable and the manner in which and the time within 
which such  declaration is to be furnished.  
(c) the period of turnover, the manner in which the turnover in relation to sale of  any goods under 
this Act  shall  be determined and the sales turnover whi ch may be deducted under sub -clause ( vi) of 
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 4;  
 (d) the restrictions and conditions  subject  to which the Commissioner may delegate  his powers  
under section  10; 
(e) the authority to whom application s for registration under sections  14, 15, 16 and 17 may be 
made and the form  of such applications and the fees payable in respect  thereof;  
(f) the procedure for and other  matters incidental to registration of dealers, the granting of 
certificates of registration, the  period within which such certificates  shall  be granted and the f orms of 
such certificates;  
(g) the intervals at which, and the manner in which, the tax under this Act  shall be payable under 
section  21; 
(h) the return s to be  furnished under  sub-section ( 2) of section  21 and dates by which, and the 
authority to whom , such returns  shall be furnished;  
(i) the procedure to be followed for assessment under section  23; 
(j) the circumstances in which, and the conditions  subject  to which, a dealer  may be permitted to 
pay a lump sum by way of composition  under section  29 and the manner of  determining such sum;  
(k) the form in which claims for refund or set -off may be preferred, the manner in  which such 
claims for refund  shall  be verified and the refunds or set -off under this Act  shall be allowed;  
(l) the authority to whom  information  shall be furnished under  section  40; 
(m) the conditions under which the production of accounts or documents or the furnishing of 
information may be required under  sub-section ( 1) of section  41; 
(n) the form and manner in which, and the authority to  whom, appeals against  assessment may be 
filed under section  43, the manner in which such appeals  shall  be verified and the fees payable in 
respect thereof and the procedure, to be  followed by such authority;  
(o) the form and manner in which applications for revision  under section  47 or for review 
under  sub-section  (5) of section  48 may be filed and the fee payable in respect thereof;  
(p) the conditions  subject to which the  Commissioner may authorise the persons appointed 
under  sub-section ( 2) of section  9 to assist  him to investigate offences under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section  53; 
(q) the conditions under which offences may be compounded under section  54; 
(r) the manner in which, and the time within which, applications  shall be made (including fee s 
payable in respect thereof),  information furnished, securities given and notice s served under this Act;  
(s) any other  matter which is required  to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Any rules made under this Act may provide that a  contravention thereof  shall be punishable with  
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and in the case of a continuing contravention,  with an 
additional fine which may extend to twenty -five rupees for every day  during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such  contravention.  
72. Rules to be laid before  Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act  shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is  made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comp rised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both House s 
agree  in making any modification in the rule or  both House s agree  that the rule  should not be made, the 37 
 rule shall  thereafter  have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.  
73. Repeal and saving s.—(1) The  Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act,  1941  (Bengal Act VI of  1941) , as 
in force in Delhi  (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), is hereby repealed:  
Provided that such repeal  shall not affect the previous operation of the said Act or any right, title, 
obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred thereunder and  subject thereto, anything done 
or any action taken including any appointment, notification, notice,  order, rule, form or certifica te in the 
exercise of any power  conferred by or under the said Act  shall be deemed to have been done or take n in 
the exercise of the powers  conferred by or under this Act, as if this Act were in force on the date on which 
such thing was done or action was ta ken, and all arrears of tax and  other  amounts due at the 
commencement of this Act may be recovered as if they had accrued under this Act.  
(2) Any application for revision pending immediately before the date on which the Appellate Tribunal 
is constituted under section  13 (hereafter in this section referred to as the notified date), before the 
Commissioner under the  Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act,  1941 (Bengal Act VI of  1941) , as in force in 
the Union territory of Delhi  shall on such date stand transferred to, and be disposed of by the Tribunal:  
Provided that no application for revision  shall be transferred to the Appellate Tribunal if the petitioner 
making the application for revision waives  his right of appeal to the Tribunal within fifteen days after the 
notified date, in which case the application for revision  shall be disposed of by the Commissioner as if it 
were an application for revision made under section  47. 
(3) Any application for revision, pending immediately before the notified date, before the 
Commissioner and transferred to the Appellate Tribunal under  sub-section ( 2) shall be disposed of by the 
Appellate Tribunal as if it were an appeal made to the Tribunal under and in accordance with the 
provisions of section  43 of this Act.  
(4) Where an appe al against an  order passed by an officer under this Act lies to the Appellate 
Tribunal after the notified date, and the period of limitation specified for filing such appeal under this Act 
has not expired, then, such appeal  shall lie to the Tribunal within  thirty days of the notified date or within 
the expiry of the period of limitation specified for filing such appeal, whichever is later.  
74. Removal of difficulties .—(1) If any difficultly arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by general or special  order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such  order  shall be made after the expiration of one year from the commencement of 
this Act.  
(2) Every  order made under  sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the or der or both Houses agree that the  order  should not be made, the  order  shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment  shall be without prejudice to the val idity of anything previously done under that  order.  
75. Transitional provisions .—Where a dealer liable to pay tax under the  Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) 
Act, 1941  (Bengal Act VI of 1941) , as in force in Delhi immediately before the commencement of this 
Act is not liable to pay tax under the provisions of this Act, he  shall, notwithstanding the repeal of the 
first mentioned Act, continue to be liable to pay tax on the sales made by  him aft er such commencement 
of all goods — 
(i) purchased by  him before such commencement,  
(ii) manufactured by  him before or after such commencement out of raw materials pur chased 
before such commencement.   38 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section  4 (1) (a)] 
1. Motor vehicles , including chassis of motor vehicles , motor  tyres and tubes, accessories, component 
parts and spare parts of motor vehicles  and motor bodies . 
2. Motor cycle and motor and cycle combinations, motor scooters, motorettes and tyres and tubes, and 
accessories, component parts and spare parts of motor cycles, motor scooters and motorettes.  
3. Refrigerators, a ir-conditioning and  other  cooling appliances and apparatus including room coolers 
and water coolers  and component parts, spare parts and accessories  thereof . 
4. Wireless reception instruments and apparatus, radios and radio -gramophones, television sets, 
accumulators, amplifiers and loudspeakers and spare parts, component parts and accessories thereof, and 
electrical valves.  
5. Cinematographic equipment  including cameras, projectors and sound reco rding and reproducing 
equipment , and spare parts, component parts and accesso ries required for use therewith, and lenses, films 
and cinema carbons.  
6. Photographic and other cameras and enlargers, lense s, films and plates, paper and other component 
parts, spare parts and accessories required for use therewith including photographic chemicals and 
photographs but excluding X -ray apparatus and films, plates, photographic chemicals and other 
equipment requir ed for use with the X -ray apparatus and component parts, spare parts and accessories 
thereof.  
7. All  clocks, time pieces, watches, electrical time switches and  mechanical timers and component 
parts, spare part s and accessories thereof.  
8. All arms including rifles, revolvers, pistols and ammunition for the same , and component parts ,  
spare parts and accessories thereof.  
9. Cigarette cases and lighters.  
10. Dictaphone, tape -recorders and other similar apparatus for recording sound and component parts, 
spare parts and accessories thereof.  
11. Sound transmitting equipmen t including telephones and loud speakers and component parts, spare 
parts and accessories thereof but excluding sound amplifying apparatus carried on the person and adapted 
for use a s a hearing aid.  
12. Typewriters, tabulating, calculating, cash registering, indexing, card punching, frankin g and 
addressing machines, tele printers  and duplicating machines and component parts, spare parts and 
accessories thereof.  
13. Binoculars, telescopes and opera glasses and component parts, spare parts and accessories thereof.  
14. Gramophones, record players, record changers and component parts, spare parts and accessories 
thereof and records and needles.  
15. All electronic and electrical good s other than torches, torch cel ls and filament lighting bulbs.  
16. Table cutlery including knives and forks, but not including spoons.  
17. All types of sanitary goods and fittings.  
18. (i) All goods made of glass but not including plain glass panes, optical lenses, hurricane lantern 
chimneys, phials, clinical syringes, thermometers, bangles and scientific apparatus and instruments made 
of glass.  
(ii) Glazed earthenware.  
(iii) Chinaware , including crockery.  
  39 
 19. Vacuum flasks of all kinds (including thermos es, thermic jugs, ice buckets or boxes , urns 
and other  domestic receptacles to keep food or beverages hot or cold) and refills thereof.  
20. Liquor (foreign liquor and Indian -made foreign liquor).  
21. Picnic set sold as a single unit.  
22. Ir on and steel safes and almirahs.  
23. Motor spirit, high speed diesel oil, aviation gasoline, aviation turbine fuel and all other varieties of 
fuel for motor vehicles and aircrafts.  
24. Cosmetics, perfumery and toilet goods including shampoos but not including soap, tooth brush, 
tooth  paste, tooth powder and kumkum.  
25. Leather goods  excepting footwear, belts and sports articles made of leather.  
26. Furniture including iron and steel furniture.  
27. Sheets, cushions, pillows, mattresses and other articles made from foam rubber or plastic foam or 
other synthetic foam.  
28. Furs and articles of personal or domestic use made therefrom . 
29. Articles and wares made of stainless steel excluding safety razor blades and surgical instruments 
or parts of industrial machinery and plant . 
30. Perambulartors.  
31. Plastic, celluloid bakelite and goods and goods m ade of similar  other substances  but not including 
such goods of value not exceeding thirty rupees per piece . 
32. Fireworks including coloured matches.  
33. Lifts whether operated by electricity or hydraulic power.  
34. All types of glazed and vitrum tiles, mosaic tiles , laminated sheets like Sun mica, Formica, etc.  
__________  
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section  4 (1) (b)] 
1. Coal including coke in  all its forms.  
2. Cotton as defined in  section  14 of the Central Sales Tax  Act, 1956  (74 of 1956).  
3. Iron and steel as defined in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act , 1956 (74 of 1956).  
4. Jute as defined in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956).  
5. Oil seeds as defined in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956).  
6. Hides and skins, whether in a raw or dressed state.  
7. Cotton yarn as defined in sectio n 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act , 1956 (74 of 1956) , and cotton 
thread.  
 
  40 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section  7) 
1. All cereals  and pulses including all forms of rice  and their brans  and cooked dal.  
2. Flour including atta, maida, besan and suji.  
3. Chapaties, paranthas, stuffed paranthas, puries, stuffed puries, kulchas, nans and bhaturas and 
bread (double roti).  
4. Meat and fish other than canned, preserved, processed, dried, dehydrated or cooked.  
5. Fresh eggs.  
6. Vegetables, green or dried (except  when sold in sealed containers) and vegetables seeds.  
7. Fruits other than d ry fruits or canned, preserved, dried or dehydrated fruits.  
8. Sugar as defined in the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944).  
9. Salt.  
10. Fresh milk (whole or separated ) including boiled and sugared milk.  
11. Edible oils produced in indigenous kohlu  or ghani  (without employing electricity or any other 
power at any stage ) when sold by the person owning such indigenous  kohlu or ghani  and dealing 
exclusively in the productio n of edible oils by such indigenous kohlu  and ghani . 
12. Dahi and lassi.  
13. All varieties of cotton fabrics, rayon or artificial silk fabrics and woo llen fabrics.  
Explanation. —The expression “cotton fabrics ”, “rayon or artificial silk fabrics ” and “woollen fabrics ” 
shall have the same meanings as are, respectively assigned to them in the Central Excises and Salt                 
Act, 1944 (1 of 1944).  
14. Books and periodicals, maps, educational charts, instruments boxes used by students and 
educational g lobes and instruments, such as instruments used in mechanical drawin g and biology, used by 
students.  
15. Fuel wood and charcoal.  
16. School exercise and drawing books.  
17. Agricultural implements including chaff cutters and persian  wheels or parts thereof and electric 
motors including monoblock pump sets of 3 to  7 
   horse power.  
18. Cattle feeds, including fodder and poultry feeds.  
19. Electric energy.  
20. Fertilizers.  
21. Water but not aerated water or mineral water or water sold in bottles or sealed containers.  
22. Tobacco as defined under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944).  
23. (i) Country made shoes (Juties).  When manufactured — 
(ii) Cane and bamboo handicrafts.  (a) without the use of power, and  
(iii) Earthen wares made by 
Kumhars.  (b) at a place other than a factory as defined in the 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) and sold either by 
the maker himself or by any member of his family or 
by a cooperative society consisting wholly of the 
makers of such articles.  
24. Charkha, takli and charkha accessories.  41 
 25. Slate, slate pencils, takhties, black ink used for takhties, writing chalks, crayons (excluding colour 
pencils), foot -rules of the types used in schools and kalams  (pens used for takhties).  
26. Bet el leaves including prepared pans.  
27. Pesticides for plant protection.  
28. Plant protection machines.  
29. Ready -made garments of khadi made out of cloth certified as such under the Khaddar (Protection 
of Name ) Act, 1950 (78 of 1950).  
30. Condoms.  
31. Blood for transfusion that is to say fresh human blood or plasma, liquid or dried.  
32. Handspun yarn.  
33. Achar and muraba  except when sold in sealed containers.  
34. Scientific goods including scientific glass goods, geometrical and drawing goods used in S chools 
and Colleges for teaching and for use by students.  
35. Livestock including poultry.  
36. Cotton paddings.  
--------------------------The Rampur Raza Library Act, 1975--------------------------
1 
 THE RAMPUR RAZA LIBRARY ACT, 1975                                                                                                                                         
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Rampur Raza  Library as an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
RAMPUR RAZA LIBRARY BOARD  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Board.  
5. Composition of Board.  
6. Term of office and fresh nomination in certain cases.  
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts.  
8. Duty of Government nominating persons.  
9. Meetings of Board.  
10. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes.  
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board.  
12. Staff of Board.  
13. Transfer of se rvice of existing employees to Board.  
14. Location of library.  
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY, LIABILITIES AND FUNCTIONS OF BOARD  
15. Properties and liabilities of Board.  
16. Duties of Board.  
17. Powers of Board.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS  
18. Grants by Central Government to Board.  
19. Fund of Board.  
20. Budget.  
21. Accounts and audit.  
22. Returns and reports.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Board.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Delegation of powers and duties.  
25. O fficers and employees of Board to  be public servants.  
26. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
27. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
28. Power of Board to make regulations.  
29. Act to override other enactments and instruments.  
 
  3 
 THE RAMPUR RAZA LIBRARY ACT, 1975  
ACT NO. 22 OF 1975  
[9th May, 1975 .] 
An Act to declare the Rampur Raza Library to be an institution of national importance and to 
provide for its administration and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Rampur Raza Library Act, 1975.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Rampur Raza Library as an institution of national importance .—It is hereby 
declared that the Rampur Raza  Library, at Rampur, is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this  Act, unless t he contest otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board” means the  Board established under section 4;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman  of the Board;  
(c) “deed  of trust” means the deed of trust executed by the late Nawab Sir Syed Raza  Ali Khan 
Bahadur of Rampur, on the 6th  August, 1951, and registered as  No. 103, Book IV, Volume No.  8, on 
pages 74 to 93 of the Office of  the officiating Chief Sub -Registrar,  Rampur;  
(d) “Fund” means the  Fund referred to in section 19;  
(e) “library” means the Rampur Raza Library,  which is declared by this Act to be an  institution of 
national importance ; 
(f) “member” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairman, and  also includes the  
Vice -Chairman,  if any;  
(g) “prescribed ” means  prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “Rampur” means the  headquarters of the District of Rampur in the State of Uttar Pradesh;  
(i) “State Government ” means the Government of the State of Uttar Pradesh.  
CHAPTER II  
RAMPUR RAZA LIBRARY BOARD  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established , for the 
purposes of this Act, a Board, to be known as the “Rampur Raza Library Board ”. 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acq uire, hold and dispose of property 
and to contract, and may, by that name, sue and , be sued.  
5. Composition of Board .—(1) The Board shall consist of the following person s, namely :— 
(a) the Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh, ex officio , who shall be the Chairman ; 
  
                                                           
1. 1st July, 1975 , vide notification No.  G.S.R.  354(E), dated 26 th June, 1975, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( i). 
 4 
 (b) Shri Syed Murtaza Ali Khan, for life, who shall be the Vice -Chairman;  
(c) Colonel Bashir Hussain Zaidi, for life;  
(d) the Accountant -General, Uttar Pradesh, ex officio;  
(e) a descendant of the late Nawab Sir Syed Raza Ali Khan Bahadur  of Rampur, to be nominated 
by the Central Government ; 
(f) four persons to be nominated by the Central Government, out of whom — 
(i) two shall be persons who, in the opinion of the Central Government, have expert 
knowledge with regard to the collections in the library or are distinguished historians or scholars 
of Arabic , Persian or Urdu,  
(ii) one shall be an officer, not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government of 
India in the Department dealing with matters connected with the library,  
(iii) one shall be a person who, in the opinion of the Central Government, has expert 
knowledge of, and experience in, management of public libraries;  
(g) the Collector and District Magistrate, Rampur,  ex officio;  
(h) three other persons, of whom at least two sh all be scholars of repute, to be nominated by the 
State Government;  
(i) the Director of the Library,  ex officio , who shall be the Member -Secretary.  
(2) Every nomination made under this section shall be notified by the Central Government in the 
Official Gaz ette and every nomination so notified shall take effect from the date of the notification.  
6. Term of office and fresh nomination in certain cases .—(1) The term  of office of nominated 
members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any nominated member may  resign his office by giving notice in wri ting to the Government 
nominati ng him, and on such resignation being notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office on the date of public ation  of such noti fication.  
(3) If the  office of any nominated member  is vacated before the expiry of the term of his office, the 
resulting vacancy may be filled by fresh nomination by the Government by which such member  was 
nominated, and the member  so nominated shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the 
member in whose place he is nominated.  
(4) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re -nomination.  
(5) If any nominated member is, by infirmity or otherwise, rendered temporaril y incapable of carrying 
out his duties or is absent on lave or otherwise in circumstance s not involving the vacation of his office, 
the Central Government or the St ate Government, as the case may  be, may nominate another person to act 
in his place during h is absence.  
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts .—No act of the Board shall be invalid merely by         
reason of— 
(a) any vacancy  in, or defect in the constitution  of, the Board, or  
(b) any  defect in the nomination of a person acting as a member thereof, or  
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
8. Duty of Government nominating persons .—(1) Before nominating a person to be a member of 
the Board, the Centr al Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall satisfy itself that 
the person will have no such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise or 
performance by him of his functions as a member, and the Cent ral Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be, shall also satisfy itself from time to time with respect to every member nominated by 
it that he has no s uch interest; and any person who  is or whom the Central Government or the St ate 
Government,  as the case may  be, proposes to nominate and who has consented to be a member shall, 5 
 whenever reques ted by the Central Government or  the State Government so to do, furnish to it such 
information with regard to his financial or other interest in the library as that Government considers 
necessary for the performance by it of its duties under this sub -section.  
(2) A nominated member who i s, in any way, whether directly or indirectly, concerned or interested 
in a contract or arrangement or proposed contract or arrangement, entered into or to be entered into, by or 
on behalf of the Board shall, as soon as possible, after relevant circumstanc es have come to his 
knowledge, disclose the nature of his concern or interest at a meeti ng of the Board and the disclosure  shall 
be recorded in the minutes of the Board and the member shall not take any  part after such disclosure in 
the discussion, or vote , on the contract or arrangement; and if he does vote, his vote shall be void.  
9. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), observe such rules of procedure in  regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by regulations made 
under this Act.  
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, the Vice -Chairman, if any, or in the absence of both, any 
member  chosen by  the members present from amongst themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the 
Board.  
(3) If an officer of Government who is nominated as a member of the Board by virtue of his office is 
unable to attend any meeting of the Board, he may, with the previous  approval of the Chairman, authorise 
in writing, any person to attend that meeting, but the person so authorised shall not be entitled to vote at 
that meeting.  
(4) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the m embers 
present and voting and in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman or, in his absence, the            
Vice -Chairman, if any, or, in the absence of both, the member presiding;  shall have a second or casting 
vote.  
10. Temporary association of pe rsons with Board for particular purposes .—(1) The Board may 
associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes as may be provided by regulations made under 
this Act, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire to have with regard to the performance of 
any of its functions under this Act.  
(2) A person associated with it by the Board under sub -section  (1) for any purpose shall have the right 
to take part in the discussions of the Board relating to that purpose, but shall not, by virtue of t his section, 
be entitled to vote.  
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board .—(1) All orders and decisions of the 
Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or the Vice -Chairman, if any, or any other 
member authorised by  the Board in this behalf, and all other instruments issued by the Board shall be 
authenticated by the signature of an officer of the Board authorised in like manner in this behalf.  
(2) Orders, decisions or instruments authenticated in accordance with the provisions of                  
sub-section  (1) shall be evidence  of the matter recorded therein and shall be admissible in evidence  
notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or in any other law for 
the time being in force.  
(3) Any member, officer or other employee of the Board or any other person interested in the library 
shall be entitled to be  furnished, within seven days after he has made a request in that behalf to the library, 
with a copy of the order, decision or instrument authenticated in the manner specified in                       
sub-section  (1), on payment of such fee as may be prescr ibed.  
12. Staff of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Board may, for the purpose 
of enabling it efficiently to perform its functions under this Act, appoint such number of officers and other 
employees as it may think fit.  
  6 
 (2) The recruitment and conditions of service of such officers and employees shall be such as may be 
provided by regulations made under this Act.  
13. Transfer of service of existing employees to Board .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, 
every person employ ed in the library immediatel y before the date of establishment  of the Board shall, on 
and from such date, become an employee of the Board with such designation as the Board may determine 
and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the 
same terms and conditions as  he would have held the same on such date if the Board had not been 
established and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Board is duly terminated or 
until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Board:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such person shall 
not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government.  
14. Location of library .—The library and the collections thereof shall continue to be located at 
Rampur.  
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY,  LIABILITIES AND FUNCTIONS OF BOARD  
15. Properties and liabilities of Board .—(1) On the establishment of the Board — 
(i) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in, or realisable by, the trustees of the library 
constituted by the deed of trust, in their capacity as such, shall vest in, and be realisable by, the Board; 
and 
(ii) all liabilities in relation to the library, which are enforceable against the said trustees, shall be 
enforceable only against the Board.  
(2) All properties, which may, after the establishment of the Board , be given, bequeathed or otherwise 
transferred to the library or acquired by the Board, shall vest in the Board.  
16. Duties of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of the deed of trust, it shall be the general duty of 
the Board to manage the library and to plan, promote, organise and implement programmes for the 
development of the library on modern scientific lines (including provision of adequate faciliti es for 
preservation and photo -duplication of rare manuscripts) and to perform such other functions as the 
Central Government may, from time to time, assign to the Board.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,  the Board may 
take such steps as it thinks fit — 
(a) to provide for instruction and research in matters relating to libraries and for the advancement 
of learning and dissemination of knowledge in such matters;  
(b) to protect, enlarge and improve the collections in the library;  
(c) to promote study and research and to provide facilities to scholars for this purpose;  
(d) to do all such other things as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 
17. Powers of Board .—(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Central Government 
may think fit to impose, the Board may exercise all such powers as may be necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of carrying out its functions and duties under th is Act.  
(2) Subject to such regulations as may be made by the Board in this behalf, the Board may, from time 
to time, purchase or otherwise acquire such manuscripts, books, articles or things as may, in the opinion 
of the Board, be worthy of preservation i n the library.  
  7 
 CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS  
18. Grants by Central Government to Board .—For the purpose of enabling the Board to discharge 
its functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board in each financial year such sums of money as that 
Government considers necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise.  
19. Fund of Board .—(1) The Board shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited— 
(a) all moneys paid to it by the Central Government;  
(b) such sums of money as the State Government may pay annually for specified purposes;  
(c) all fees and other charges levied by it under this Act;  
(d) all moneys received by the Board by way o f grant, gift, donation, benefaction, bequest, 
subscription, contribution or transfer;  
(e) all other money received by the Board in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) The Board may expend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act and 
such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund.  
(3) A sum of money, not exceeding such sum as may be specified by regulations made under this Act, 
shall be kept in current account with any nationalised bank, or any oth er scheduled or other bank 
approved by the Central Government in this behalf, but any moneys in excess of that sum shall be 
deposited in the Reserve Bank of India or  with the agents of the Reserve Bank of India or  invested in such 
manner as may be generally or specially approved by the Central Government.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section,— 
(a) “nationalised bank ” means a corresponding new bank as defined in the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970);  
(b) “scheduled bank ” means a bank included for the time being in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).  
20. Budget .—(1) The Board shall, by such date in each financial year as may be specified by the 
Central Government, submit t o it for approval a budget for the next financial year in the form specifi ed by 
that Government , showing therein the estimated receipts and expenditure, and the sums which would be 
required from the Central Government during that financial year.  
(2) The bu dget for a financial year, as approved by the Central Government for any financial year, 
shall be the budget of the library for that financial year.  
(3) If any sum granted by the Central Government to the library for any financial year remains wholly 
or pa rtly unspent in that financial year, the unspent sum may be carried forward to the next financial year 
and taken into account in determining the sum to be provided for by the Central Government for that year.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), no sum shall be expended by or on behalf of the 
Board, unless the expenditure is covered by provision in the budget proved by the Central Government.  
(5) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Central Government may think fit to impose, the 
Board may sanction any re -appropriation from one head of expenditure to another or from a provision 
made for one purpose to that for another purpose.  
21. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance -sheet in such form as may be 
specified, in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by the Central Gove rnment in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  8 
 (2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India or any officer authorised by him in this behalf, and any expenditure incurred by him in connection 
with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Controller and Auditor -General of India and any person authorised by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the Board s hall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the aud it of 
Government accounts, and, i n particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Board, and 
the library.  
(4) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person authorised by him in  this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall, as soon as may be after the receipt 
thereof, cause the same to be laid before each House Parliament.  
22. Returns and repo rts.—(1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time and 
in such form and in such manner as the Central Government may direct, such returns, statements and 
particulars as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.  
(2) Witho ut prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall, as soon as possible after 
the commencement of each financial year, submit to the Central Government, within such time as may be 
specified by the Central Government, a report giving true gi ving true and full account of the activities of 
the Board during the previous financial year and an account of activities likely to be undertaken during 
the current financial year.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Power of Central Government to issue directions  to Board .—In the discharge of its functions 
under this Act, the Board shall be bound by such directions on question s of policy as the Central 
Government may give to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Board shall be given an opportunity to express its  views before any direction is 
given to it under this sub -section.  
24. Delegation of powers and duties .—The Board may, by general or special order in writing, direct 
that all or any of the powers or duties, which may be exercised or discharged by it, shall , in such 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercised or 
discharged also by any member, officer or employee of the Board specified in this behalf in the order.  
25. Officers and employees of Board to  be public servants .—Every officer or employee of the 
Board shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or 
regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be  a public servant within the meaning of section 21 o f the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1960).  
26. Protection of action taken under the Act .—No suit , prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Board or any member, officer or other employee of the Board for anything which is in good 
faith done or  intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder.  
27. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that when the Board has been established, no such rules shall be made without consulting 
the Board.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the follow ing matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the members 
nominated under clause  (e), clause  (f) or clause  (h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  9 
 (b) the  travelling and other allowances payable to a member other than the Chairman a nd to a 
person associated with the Board under section 10;  
(c)  the disqualifications for membership of the Board and the procedure to the followed in 
removing a member who is or  becomes subject to any disqualification;  
(d) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, contract s may be entered into by or 
on behalf  of the  Board;  
(e) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this sect ion shall be laid as soon as may b e after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the sess ion immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may b e; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
28. Power of Board to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous  approval of the 
Central Government,  1[by notification in the Official Gazette ,] make  regulations, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules  made thereunder, with regard to the discharge of its functions under 
this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without  prejudice to the generality of the fo regoing power, such regulations  may 
provide for all or  any of the following matters , namely :— 
(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to which manuscripts and  books in the library may be 
used;  
(b) the manner in which, and the purposes for which, persons may be associated  with the Board;  
(c) the time and place of  meetings of the Board, the procedure to be followed in regard to the  
transaction of business at such meetings and the quorum nece ssary for the  transaction of business at a 
meeting of the Board;  
(d) the maintenance of minutes  of meetings of the Board and the transmission of copies thereof to 
the Central  Government;  
(e) the recruitment and conditions of service of officers and other  employees of the Board;  
(f) the persons by whom, and  the manner in which, payments, deposits and investments may be 
made on behalf  of the Board;  
(g) the maximum amount that may be kept by the Board in a current  account;  
(h) the maintenance of registers and accounts;  
(i) the compilation of  catalogues and inventories of the manuscripts, books and other articles and  
things in the library;  
(j) the steps to be taken for  the preservation of the manuscripts, books and other articles and 
things in the  library ; 
(k) the general management of the library;  
(l) the fees and other charges to be levied for the use of any  manuscript or book in the library;  
(m) any other matter in  respect of which provisions is, in the opinion of the Board, necessary for 
the performance of i ts functions under this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 52 of 1981, s. 2  (w.e.f. 24 -12-1981).    10 
 (3) The Central Government may,  after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official 
Gazette,  amend, vary or rescind any regulation which it has approved and thereupon the  regulation shall 
have effect as so amended or varied or  be of no effect, as the  case may be, but without prejudice to the 
exercise of the powers of the Board  under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2). 
1[(4) Every  regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately  
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree  in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the  regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only  in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that  
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity  of anything previously done 
under that regulation.]  
29. Act to override other enactments, and instruments .—The provisions o f this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law other than this Act for the 
time being in force or any instrument having effect any virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 52 of 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -12-1981).  
--------------------------The Tobacco Board Act, 1975--------------------------
1 THE TOBACCO BOARD ACT, 1975  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE TOBACCO  BOARD  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Board.  
5. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman.  
6. Officers of the Board and other staff.  
7. Committees of the Board.  
8. Functions of the Board.  
9. Dissolution of the Board.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF PRODUCTION AND DISPOSAL OF VIRGINIA TOBACCO  
10. Registration of growers of virginia tobacco.  
10A. Registration of growers of virginia tobacco seedlings for commercial purposes.  
11. Registration of curers of virginia tobacco.  
11A. Registration of processors and manufacturers of virginia tobacco, etc.  
11B. Licences to be obtained for grading work and construction of barns, etc.  
12. Registration of exporters, packers, auctioneers and dealers.  
13. Virginia tobacco to be sold at registered auction p latforms  
13A. Duty of registered dealers and exporters to purchase at auction platforms, etc.  
13B. Duty or buyers of virginia tobacco at pl aces other than auction platforms to refrain from certain 
unfair practices.  
14. Application, cancellation, fees and o ther matters relating to registration.  
14A. Power to levy fees.  
15. Power of inspection.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
16. Grants and loans by the Central Government.  
17. Constitution of the Tobacco Fund.  
18. Borrowing powers of the Board.  
18A. Wr iting off of losses.  2 SECTIONS  
19. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
20. Power to prohibit or control import and export of tobacco and tobacco products.  
20A. Power of Central Government to authorise purchase of virginia tobacco.  
21. Directions by Central Government.  
22. Returns and reports.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Penalties.  
24. Penalties for obstructing a member, officer or other employee of the Board in the discharge of his 
duties and for failure to produce books and record s. 
25. Other penalties.  
26. Offences by companies.  
27. Jurisdiction of court.  
28. Previous sanction of Central Government.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Suspension of operation of Act.  
31. Application of other laws not barred.  
32. Power  of Central Government to make rules.  
33. Power to make regulations.3 THE TOBACCO BOARD ACT, 1975  
ACT NO. 4 OF 1975  
[19th March , 1975 .] 
An Act to provide for the development under the control of the Union of the tobacco industry.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Tobacco Board           
Act, 1975.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates  may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for different 
States or different parts thereof.  
2. Declaration as to expe diency of control by the Union. —It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the tobacco industry.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Tobacco Bo ard established under section 4;  
(b) “Chairman ” means Chairman of the Board;  
(c) “curing ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Central Excises and Salt Act,                          
1944 (1 of 1944) and all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed 
accordingly;  
(d) “dealer ” means a dealer in tobacco;  
(e) “Executive Director ” means the Executive Director appointed under section 6;  
(f) “export ” and “import ” mean, respectively, taking out of, or bringing into, India, by land, sea or 
air; 
(g) “member ” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairman;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act ; 
(i) “registered ” means, except in the  expression “registered grower”,  registered under Chapter III 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder;  
(j) “registered grower ” means a person who has obtained a certificate of registration under    
section 10 for growing virginia tobacco.  
CHAPTER II  
THE TOBACCO  BOARD  
4. Establishment  and constitution of the Board. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by no tification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the Tobacco Board.  
                                                           
1. 28th August , 197 6, vide notification No. S.O. 3141,  dated 20th A ugust , 197 6, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary,  Part II , 
sec. 3( ii). 
This Act has been extended to the States of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka in respect of ss. 10 and 11 and ss . 12, 14 and 15 
in the whole of India.  4 (2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by  the said name sue and be sued.  
1[(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Guntur in the State of Andhra Pradesh and the Board 
may,  with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices or agencies at oth er places 
in or outside India. ] 
(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) three me mbers of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People and 
one by the Council of States;  
(c) 2[eight ] members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent respectively: — 
(i) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Agriculture;  
(ii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Commerce;  
(iii) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Finance;  
(iv) the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Industrial Development;  
(v) the Indian Council of Agricultural Research ; 
(vi) the Government of Andhra Pradesh; 3*** 
4[(via) the Government of Gujarat; and]  
(vii) the Government of Karnataka;  
(d) two members to be appointed by the Central Government, by rotation in the alphabetical 
order, to represent the Governme nts of tobacco -growing States 5[other than the State s of Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujarat and Ka rnataka];  
(e) not more than 6[ten members]  to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst 
growers of tobacco, dealers and exporters (including packers) of tobacco and tobacco products, 
manufacturers of tobacco products and from amongst persons who, in the opinion of the Central 
Government,  are experts in tobacco marketing or agricultural economics:  
7[Provided that the number of members appointed under this clause from amongst the growers of 
tobacco shall not exceed six.]  
7[(f) the Agricultural Marketing Adviser to the Government of India, D epartment of Rural 
Development, ex officio ; 
(g) the Executive Director, ex officio .] 
7[(4A) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for 
being chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliame nt.] 
(5) The Board shall elect, fr om amongst its members, a Vice -Chairman who shall exercise such of the 
powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be de legated to 
him by the Chairman.  
(6) The term of office of the members and the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1978, s. 2, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “seven” (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  
3. The word “and” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978). 
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “other than the States of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka” ( w.e.f. 30-8-1978).  
6. Subs. by Act 57 of 1985, s. 2, for “eight members” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).   
7. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  5 (7) 1[Any officer]  of the Central Government (not being a member of the Board) as is deputed by the 
Central Government in this behalf, shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Board and take part 
in the proceedings thereof, but shall not have the right to vote.  
(8) The Board may associate with itself , in such manner and for such purposes as may be prescribed, 
any persons whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the provisions of this Act 
and a person so associated shall have the right to ta ke part in the discussions of the Board relevant to the 
purposes for which he has been associated, but shall not have the right to vote.  
(9) No act or proceeding of the Board or any committee appointed by it under section 7 shall be 
invalidated merely by r eason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or such committee; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board or such committee; 
or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board or such committee not affecting the merits of 
the case.  
5. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman. —The Chairman shall be 
entitled to such salary and allowances and such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, 
provident f und and other matters as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central Government.  
6. Officers of the Board and other staff. —(1) The Central Government shall appoint an Executive 
Director to exercise such powers and perform such duties under the Chairman  as may be prescribed or as 
may be de legated to him by the Chairman.  
(2) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board to exercise such powers and 
perform such duties under the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the 
Chairman.  
(3) The Executive Director and the Secretary shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances and 
such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may from time 
to time be fixed by the Central Gove rnment.  
(4) Subject to such control, restrictions and conditions (including conditions as to appointment of the 
officers and other employees of the Tobacco Export Promotion Council, in the event of the said Council 
being wound up) as may be prescribed, the  Board may appoint such other officers and employees as may 
be necessary for the efficien t performance of its functions.  
(5) The Chairman, the Executive Director, the Secretary and other officers and employees of the 
Board shall not undertake any work unco nnected with their duties under this Act except with the 
permission of the Central Government.  
7. Committees of the Board. —(1) The Board may appoint such committees as may be necessary for 
the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functi ons under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall have the power to co -opt as members of any committee appointed under                    
sub-section ( 1) such number of person s who are not members of the Board as it may think fit and the 
persons so co -opted shall ha ve the right to attend the meetings of the committee and take part in the 
proceedings of the committee but sh all not have the right to vote.  
8. Functions of the Board. —(1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote, by such measures as it 
thinks fit, the  development under the control of the Central Government of the tobacco industry.  
(2) Without prejudice to the gener ality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures referred to 
therein may provide for — 
2[(a) regulating the production and curing of virginia tobacco having regard to  the following 
factors, namely: — 
(i) the demand for virginia tobacco in India and abroad;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1985,  s. 2, for “The Executive Director and any such officer” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).   
2. Subs. by s. 3,  ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  6 (ii) the suitability of land for growing virginia tobacco;  
(iii) the differences in  soil characteristics and agro -climatic factors in  different regions of the 
country where virginia tobacco is grown and the effect thereof on the quality and quantity of 
virginia tobacco produced in those regions;  
(iv) the marketability of different types of virginia tobacco;  
(v) the need for rotation of crops; and  
(vi) the nature of the holdings of the growers of virginia t obacco whether owned or leased; ] 
(b) keeping a constant watch on the virginia tobacco market, both in India and abroad, and 
ensuring that the growers get a fair and remunerative price for the same and that there are no wide 
fluctuations in the prices of the commodity;  
(c) maintenance and improvement of existing markets, and development of new markets outside 
India for Indian virginia tobacco and its products and devising of marketing st rategy in consonance 
with demand for the commodity outside India, including group marketing under limited brand names;  
1[(cc) establishment by the Board of auction platforms, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, for the sale of virginia tobacco by registered growers or curers, and functioning of the 
Board as an auctioneer at auction platforms established by or registered with it subject to such 
conditions as may be specified by the Central Government;]  
(d) recommending to Central Governme nt the minimum prices which may be fixed for purposes 
of export of virginia tobacco with a view to avoiding unhealthy competition amongst the exporters;  
(e) regulating in other respects virginia tobacco marketing in India and export of virginia tobacco 
having due regard to the interests of growers, manufacturers and dealers and the nation;  
(f) propagating information useful to the growers, dealers and exporters (including packers) of 
virginia tobacco and manufacturers of virginia tobacco products and others  concerned with virginia 
tobacco and products thereof;  
(g) purchasing virginia tobacco from growers when the same is considered necessary or expedient 
for protecting the interests of the growers and disposal of the same in India or abroad as a nd when 
consi dered appropriate;  
(h) promoting the grading of tobacco at the level of growers;  
(i) sponsoring, assisting, co -ordinating or encouraging scientific, technological and economic 
research for the promotion of tobacco industry;  
(j) such othe r matters as may be  prescribed.  
(3) Without prejudice to the gener ality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and subject to priority 
being given to matters specified in sub -section ( 2), the measures referred to in sub -section ( 1) may also 
provide in relation to tobacco, othe r than virginia tobacco, for all or any of the matters specifie d in  
clauses ( c) to ( g) of sub -section ( 2) and for this purpose any reference in those clauses to virginia tobacco 
shall be construed as including a reference to tobacco other than virginia to bacco.  
(4) The Board shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with and subject to such 
rules as may be made by the Central Government and such rules may in particular make provisions for 
ensuring that the Board functions in close liaison with Union agencies, institutions and authorities 
concerned with the tobacco industry (including growing of tobacco) and avoids duplication of effort.  
9. Dissolution of the Board. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gaze tte and for reasons to be specified therein, direct that the Board shall be dissolved from such date and 
for such period as may be  specified in the notification:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1978, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  7 Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reason able 
opportunity to the Board to make representations against the proposed dissolution and shall consider the 
representations, if any, of the Board.  
(2) When the Board is dissolved under the p rovisions of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all members, notwithstanding that their term of office has not expired, shall, from the date of 
dissolution, vacate  their offices as such members;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as th e Central Government may appoint in this behalf;  
(c) all funds and other properties vested in the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, vest 
in the Central Government; and  
(d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall be reconstituted in accordance 
with th e provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF PRODUCTION AND DISPOSAL OF VIRGINIA TOBACCO  
10. Registration of growers of virginia tobacco. —(1) No person shall grow virginia tobacco except 
under, and in accordance with, the conditions of a certificate of registration obtained from the Board in 
accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
(2) In granting or refusing a certificate of registration, the Board shall have regard to the demand for 
virginia tobacco in Ind ia and abroad, and the suitability of the land in relation to which the certificate is 
applied for and such other factors as may, having regard to the needs of the virginia tobacco industry, be 
prescribed.  
(3) A certificate of registration granted in pursu ance of this section shall be valid for such period as 
may be prescribed.  
(4) Every application for such certificate of registration shall be accompanied by such fees (not 
exceeding one rupee for 0.4 hectare of the land in relation to which such applicatio n has been made) as 
may be prescribed.  
1[10A. Registration of growers of virginia tobacco seedling s for commercial purposes. —(1) No 
person shall grow virginia tobacco seedlings for commercial purposes unless he registers himself as a 
nursery grower with the Board in accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in this sub -section shall 
apply to the growing by a registered grower of any virginia tobacco seedlings for his own use.  
(2) No registered nursery grower shall sell or cause to be sold any virginia tobacco seedlings grown 
by him to any person other than a registered grower.]  
11. Registration  of curers of virginia tobacco. —No person other than a registered curer shall cure 
or undertake the curing of virginia tobacco unless he registers himself as a curer with the Board in 
accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
2[11A. Registration of processors and manufact urers of virginia tobacco, etc. —No person shall 
process virginia  tobacco or manufacture products therefrom unless he registers himself as such processor 
or manufacturer, as the case may be with the Board in accordan ce with the rules made under this Act.  
11B. Licences to be obtained for grading work and construction of barns  etc.—No person 
shall — 
(i) take up grading work relating to virginia toba cco for commercial purposes; or  
(ii) take up the constr uction and operation of a barn,  
unless he obtains a licence from the Board in accordance with the rules made under this Act. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1985, s. 4  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).   8 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) “barn” means a building or structure with a roof of zinc sheets or tiles having flue pipes, 
furnace and tiers used for flue curing of tobacco leaves;  
(ii) “grading work ” means separating tobacco leaves into specific grades on the basis of plant 
position, maturity, colour, body and blemish and in accordance with such specifications as may be 
prescribed.]  
12. Registration of exporters, packers, auctioneers and dealers. —No p erson shall export tobacco 
or any tobacco products or function as a packer, auctioneer of, or dealer in, tobacco unless he registers 
himself with the Board in accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
13. Virginia tobacco to be sold at registered auct ion platforms. —No registered grower or curer 
shall sell or cause to be sold virginia tobacco elsewhere than at an auction platform registered with the 
Board in accordance with  the rules made under this Act 1[or established by the Board under this Act].  
2[13A. Duty of registered dealers and exporters to purchase at auction platforms, etc. —No 
registered dealer or registered exporter shall purchase or cause to be purchased virginia tobacco 
elsewhere — 
(a) than at an auction platform registered with the Board in accordance with the rules made under 
this Act or established by the Board under this Act; or  
(b) than from any other registered dealer or a registered grower or curer:  
Provided that in relation to any State in which the provisions of section 13 are not in force, the 
condition specified under clause ( a) shall not apply.  
13B. Duty o f buyers of virginia tobacco at pl aces other than auction platforms to refrain  from 
certain unfair practices. —Every deale r who purchases virginia tobacco in any State in which the 
provisions of section 13 are not in force, — 
(a) shall pay the full price for the whole quantity of virginia tobacco so purchased by him at the 
rate at which he agreed to purchase such tobacco and s hall refrain from claiming any discount in the 
weight or other deductions in weight thereof or any deductions from the price as calculated in 
accordance with such rate;  
(b) shall pay the full price for virginia tobacco so purchased by him as calculated in accordance 
with the provisions of clause ( a) as expeditiously as possible and in any case within such reasonable 
time as may be specified in this behalf by the Board; and  
(c) shall refrain from having recourse to any practices which the Board may, having r egard to the 
need for protection of persons selling virginia tobacco in such State and all other relevant 
considerations, specify to be unfair practices.]  
14. Application, cancellation, fees and other ma tters relating to registration. —The form of 
application and the form of certificate of registration under secti on 10, the form of application 3[for 
registration of nursery growers for the purposes of section 10A, for registration of curers for the purposes 
of section 11, for registration of processo rs and manufacturers for the purposes of section 11A, for 
obtaining licences for taking up grading work or construction and opera tion of barns under section 11B ], 
for registration of exporters, packers or auctioneers of, or dealers in, tobacco, for the pur poses of               
section 12, and for registration of auction platforms for the purposes of section 13, the time within which 
and the manner in which such applications shall be made, the fees payable on such applications, the 
particulars to be specifi ed therein, the principles and the procedure to be followed in granting and 
cancelling certificates of registration or the registration of auction plat forms or, as the case may be, 4[the 
registration as nursery growers, curers, processors, exporters, packe rs or auctioneers of, or dealers in, 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1978, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 57 of 1985, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-12-1985). 
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “for registration of curers for the purposes of section 11” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1-12-1985).  9 virginia tobacco or as manufacturer s of the products of virginia tobacco or in granting licences under 
section 11B, the returns to be submitted and the registers to be maintained by registered growers, nursery 
growers, curers, processors, exporters, packers or auctioneers of, or dealers in, virginia tobacco or the 
registered manufacturers of the products of virginia tobacco or the persons licensed under section 11B 
and the registers to be kept by the Board shall be such as may be prescribed] . 
1[14A. Power to levy fees. —(1) Where virginia tobacco is sold at any auction platform established by 
the Board under this Act, it shall be competent for the Board or for any officer of the Board authorised by 
it in this behalf to levy fees, for the services rendered by the Board in relation to such sale, at such rate not 
exceeding two per cent. of the value of such tobacco as the Central Government may, from time to time, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(2) The fe es levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be collected by the Board or such officer, equally from 
the seller of the virginia tobacco and the purchaser of such tobacco, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.]  
15. Power of inspection. —The Board may authorise any o f its members, officers or other employees 
to inspect in such manner as may be prescribed any land or premises to verify the accuracy of any 
particulars mentioned in any application or any return referred to in section 14.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
16. Grants and l oans by the Central Government. —The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants or loans such 
sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
17. Constitution of the Tobacco Fund. —(1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Tobacco 
Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) the fees levied and collected under this Ac t or the rules made thereu nder;  
(b) any sums of money paid or any loans granted by the Central Government for the purposes of 
this Act;  
(c) any grants or loans that may be made by any person for the purposes of this Act;  
(d) the sums, if any, realised by the Board in carrying out t he measures referred to in section 8.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 8;  
(b) for meeting the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the officers and other 
employees of the Board;  
(c) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board;  
(d) for repayment of any loans.  
18. Borrowing powers of the Board. —Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the 
Board shall have the power to borrow on the security of the Tobacco Fund  or any other asset for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act.  
2[18A. Writing off of losses. —Subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Central 
Government, where the Board is of opinion that any amount due to, or any loss, whether of money or of  
property, incurred by, the Board is irrecoverable, the Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, sanction the writing off finally of the said amount or loss:  
Provided that no such approval of the Central Government shall be necessar y where such 
irrecoverable amount or loss does not exceed in any individual case and in the aggregate in any year such 
amounts as may be prescribed.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 57 of 1985, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  10 19. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepar e an annual statement of accounts, including the 1[income and expenditure account] and the 
balance -sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Com ptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has  in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Board.  
(4) The accounts of  the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the sam e to be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
20. Power to prohibit or control import and export o f tobacco and tobacco products. —(1) The 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provi sion for prohibiting, 
restricting or otherwise controlling the import or export of tobacco and tobacco products, either generally 
or in specified classes of cases.  
(2) All tobacco and tobacco products to which any order under sub -section ( 1) applies, shall  be 
deemed to be goods of which the import or export has been prohibited under section 11 of the Customs 
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly.  
(3) If any person contravenes any order made under sub -sectio n (1), he shall, without prejudice to   
any confisca tion or penalty to which he may  be liable under the provisions of the Customs Act,           
1962 (52 of 1962), as applied by sub -section ( 2), be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to  one year, or with fine, or with both.  
2[20A. Power of Central Government to authoris e purchase of virginia tobacco. —Without 
prejudice to the provisions of clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 and notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other provi sion of this Act, if the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be 
specified in the order, authorise any body or other agency to purchase  virginia tobacco from the growers 
and dispose of the same in India or abroad.]  
21. Directions by Central Government. —The Board shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administrat ion of this Act.  
22. Returns and reports. —(1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and 
statements and such particulars in regar d to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and 
development of the tobacco industry, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall, as soon as possible , after 
the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and before such 
date, as may be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes during 
the previous financial year.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1985 , s. 9, for “profit and loss account” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).   
2. Ins. by s. 10 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  11 (3) A copy  of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Penalties. —Any person who, being required under this Act to furnish any return , fails to furn ish 
such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false and which he knows to be false 
or does not believe to be true, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees . 
24. Penalties for obstructing a member, off icer or other employee of the Board in the discharge 
of his duties and for failure to produce books and records. —Any person who — 
(a) obstructs any member or any officer or other employee of the Board or any other person in the 
exercise of any power conferr ed, or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on him by or under this 
Act; or  
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails to produce such 
book or record when required to do so by or under this Act,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
25. Other penalties. —Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of 
the provisions of this Act 1[or of any rules or regulations made there under] other than the provisions, 
punishment for the contravention whereof has been provided for in section 20 or section 23 or section 24, 
shall be punishable with imp risonment for a term which may 2[extend to two years,  or with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both] and in the case of a continuing contravention with an 
additional fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues 
after conviction for the fi rst such contravention.  
26. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the bu siness of the company as well as the company shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has bee n 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, sec retary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly . 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company”  means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
27. Jurisdiction of court. —No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of 
the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
28. Previous san ction of Central Government. —No prosecution for any offence punishable under 
this Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 1985, s. 11, for “or of any rules made thereunder” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both”  
(w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).   12 29. Protection  of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government, or the Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the 
Board or such committee, or any officer or other employe e of the Central Government or of the Board or 
any agent of or any other person authorised by the Board, for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
30. Suspension of operation of Act. —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances 
have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act should cease to be 
imposed or if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, the Cen tral Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to a specified extent, for such period as may 
be specified in the notification, the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act, in all or any of the 
territo ries to wh ich this Act extends.  
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has, under sub -section ( 1), been suspended or 
relaxed, such suspension or relaxation may, at any time while this Act remains in force, be removed by 
the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(3) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in  one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued, the 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the previous op eratio n 
of the notification.  
31. Applic ation of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
32. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the powers and functions of the Vice -Chairman of the Board;  
(b) the term of office and other conditions of service of members, the manner of filling vacancies 
among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their  functions by, members;  
(c) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which shall be performed by the Execut ive 
Director and the Secretary;  
(d) the circumstances in which and the authority by  which a member may be removed;  
(e) the holding of a minim um number of me etings of the Board every year;  
(f) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Board for the conduct of business and the 
number of members which shall form a quorum at a meeting;  
(g) the maintenance by the Board of records of busine ss transacted by the Board and the 
submission of copies the reof to the Central Government;  
1[(ga) the specifications with regard to grading w ork referred to in section 11B; ] 
(h) the matters referred to in section 14;  
2[(hh) the manner of collection of fees  under sub -section ( 2) of section 14A;]  
(i) the powers of the Board, its Chairman, the Executive Director and committees of the Board 
with respect to the incurring of expenditure;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1985, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1978, s. 6 (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978 ).  13 (j) the conditions subject to which the Board may incur expenditure outside India;  
1[(ja) the amounts for the purposes of the proviso to section 18A;]  
(k) the preparation of budget estimates of receipts and expenditure of the Board and the authority 
by which the estimates are to be sanctioned;  
(l) the form and manner in which the accounts should be maintained by the Board;  
(m) the deposit of the funds of the Board in banks and the investment of such funds;  
(n) the conditions to be observed by the Board in borrowing money;  
(o) the conditions subject to which, and the manner in which , contracts may be entered into by or 
on behalf of the Board;  
(p) the additional matters in respect of which the Board may undertake measures in the discharge 
of its functions;  
(q) the remuneration and other allowances payable to the person or persons referred to in      
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9;  
(r) the form and manner of, and the particulars to be contained in, any returns or reports to be 
made to the Board unde r this Act;  
(s) the collection of any information or statistics in respect of tobacco or tobacco products;  
(t) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by, or provided for by rules under, this 
Act. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shal l be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
33. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Board may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act 
and the rules made thereunder for enabling it to discharg e its functions under this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the procedure to be followed at meetings of the committees appointed by the Board and the 
number of members which sh all form a quorum at a meeting;  
(b) the delegation to the Chairman, members, Executive Director, Secretary or other officers of 
the B oard, of any of the powers and duties of the Board under this Act;  
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to persons associated under sub -section ( 8) of 
section 4 or co -opted under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(d) the pay and allowances and leave  and other conditions of service of officers (other than those 
appointed by the Central Government) and other employees of the Board;  
(e) the maintenance of the accounts of the Board;  
(f) the maintenance of the registers and other records of the Board and its various committees;  
(g) the appointment by the Board of agents to discharge, on its behalf, any of its functions;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1985, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985).  14 (h) the persons by whom, and the manner in which, payments, deposits and investments may be 
made on behalf of the Board.  
1[(i) the time wi thin which full price for virginia tobacco shall be paid under clause ( b), and the 
unfair practices for the purpose of clause ( c), of section 13B.]  
(3) No regulation made by the Board shall have effect until it has been approved by the Central 
Government and published in the Official Gazette, and the Central Government, in approving a 
regulation, may make any change therein which  appears to it to be necessary.  
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, cancel any regulation wh ich 
it has approved and, thereupon, the regulat ion shall cease to have effect.  
1[(5) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the re gulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without preju dice to the validity of anything previous ly done 
under that regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 1985, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1985) .  
--------------------------The Tobacco Cess Act, 1975--------------------------
1 
 THE TOBACCO CESS ACT, 1975  
ACT NO. 26 OF 1975  
[12th May, 1975 .] 
An Act to provide for the levy and collection, by way of cess, of a duty of excise on virginia  
tobacco and a duty of customs on tobacco, for the development of tobacco industry and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The Tobacco Cess            
Act, 1975.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appo inted for different provisions.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “auction platform ” means an auction platform registered with the Board in accordance with 
the rules made under the Tobacco Board Act, 1975 or established by the Board under Act;]  
3[(b)] “Board ” means the Tobacco Board established under section 4 of the Tobacco Board      
Act, 1975  (4 of 1975) ; 
4[(c)] “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
5*                               *                                 *                                    *                                    * 
(2) All words and expressions used in this Act and not defined, but defined in the Tobacco Board  
Act, 1975  (4 of 1975) , shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Duties of excise on virginia tobacco .—(1) There shall be levied and  collected, by way of a cess 
for the purposes of the Tobacco Board Act, 1975  (4 of 1975) , a duty of excise at the rate of one paisa per 
kilogram on virginia tobacco which is produced in India and sold at  6[an auction platform].  
(2) The duty of excise levie d under sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to any cess or duty leviable on 
virginia tobacco under any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) The duty of excise payable under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any virginia tobacco sold at          
6[an auct ion platform] shall be payable by the seller thereof to the person or authority prescribed in 
respect of such platform.  
(4) The person or authority prescribed in respect of  6[an auction platform] shall collect the duty of 
excise payable on virginia  tobacco sold at such platform and pay the amount so collected to the Central 
Government in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(5) If any duty of excise payable under this section, or if any amount collected under this section by 
way of  such duty, has not been paid to the Central Government within the period prescribed under        
sub-section ( 4), the Central Government may recover such duty or amount in the same manner as an 
arrear of land revenue.  
 4. [Duties of customs on tobacco. ] Omitted by the Cess Laws (Repealing and Amending) Act 2006    
(24 of 2006 ), s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 1-6-2006) . 
                                                           
1. 1st January , 1976 , vide notification No. S .O. 5419 , dated 17th December, 1975 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1978, s. 7 (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  
3. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( b) thereof by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f.  30-8-1978 ). 
4. Clause ( b) re-lettered as clause (c) thereof by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  
5. Clause ( c) omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  
6. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “a registered auction platform” (w.e.f. 30 -8-1978).  2 
 5. Crediting proceeds of duties to Consolidated Fund of India .—The proceeds of the  1[duty of 
excise levied under section 3] shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central 
Government may, if Parliament, by appropriation made by law in this behalf, so provides , pay to the 
Board, from time to time, from out of such proceeds, after deducting the expenses on col lection, such 
sums of money as it may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the Tobacco Board                    
Act, 1975  (4 of 1975) . 
6. Penalty for evasion of duty of excise payable under section 3 .—Whoever wilfully  or 
intentionally evades or attempts to evade the payment of any duty of excise payable by him under    
section 3, or the payment of any amount collected by way of duty under that section shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
7. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who, at the time of offence was committed, was in charge of, and wa s responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this su b-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in s ub-section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or ot her 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose s of this section, — 
(a) “comp any” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
8. Jurisdiction of c ourt.—No c ourt inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of 
the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
9. Previous sanction of Central Government .—No prosecution for any offence punishable under 
this Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Governm ent. 
10. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer or other employee of the Central Government or against 
the Board or any officer or employee of the Boa rd for anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
11. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules  for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the assessment and collection of the duties o f excise levied under section 3  and the functions 
and powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be discharged in connection therewith 
by the Board or any officers or other employees of the Board;  
(b) the persons or authorities who may collect duties of excise under  sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) of 
section 3, the time within which and the manner in which the proceeds of such duties of excise shall 
be paid to the Central Government;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2006, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “duties of excise and customs levied under sections 3 and 4 
respectively” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2006).  3 
 (c) the returns which the persons or authorities referred to in clause ( b) shall furnish to  the Central 
Government and the form and the manner in which and the intervals at which such returns shall be 
furnished;  
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by, or provided for, by rules, under 
this Act.  
(3) In making any rule under  this section, the Central Government may direct that a contravention 
thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continui ng contravention, 
with an additional fine which may extend  to fifty rupees for every day during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such contravention.  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be af ter it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the sessi on or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may b e; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
--------------------------The Tokyo Convention Act, 1975--------------------------
1 
 THE TOKYO CONVENTION ACT, 1975  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1975  
 [8th May, 1975 .] 
An Act to give effect to the Convention on offences and certain other acts committed on board 
aircraft.  
WHEREAS  a Convention on offences and certain other acts committed on board aircraft was on the 
Fourteenth day of September, 1963, signed at Tokyo;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient that India should accede to the said Convention and should make 
provisions for gi ving ef fect theret o; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the R epublic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMIN ARY 
1. Short title , extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Tokyo Convention       
Act, 1975.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
CHAPTER II  
DEFINITIONS  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aircraft” means any aircraft, whether or not reg istered in India, other than — 
(i) a military aircraft ; or 
(ii) an aircraft belonging to, or exclusively employed in the service of, the State;  
(b) “appropriate authority ” means— 
(i) in relation to India, any police office r not below the rank of an Assistant Sub -Inspector o r 
any Immigration Officer, and  
(ii) in relation to any other country, being a Convention country, any officer having functions 
corresponding to the functions in India either of a police officer not below the rank of an 
Assistant Sub -Inspector or of an Immigration Officer;  
(c) “commander ”, in r elation t o an aircraft, means the member  of the crew designated as 
commander of the aircraft by the operator thereof, or failing such a person, the person who is for the 
time being the pilot in command of the aircraft;  
(d) “Convention country ” means a country in which the Tokyo Convention is for the time being 
in force;  
(e) “Indian registered aircraft ” means an aircraft — 
(A) which is for the time being registered in India;  
  
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1976 , vide notification No. S.O. 5426, dated 17 th December, 197 5, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( ii). 2 
 (B) which is not for the time being registered in any country but in t he case of which either 
the operator of the aircraft or each person entitled as owner to any legal or beneficial interest in it 
satisfies the f ollowing requirements, namely: — 
(i) that  he is a person qualified to be owner of a legal or beneficial interest in an aircraft 
registered in India; and  
(ii) that he resides or has his principal place of business in India; or  
(C) Which, for the time being registered in any country other than Indi a, is for the time being 
chartered by demise to a person who, or to persons each of who m, satisfies the requirements 
specified in sub -clause  (B) (i) and ( ii); 
(f) “military aircraft ” means an aircraft of the naval, military or air force of any country and 
includes every aircraft, commanded by a person in naval, military or air force service, detailed for the 
purpose;  
(g) “operator”, in relation to an aircraft at any time, means the  person who at that time has the 
management of the aircraft;  
(h) “pilot in command ”, in relation to an aircraft , means a person who for the time being is in 
charge of the piloting of the aircraft without being under the direction of any other pilot in the air craft 
and responsible for the operation and safety of the aircraft during f light time;  
(i) “Tokyo Convention ” means the Convention on offences and certain other acts committed on 
board aircraft signed at Tokyo on the Fourteenth day of September, 1963;  
(j) any reference to a country or to the territorial limits thereof shall be construed as including a 
reference to the territorial waters, if any, of that country, and any reference to an aircraft in flight shall 
include a reference to an aircraft during any p eriod when it is on the surface of the sea or land but not 
within the territorial limits of any country.  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the period during which an aircraft is in flight shall be deemed to 
include any period from the moment when power is applied for the purpose of the aircraft taking off on a 
flight until the moment when the landing run, if any, at the termination of that flight ends; and for the 
purpose of section 5 the aforesaid period shall also be deemed to include — 
(i) any further per iod from the moment when all external doors, if any, of the aircraft are closed 
following embarkation for a flight until the moment when any such door is opened for 
disembarkation, after that flight;  
(ii) if the aircraft makes a forced landing, any period thereafter until the time — 
(a) in a case where the forced landing takes place in India, when the appropriate authority 
arrives at the place of such forced landing; and  
(b) in any other case, when the appropriate authority takes over the responsibility for the 
aircraft and for the persons and property on board the aircraft.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
3. Application of criminal law to aircraft .—(1) Any act or omission taking place on board an 
Indian registered aircraft while in flight elsewhere than in or over India  which, if taking place in India, 
would constitute an offence under any law in force in Indi a shall constitute that offence:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply to any act or omission which is expressly or impliedly 
authorised by or under a ny law of a country outside India, where the aircraft is in flight.  
(2) No proceedings for an offence under any law in force in India, committed on board an aircraft 
while in flight elsewhere than in or over India (other than an offence under the Aircraft                          
Act, 1934 [22 of 1934 ]) shall be instituted except by or with the consent of the Central Government.  3 
 (3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 2) shall prevent the arrest, or the issue of a warrant for the 
arrest, of any person in respect of any offence, or the remanding in custody or o n bail of any person 
charged with any offence.  
4. Provisions as to Extradition Act .—For the purposes of application of the Extradition               
Act, 1962 (34 of 1962), to crimes committed on board an aircraft in flight, any aircraft registered in a 
Convention country shall, at any time while that aircraft is in flight, be deemed to b e within the 
jurisdiction of that country, whether or not it is for the time being also within the jurisdiction of any other 
country.  
5. Powers of commander of aircraft .—(1) If the commander of an aircraft in flight, wherever the 
aircraft may be, has reaso nable grounds to believe in respect of an y person on board the aircraft — 
(a) that the person in question has done or is about to do any act on the aircraft while it is in flight 
which  jeopardises or may jeopardise — 
(i) the safety of the aircraft or of pers ons or property on board the aircraft; or  
(ii) the good order and discipline on board the aircraft; or  
(b) that the person in question has done on the aircraft while in flight any act which in the opinion 
of the commander is an offence under any law in force in the country in which the aircraft is 
registered, not being a law of a political nature or based on racial or religious discrimination,  
then, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the commander may take with respect to that person 
such reasonable measures, including restraint  of his person, as may be necessary — 
(i) to protect the safety of the aircraft or of persons or property on board the aircraft; or  
(ii) to maintain good order and discipline on board the aircraft; or  
(iii) to enable the commander to disembark or deliver that person in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 5). 
(2) The aircraft commander may require the assistance of other crew members and may request, but 
not require, the assistance of passengers or authorise othe r crew members and passengers, to restrain any 
person whom he is entitled to restrain.  
(3) Any crew member or passenger may also take reasonable preventive measures without any 
authorisation under sub -section (2) when he has reasonable grounds to believe t hat such action is 
immediately necessary to protect the safety of the aircraft, or of persons or property therein.  
(4) Any restraint imposed on any person on board an aircraft under the powers conferred by the 
foregoing provisions of this section shall not  be continued after the time when the aircraft first thereafter 
ceases to be in flight unless before or as soon as is reasonably practicable after that time, the commander 
of the aircraft causes notification of the fact that a person on board the aircraft is under restraint and of the 
reasons therefor to be sent to the appropriate authority of the country in which the aircraft so ceases to be 
in flight, but subject to such notification ma y be continued after that time — 
(a) for any period (including the period of any further flight) between that time and the first 
occasion thereafter on which the commander is able with any requisite consent of the appropriate 
authorities to disembark or deliver the person under restraint in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 5); or 
(b) if the person under restraint agrees to continue his journey under restraint on board that 
aircraft.  
(5) The commander of an aircraft, — 
(a) if, in the case of any person on board the aircraft, he has reasonable grounds — 
(i) to be lieve as mentioned in clause  (a) of sub -section ( 1); and  4 
 (ii) to believe that it is necessary so to do in order to protect the safety of the aircraft or of 
persons or property on board the aircraft or to maintain good order and discipline on board the 
aircraft, 
may disembark that person in any co untry in which that aircraft may  be; and  
(b) if, in the case of any person on board the aircraft, he has reasonable grounds to believe as 
mentioned in clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1), may deliver that person to the appropriate authority.  
(6) The commander of an aircraft — 
(a) if he disembarks any person in pursuance of clause  (a) of sub -section ( 5), in the case of an 
Indian registered aircraft, in any country or, in the case of any other aircraft, in India, shall report the 
fact of, and the reas ons for , that disembarkation to — 
(i) the appropriate authority in the country of disembarkation; and  
(ii) the appropriate diplomatic or consular officer of the country of nationality of that person;  
(b) if he intends to deliver any person in pursuance of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) in India, or in 
the case of an Indian registered aircraft, in any other country which is a Convention country, shall  
before or as soon as reasonably  practicable after landing give notificatio n of his intention and of the 
reason s therefor— 
(i) to the appropriate authority; and  
(ii) in either case, to the appropriate diplomatic or consular officer of the country of 
nationality of that person , 
and any commander of an aircraft who without reasonab le cause fails to comply with the requirements of 
this sub -section shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees.  
6. Jurisdiction .—(1) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that for the purpose of any 
proceedings before a court in India, any court having jurisdiction in respect of piracy committed on the 
high seas shall have jurisdiction in respect of offences and other acts committed on board an aircraft as 
described in this Act wherever that offence o r act is committed.  
(2) For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction, an offence under any law in force in India, committed 
on board an aircraft in flight shall be deemed to have been committed in any place in India where the 
offender may for the time being  be. 
7. Provisions as to evidence in connection with aircraft .—(1) Where in any proceedings before a 
court in India for an offence or other act committed on board an aircraft the testimony of any person is 
required and the court is satisfied that the perso n in question cannot be found in India, there shall be 
admissible in evidence before that court any deposition relating to the subject matter of those proceedings 
previously made on oath by that person outside India which was so made — 
(a) in the presence o f the person charged with the offence; and  
(b) before a judge or a magistrate of a country such as is mentioned in the First Schedule to the 
Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955) or before a consular officer of the Central Government.  
(2) Any such deposition shall be authenticated by the signature of the judge, magistrate or consular 
officer before whom it was made and he shall certify that the person charged with the offence was present 
at the taking of the deposition.  
(3) It shall not be necessary in any pro ceedings to prove the signature or official character of the 
person appearing so to have authenticated any such deposition or to have given such a certificate, and 
such a certificate shall, unless the contrary is proved, be sufficient evidence in any proce edings that the 
person charged with the offence was present at the making of the deposition.  
(4) If a complaint is made to such a consular officer as aforesaid that any offence has been committed 
on an Indian registered aircraft while in flight elsewhere t han in or over India, that officer may enquire 
into the case upon oath.  5 
 (5) In this section — 
(a) the expression “deposition ” includes an affidavit, affirmation or statement made upon        
oath; and  
(b) the expression “oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in the case of persons allowed by 
law to affirm or declare instead of swearing , 
and noting contained in this section shall prejudice the admission as evidence of any deposition which is 
admissible in evidence apart from this section.  
8. Provisions as to documentary evidence .—(1) In any legal proceedings under this Act, a 
document publish ed by the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with Civil Aviation and 
purporting to be the publication known as “Aeronautical Information Publication ” or a publication of the 
series known as “Notam” and “Aeronautical Information Circular ” shall be e vidence of the matters 
appearing from that document.  
(2) Any message or signal transmitted to or received from an aircraft which relates to the position of 
the aircraft will be treated as evidence of certain records and shall apply to any legal proceedings.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Power to apply the provisions of Act with modifications to certain aircraft .—The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the provisions of this Act 
shall apply to an aircraft referred to in sub -clause (B) of clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, subject 
to such modifications as may be specified in the notification.  
10. Contracting parties to Convention .—The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, certify as to who are the contracting parties to the Tokyo Convention and to what extent 
they have availed themselves of the provisions of the Convention, and any such notification by the 
Central Government shall be conclusive evidence of the matters certified therein.  
11. Power to treat certain aircraft to be registered in Convention country .—If the Central 
Government is satisfied that the requirements of Article 18 of the Tokyo Convention have been satisfied 
in relation to any aircraft, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such aircraft shall, for 
the purposes of this Act, be treated as  registered in such Convention country as may be specified in the 
notification.  
 
