--------------------------The Advocates (Amendment) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE ADVO CATES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 107 OF 1976  
[13th September, 1976.]  
An Act further to amend the Advocates Act, 1961.  
BE it enacted by P arliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment)      
Act, 1976.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date1 as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
different provisions of this Act.  
2*                                    *                                    *                                     *                                 * 
11. Transitional provisions. —Every person holding office  as— 
(i) Chairman or Vice -Chairman of the Bar Council of India; or  
(ii) Chairman or Vice -Chairman of any State Bar Council,  
immediately  before the coming into force of section 4 or, as the case may be, section 3 of this Act shall 
cease to hold such office on such commencement.  
 
 
                                                           
1. 15th October , 1976 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 837(E) , dated  8th October , 1976 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
2. Sections 2 to 10 repealed by Act 19 of 1988, s. 2 and the Fi rst Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
--------------------------The Assam Sillimanite Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Refractory Plant) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
  
THE ASSAM SILLIMANITE LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
REFRACTORY PLANT) ACT, 1976                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE REFRACTORY PLANT  
3. Refractory Plant to vest in the Central Government.  
4. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the Refractory Plant in a Government 
company.  
5. General effect of vesting.  
6. Duty to deliver possession of the Refractory Plant and documents relating thereto.  
7. Duty to furnish particulars.  
8. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
 9. Amount to be paid for transfer and vesting of Refractory Plant.  
10. Payment of other amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF REFRACTORY PLANT  
11. Management, etc., of Refractory Plant.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF REFRACTORY PLANT  
12. Employment of employees to continue.  
13. Provident and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
16. Priority of claims in relation to arrears of provident fund, etc.  
17. Priority in relation to other claims.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Proof of claims.  
20. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.  
21. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Penalties.  
23. Offences by companies.  
24. Act to have  overriding effect.  
25. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Government 
company.  
27. Delegation of powers.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Power to remove difficulties.  
30. Declaration as to the policy of the State.  
  3 
 THE ASSAM SILLIMANITE LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER  OF 
REFRACTORY PLANT) ACT , 1976  
ACT NO. 22 OF 1976  
[11th February, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest of the Assam 
Sillimanite Limited in respect of its Refractory Plant and for  matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  it is urgently necessary to augment t he supplies of refractories to meet the essential 
requirements  of the iron and steel industry;  
AND WHEREAS for the said purpose, a licence to set up a refractory plant was granted to the Assam 
Sillimanite Limited under the Industries (Development and Regul ation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS  in pursuance of the licence granted to it, the Assam Sillimanite Limited had imported 
machinery from abroad and commenced the construction of the first stage of its Refractory Plant but the 
project of the said com pany did not proceed beyond the first stage on account of financial and other 
difficulties, and the pilot Refractory Plant, which was constructed by th e said company, has been closed;  
AND WHEREAS  special type of refracto ries, including high alumina re fractories, needed by the iron 
and steel industry may be manufactured at the Refractory Plant of the Assam Sillimanite Limited and 
such manufacture will enable the country to progressively reduce the import of such special type of 
refractories;  
AND WHEREAS  for the purpose of speedily bring ing the Refractory Plant of the  Assam Sillimanite 
Limited into operation, the management of the said Refractory Plant was taken over, for a limited period 
by the Central Government under section 18AA of the Industries (Developm ent and Regulation)          
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS  for the purpose of augmenting the supplies of refractories to meet the essential 
requirements of the iron and steel industry, it is necessary to acquire the right, title and interest of the 
Assam Sillimanite Limited in respect of its Refractory Plant;  
BE it enacted b y Parliament in the Twenty -seventh  Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called The Assam Sillimanite Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Refractory Plant) Act, 1976.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the day on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 14;  
(c) “Company ” means the Assam Sillimanite Limited, be ing a company as defined in the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  and having its registered office at Gauhati in the State of Assam;  
(d) “Refractory Plant ” means the refractory manufacturing plant, owned by the Company, 
situated near Ramgarh in the State of Bihar;  
(e) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in relation to any provision of this Act and different dates may be specified 
in relation to different provisions of this Act;  
(f) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in  the Companies                 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
  4 
 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE REFRACTORY PLANT  
3. Refractory Plant to vest in the Central Government .—On the appointed day, the Refractory 
Plant shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its Refractory Plant shall vest absolutely in, the Central Government.  
4. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the Refractory Plant in a Government 
company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Central Government may, if it is 
satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has co mplied, with such terms and 
conditions as that Government may impose, direct , by an order in writing, that the right, title and interest 
of the Company in relation to the Refractory Plant shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central 
Government, vest  in the Government company either on the date of publication of the direction or on such 
earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in that direction.  
(2) Where an order for vesting of the Refractory Plant i n a Government company is made under    
sub-section ( 1), all the rights and obligations of the Central Government in relation to the Refractory Plant 
shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and obligations, 
respecti vely, of the Government company.  
(3) The Government company shall, in the management and administration of the Refractory Plant, 
act in accordance with such directions, if any, as may be issued by the Central Government in this behalf.  
(4) The Government c ompany may also apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions 
as to the manner in which the management of the Refractory Plant shall be conducted or in relation to any 
matter arising in the course of such management.  
5. General effect of ves ting.—(1) The Refractory Plant shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, 
powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable (not being any mining lease 
held by the Company before the appointed day), cash balances, cash on hand,  reserve funds, investments , 
book debts and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately 
before the appointed day, in the ownership, possession, power or control of the Company, whether within 
or outside India, an d all books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating 
thereto and shall also be deemed to include the liabilities and obligations specified in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8.  
(2) All property as aforesaid which h ave vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust,  obligation, mortgage, charge, li en and from 
all other encumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction , or decree or order of any court  
restricting the use of such property in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or 
any part of such property shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central G overnment and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in or, in relation to, any such property shall give , 
within such time and in such manner as may be pres cribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other i nterest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to cla im, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole  or in part, out of the amount s pecified in relation to such property in 
section 9, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforcea ble against any property 
which has vested in the Central Government or the Government company.  
(5) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
matter specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 8, instit uted or preferred against the Company is pending, 
the same shall not, in so far as it relates to the Refractory Plant, abate, be discontinued, or be, in any way, 
prejudicially affected by reason of transfer of the Refractory Plant or of anything contained in this Act, 5 
 but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the 
Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
6. Duty to deliver possession of the Refracto ry Plant and documents relating thereto .—(1) Every 
person, in whose possession or custody or under whose control the Refractory Plant or any part thereof or 
any machinery, instrument or other movable asset forming part of the Refractory Plant, may be 
immediately before the appoi nted day , shall forthwith deliver possession of the Refractory Plant or such 
part, machinery, instrument or other asset, as the case may be, to the Central Government or the 
Government company or to such person or body of persons as the Central Government or the Government 
company may specify in this behalf.  
(2) Every person who has, on the appointed day, in his possession or under his control any books, 
documents or other papers relating to the Refractory Plant which has vested in the Central Government or  
a Government company under this Act, and which belong to the Company or would have so belonged if 
the Refractory Plant had not vested in the Central Government or the Government company , shall be 
liable to account for the said books, documents and other p apers to the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, and shall deliver them up to the Central Government or the 
Government company or to such person or body of persons as the Central Government or the Government 
compa ny may specif y in this behalf.  
(3) The Central Government may take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for securing possession 
of the Refractory Plant which has vested in it under section 3.  
7. Duty to furnish particulars .—The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government 
may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all the properties and assets 
of the Company as on the appointed day, pertaining to the Refractory Plant which has vested in the 
Central Government under se ction 3, and for this purpose the Central Government or the Government 
company shall afford the Company all reasonable facilities.  
8. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability, other than the liability 
specified in sub -section  (2), of the Company in relation to the Refractory Plant , in respect of any period 
prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and not 
against the Central Government or the Government company.  
(2) Any liability in respect of — 
(a) the amounts advanced to the Company (after the management of the Refractory Plant had 
been taken over by the Central Government) by the Hindustan Steel Limited (a company formed and 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956  [1 of 1956] ), together with interest due thereon;  
(b) wages, salaries and other dues of employees of the Refractory Plant, in respect of any period 
after the management of such plant had been taken o ver by the Central Government,  
shall, on and from the app ointed day, be the liability of the Central Government and shall be discharged 
by that Government or, for and on behalf of that Government, by the Government company, as and when 
repayment of such amount becomes due or as and when such wages, salaries and other dues become due 
and payable.  
(3) For the removal of doubt s, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other section of this Act, no 
liability other than the liability specified in sub -section ( 2) in relation to the Refractory Plant, in 
respect of any  period prior to the appointed day shall be enforceable against the Central Government 
or the Government company, as the case may be;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any c ourt, tribunal or other author ity in relation to the Refractory 
Plant, passed after the appointed day in respect of any matter, claim or dispute in relation to any 
matter, not being a matter referred to in sub -section ( 2), which arose before that date, shall be 
enforceable against the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be;  6 
 (c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for  the contravention, in 
relation  to the Refractory Plant, of any provision of law for the time being in force, shall be 
enforceable against the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
9. Amount to be paid for transfer and vesting of  Refractory Plant .—(1) The Company shall be 
given by the Central Government in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of one 
crore seven lakhs and seventeen thousand rupees for the transfer t o, and vesting in, it, under section 3, of 
the Refractory Plant.  
(2) The amount payable under sub -section ( 1) shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent . 
per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of 
such amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company in relation to 
the Refractory Plant, other than those referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 8, shall be met from the 
amount  referred to in sub -section ( 1), in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the 
Company.  
10. Payment of other amount .—(1) In addition to the amount s specified in section 9, there shall also 
be given to the Company, in cash, by the Central Government an amount computed at the rate of rupees 
two thousand and five hundred per mensem for the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 
Refractory P lant during the period commencing on the 2nd day of November, 1972, and ending on the 
appointed day.  
(2) In addition to the amount referred to in sub -section ( 1), there shall be given by the Central 
Government, in cash, to the Company, simple intere st at t he rate of four per cent.  per annum on the 
amount computed at the rate specified in sub -section ( 1), for the period commencing on the appointed day 
and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is made by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner . 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC. , OF REFRACTORY PLANT  
11. Management, etc., of Refractory Plant .—On the commencement of this Act, the general 
superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the Refractory Plant 
shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government under section 4, vest in the 
Government company specified in such direction, or  
(b) where no such direction has been made, vest in such person or body of persons as may be 
appointed by the Central G overnment in this behalf,  
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the person or body of persons so appointed, as 
the case may be, shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as the Company is 
authorised to exercise and  do in relation to the Refractory Plant.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF REFRACTORY PLANT  
12. Employment of employees to continue .—(1) Every person, who has been, immediately before 
the appointed day, employed by the Company, shall, if employed in connection with the Refractory Plant, 
become , as from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government or the Government company 
in which the Refractory Plant has vested, as the case may be, and shall hold his office or service therein 
by the same tenure , on the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and same rights 
and privileges as to pension and gratuity and other like matters as he woul d have held the same under the 
Company if the Refractory Plant had not vested in the Central Government or the Government company, 7 
 and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Central Government or the 
Government company is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment 
are duly alte red by the Central Government or the Governm ent company, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the s ervices of any empl oyee of the C ompany to the 
Central Government or the Government company shall not entitle such employee to any compensation 
under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by 
any court, tribunal or o ther authority.  
(3) Where, under the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, any person, whose services 
become terminated or whose services become transferred to the Central Government or a Government 
company by reason of the provisions of this Act,  is entitled to arrears of salary or wages or any payment 
for any leave not availed of or other payment, not being payment by way of gratuity or pension, such 
person may, except to the extent such liability has been taken over by the Central Government und er   
sub-section ( 2) of section 8, enforce his claim against the Company but not against the Central 
Government or the Government company.  
13. Provident and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in the Refractory Plant, the 
monies relatable to the employees whose services have become transferred by or under this Act to the 
Central Government or a Government company shall, out of the monies standin g, on the appointed day, to 
the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and vested 
in, the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred, under s ub-section ( 1), to the Central Govern ment or a 
Government company, shall be dealt with by that Government or Government company, as the case may 
be, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) For the purpose of disbursing the amount 
payable to the Company, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such person as it may think fit to be the Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act, and different persons may be  
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise  any powers may exercise those powers in 
the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been conferred on that person directly by this 
Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company, an amount equal to the amount specified in section 9 and shall also pay to the Commissioner 
such amounts as may be payable to the C ompany under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 10.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited b y him to the credit of the said deposit account in the Public Account of India, and thereafter 
the said deposit account shall be operated by the Commissioner.  
(3) Interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in        
sub-section ( 2) shall ensure to the benefit of the Company.  8 
 16. Priority of claims in relation to arrears of provident fund, etc. —(1) Out of the amount paid to 
him under sub -section ( 1) of section 15, the Commissioner shall deduct in the first instance, all sums 
equal to the amount of arrears due to the persons who were in employment of the Company, in connection 
with the Refractory Plant,  on the 1st day of July, 1973, — 
(a) in relation to a provident fund, pension fund or any other fund establis hed for the welfare of 
such persons,  
(b) as wages.  
(2) All sums deducted under sub -section ( 1) shall, in accordance with such rules as may be made 
under this Act, be credited by the Commissioner to the relevant fund or paid by him to the persons to 
whom th e said sums are due and on such credit or payment, the liability of the Company in respect of the 
amount of arrears due as aforesaid shall, to the extent of such credit or payment, stand discharged.  
(3) Every deduction made under sub -section ( 1) shall have  priority over all other debts, whether 
secured or unsecured.  
17. Priority in relation to other claims .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in section 16, e very 
secured debt due from the C ompany shall have priority over all other debt s and shall be paid in 
accordance with the rights and interests of the secured creditors:  
Provided that where the secured debts are due t o different creditors by reason  of the hypothecation of 
different assets to them, such debts shall be repaid in full in accordance with the rights  and interests of 
such creditors, unless the balance of the amount left after meeting the liabilities referred to in section 16 is 
insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid accordingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, there shall be 
paid in priority  to all other unsecured debts, — 
(a) all revenues, taxes, cesses, rates and any other dues payable immediately before the appointed 
day, to the Central Governmen t, State Governments, local authorities and State Electricity Boards in 
relation to the Refractory Plant, as the case may be;  
(b) all amounts due in respect of any compensation or liability for compensation under the 
Workmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923  (8 of 1923) , in respect of the death or disablement of any 
employee of the Company in relation to the Refractory Plant, unless the Company has, under such a 
contract with insurers as is mentioned in section 14 of the said Act, rights capable of being transferred  
to, and vested in , the workmen;  
(c) all sums deducted by the Company from the salary or wages of any employee of the 
Refractory Plant for credit to any provident fund or any other fund established for the welfare of the 
employees but not deposited to the credit of such funds.  
(3) The debts specified in sub -section (2) shall rank equally among themselves and be paid in full, 
unless the balance of the amount left after meeting the liabilities referred to in section 16, and              
sub-section ( 1) of this section, is insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal 
proportions and be paid accordingly.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every  person having a claim against the Company 
in relation to the Refractory Plant shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thir ty days 
from the specified date : 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by suf ficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
19. Proof of claims .—(1) The Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which ever y 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be excluded from the benefit of the deductions or 
disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
  9 
 (2) Not less than fourteen days’  notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of the dai ly newspaper in the English language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the 
regional language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the 
claimants to file the proof of their claims with the Commissioner wi thin the time specified in the 
advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the deductions or disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner sh all, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in  part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making an investigati on under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil c ourt 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect o f the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commissi on for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commis sioner shall be 
deemed to be a civ il court for the purpose of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against  the decision to the principal civil c ourt of  original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction t he Refractory Plant is situated : 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court for the State in  which the Refractory Plant is situated, and such 
appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court.  
20. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—Where, after meeting the claims 
admitted by him of secured creditors, and unsecured creditors having priority under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 17, the total amount of the claims of other unsecured creditors admitted by the Commissioner 
does not exceed the balance of the amount left after meeting the liabilities re ferred to in  section 16, and 
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 17, every admitted claim of such other unsecured creditors, shall rank 
equally among themselves and be paid in full, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the Company; but 
where such amou nt is insufficient to meet in full the total amount of such admitted claims, all such claims 
shall abate in equal proportions and be paid accordingly.  
21. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the  Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed for a period of three years 
from the first day on which the disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any mo ney so transferred may be 
preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if 
such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for 
the refund of the revenue.  
  10 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Penalties .—Any person, wh o,— 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the Refractory Plant, 
wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the Government company, as 
the case may be; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains any property forming part of, the Refractory Plant 
or wil fully  withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the Government company or 
any person or body of persons specified by that Government or the Government company, as the case 
may be, any document relating to such Refractory Plant which may be in h is possession, custody or 
control or fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Government company or any person or 
body of persons specified by that Government or the Government company any assets, books of 
account, registers or other documents in his custody or control , relating to the Refractory Plant; or  
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the Refractory Plant or prefers 
any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe  to be false or grossly 
inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
23. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been c ommitted by a 
company, ev ery person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceed ed against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment , if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act  has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or i s attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Ac t shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or  in any decree or order of any c ourt, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or other employees for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done  under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or 
other employees for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this  Act. 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Government 
company .—(1) Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to the Refractory Plant for any 
service, sale or supply, and in force immediately before  the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry 
of one hundred and eighty days from the appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, 11 
 before the expiry of that period, ratified, in writing, by the Central Government or the Government 
compa ny, and, in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or the Government company may make 
such alteration or modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that a Government company shall not make any alteration or modification in a contract 
without the previous approval of the Central Government:  
Provided further that the Central Government or the Government company shall not omit to ratify a 
contract, and shall not make any alteration or modification in a contract, unless it is satisfied tha t such 
contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of the 
Refractory Plant.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract, and, shall 
not make any alteration  or modification therein, except after giving to the parties to the contract a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and except after recording, in writing, its reasons for refusal to 
ratify the contract or for making any alteration or modification therein . 
27. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that all or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act may also be exercised by any person or 
persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Go vernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters , namely: — 
(a) the manner in which monies in any provident or other fund referred to in section 13 shall be 
dealt with;  
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act s hall be laid, as soon as may be  after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, whi le it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or  in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session im mediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
29. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
30. Declaration as to the policy of the State .—It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect 
to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause ( b) of article 39 of the 
Constitution.  
Explanation. —In this section, “State ” has the same meaning as in article 12 of the Constitution.  
 
--------------------------The Beedi Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE BEEDI WORKERS WELFARE CESS ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1976  
[7th April, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the levy and collection, by way of cess, a duty of excise on  1[manufactured 
beedis].  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Cess Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by  notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Fund ” means the Beedi Workers Welfare Fund formed under section 3 of the Beedi Workers 
Welfare Fund Act, 1976;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
3[(c) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Central Excise s 
and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.]  
4[3. Levy and collection of cess on manufactured beedis .—(1) With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be lev ied and 
collected by way of cess  for the purposes of the Beedi Workers Wel fare Fund Act, 1976 (62 of 1976),  a 
duty of excise on manufactured beedis at such rate which shall  5[not be less than fifty paise or more than 
five rupees]  per thousand manufactured beedis, as the Central Government may, from time to time, fix by 
notificat ion in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to any cess or duty leviable on 
manufactured beedis ( whether spelt as such or as  biris or in any other manner) under any law for the time 
being in force.]  
6[3A. Application of Act 1 of 1944 to cess .—The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt         
Act, 1944  or the rules thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemption from duty, as in force 
from time to time, shall , so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy, collection and refund of, or 
exemption from, cess under this Act, as they apply in relation to the levy, collection and refund of, or 
exemption from, duties of excise in respect of manufactured biris under that Act.]  
4. Crediting of proceeds of duty to the Consolidated Fund of India .—The proceeds of the duty of 
excise levied under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
5. Power to call for information .—The Central Government or any other authority specified by it in 
this behalf may require any person to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and any other 
information as it may think fit.  
6. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecut ion or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any officer or other employee of the Central Government for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1981, s. 2 , for “tobacco issued for the manufacture of beedi” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1982 ). 
2. 15th February , 1977 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 5 5(E), d ated 2nd February , 1977 , see Gazette of  India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(i). 
3. Ins. by Act 47 of 1981, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1982). 
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for section 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1982). 
5. Subs. by Act 24 of 1998, s. 2 , for “not be less than ten paise or more than fifty paise” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1998).  
6. Ins. by Act 47 of 1981, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1982).  2 
 7. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
  1*                                    *                                       *                                 *                                   *  
(b) the furnishing to the Central Government or any other authority specified by it in this behalf 
by any person of such statistical  and any other information as  may be required to be furnished under 
section 5;  
(c) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed , or provided for, by rules under this 
Act. 
(3) Every rule made u nder this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immedi ately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no e ffect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 47 of 1981, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1982).  
--------------------------The Beedi Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE BEEDI WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 62 OF 1976  
[10th April, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the financing of measures to promote the welfare of persons engaged in 
beedi establishments.  
BE it enacted by P arliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Fund Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1, as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different areas in the State and for 
different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Fund ” means the Beedi Workers Welfare Fund formed under section 3;  
(b) a person is said to be engaged in an establishment if he is engaged in that establishment, 
directly or through any agency, whether for wages or not, for doing any work, skilled, unskilled, 
manual or clerical and includes — 
(i) any person who is given raw materials by an employer or a contractor for being made into 
beedi at home, and  
(ii) any person not engaged by an employer or a contractor but working with the permission 
of, or under agreemen t with, the employer or contractor;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) Word s and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Beedi and Cigar 
Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966 (32 of 1966), sha ll have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in that Act in so far as they relate to a person engaged in beedi establishments.  
3. Beedi Workers Welfare Fund .—There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Beedi Workers 
Welfare Fund and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(a) an amount which the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide from and out of the proceeds of cess credited under section 4 of the 
Beedi  Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1976  (62 of 197 6), after deducting the cost of collection as 
determined by the Central Government under this Act;  
(b) any income from investment of the amount credited under the Act referred to in clause ( a) and 
any other moneys received by the Central Government for the  purposes of this Act.  
4. Application of Fund .—(1) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the 
expenditure incurred in connection with measures and facilities which, in the opinion of that Government, 
are necessary or expedient to promote the welfare of persons engaged in beedi esta blishments; and in 
particular — 
(a) to defray the cost of measures for the benefit of  such persons directed towards — 
(i) the improvement of public health and sanitation, the prevention of disease and the 
provision and improvement of medical facilities;  
(ii) the provision and improvement of water supplies and facilities for washing;  
                                                           
1. 15th February , 1977, vide notification No. G.S.R. 5 7(E), dated 2nd February , 1977 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 2 
 (iii) the provision and improvement of educational facilities;  
(iv) the provision and improvement of housing and recreational facilities including standards 
of living, nutrition and  amelioration of social conditions;  
1[(iva) the provision of family welfare, including family planning education and services;]  
(v) the provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and facilities as may be 
prescribed;  
(b) to grant loan or subsidy to a State Government, a local authority or an employer in aid of any 
scheme approved by the Central Government for the purpose connected with the welfare of persons 
engaged in beedi establishments;  
(c) to pay annually grants -in-aid to a State Government,  2[or to a local authority or to an agency 
which satisfies the prescribed criteria (hereinafter referred to a s the agency) or to an employer ] who 
provides to the satisfaction of the Central Government welfare measures and faciliti es of the 
prescribed standard for the benefit of persons engaged in beedi establishments, so, however, that the 
amount payable as grants -in-aid to any such State Government,  3[local authority, agency] or employe r 
shall not exceed — 
(i) the amount spent in providing welfare measures and facilities as determined by the Central 
Government or any person specified by it in this behalf,  or 
(ii) such amount as may be prescribed,  
whichever is less:  
Provided that no grant -in-aid shall be payable in respect of any such welfare measures and 
facilities where the amount spent thereon determined as aforesaid is less than the amount prescribed 
in this behalf;  
(d) to meet the allowances, if any, of the members of the Advisory Committees and the Central 
Advi sory Committee constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively and the salaries and allowances, 
if any, of persons appointed under section 8;  
(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be defrayed from the 
Fund.  
(2) the Central Government shall have power to decide whether any particular expenditure is or is not 
debitable to the Fund, and its decision shall be final.  
5. Advisory Committees .—(1) The Central Government may constitute as many Advisory 
Committees as it thinks fit, but not exceeding one for each of the principal beedi producing States, to 
advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be 
referred to it by that Government, including matters relating to the application of the Fund.  
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may be appointed to it by 
the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that each Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members representing 
Government, the employers and persons engaged in beedi establishments and that at least one member of 
such Committee shall be a wo man.  
(3) The Chairman of each Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all members of every 
Advisory Committee.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1987, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “or a local authority or to an employer” (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “ local authority” (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).  3 
 6. Central Advisory Committee .—(1) The Central Government may constitute a Central Advisory 
Committee to co -ordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to advise 
the Central Government on any matter arising out of the administration of this Act.  
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may , be appointed to 
it by the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members 
representing the Government , the employers and persons engaged in beedi establishments and that at least 
one member of such Committee shall be a woman.  
(3) The Chairman of the Central Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Governme nt. 
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all members of the 
Central Advisory Committee.  
7. Power to co -opt.—(1) An Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may , at any 
time and for such period as i t thinks fit, co -opt any person  or persons to the Advisory Committee.  
(2) A person co -opted under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise all the powers and functions of a member 
under this Act but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(3) The Advisory Committee or the Cent ral Advisory Committee may, if it considers it necessary or 
expedient so to do, invite any person to attend its meeting and when such person attend s any meeting, he 
shall not be entitled to vote thereat.  
8. Appointment of welfare Commissioners, etc., and their powers .—(1) The Central Government 
may appoint as many Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Administrators, Inspectors and such other officers 
and staff as it thinks necessary for the purposes of this Act and the Beedi Workers Welfare Cess           
Act, 1 976 (56 of 1976).  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct a Welfare Commissioner to 
appoint such staff as is considered necessary for the purposes of this Act and the Beedi Workers Welfare 
Cess Act, 1976 (62 of 1976).  
(3) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 188 0). 
(4) Any Welfare Commissioner, welfare Administrator or Inspector may ,— 
(a) with such assistance, if any as he  may think fit, enter at any reasonable time, any place which 
he considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act;  
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the prop er discharge of his duties; and  
(c) exercise such other powe rs as may be prescribed.  
9. Power of Central Government to exempt .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if 
the Central Government is satisfied that there is in f orce in any State or part there of a law making 
adequate provision for the financing of activities to promote the welfare of persons engaged in beedi 
establishments, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the provisions of 
this Act shall not apply or s hall apply to Such state or part thereof subject to such exemptions and 
modifications as may be specified in the notification.  
10. Annual report of activities financed under the Act .—The Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be, after the end of each financ ial year, cause to be published  in the Official Gazette, a report giving 
an account of its activities financed under this Act during the previous financial year together with a 
statement of accounts.  
11. Power to call for information .—The Central Gov ernment may require a State Government or a 
local authority  1[or the agency] or an employer to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and 
other information in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1987, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).  4 
 12. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provision of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which the Fund may be applied for the measures and facilities specified in   
sub-section  (1) of section 4; 
(b) the condition s governing the grant of loan or subsidy under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(c) the conditions governing grant -in-aid under clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(d) the standard of welfare measures and facilities to be provided under clause ( c) of                
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(e) the determination of the amounts referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 4 and the proviso to that clause;  
(f) the composition of the Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory Committee constituted 
under sections 5 and 6 respectively, the manner in which the member s thereof shall be chosen, the 
term of office of such members , the allowances, if any, payable to them , and the manner in which the 
Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory Committ ee shall conduct their busin ess; 
(g) the recruitment , conditions of service and the duties of all persons appointed under section 8;  
(h) the power that may be exercised by a Welfare Commissioner, a Welfare Administrator or an 
Inspector under section 8;  
(i) the furnishing to the Centr al Government by a State Government or a local authority  1[or the 
agency]  or an employer of such statistical and other information as may be required to be furnished 
under section 11;  
(j) the forms in which and the period within which statistical and other  information are to be 
furnished under clause (i); 
1[(ja) the form in which an identity card is to be issued by an employer to a person engaged in a 
beedi establishment;]  
(k) any  other matter which has to be or may be prescribed, or provided for, by rules under this 
Act. 
2[(3) In making any rule under sub -section ( 2), the Central Governme nt may direct that a breach of — 
(a) any rule made under clause ( i) or clause ( j) thereof, shal l be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees;  
(b) any rule made under clause (ja) thereof, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees.]  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the sess ion or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may b e; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1987, s. 7 (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).  
--------------------------The Betwa River Board Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE BETWA RIVER BOARD ACT, 1976  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union . 
3. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BOARD  
4. Establishment and incorporation of the Betwa River Board . 
5. Executive Committee.   
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board or the Executive Committee . 
7. Chief Engineer and Financial Adviser . 
8. Other officers and employees of the Board . 
9. Advisory Committees . 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE BOARD  
10. Functions of the Board . 
11. Conditions subject to which the Board may exercise its functions . 
12. Powers of the Board.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
13. Betwa River Board Fund.  
14. Budget . 
15. Annual report . 
16. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Directions by Central Government . 
18. Disputes between the Board and the State Governments . 
19. Power to enter.  
20. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants . 
21. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
22. Power to make rules.  
23. Power to make regulations . 
24. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 THE BETWA RIVER BOARD ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 63 OF 1976  
[10th April , 1976.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Board for the creation of a reservoir at Rajghat by 
construction, on behalf of the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, of a dam 
on the Betwa river at Rajghat and for th e regulation of such reservoir.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the B etwa River Board Act, 1976.  
(2) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union. —It is hereby declared that it is ex pedient 
in the public interest that the Central Government should take under its control the regulation and 
development of the inter -State Betwa River and River Valley to the extent hereinafter provided.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context othe rwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Betwa River Board established under section 4;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Board;  
(c) “Executive Committee ” means the Executive Committee constituted under section 5;  
(d) “member ” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairman;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under section 22;  
(f) “Rajghat Dam ” means the  Dam described in the Schedule;  
(g) 2[“Rani Laxmibai Sagar ”] means the reservoir created by the construction of the Rajghat 
Dam;  
(h) “regulations ” means regulations made  by the Board under section 23;  
(i) “rules ” means rules made by the Central Government under section 22.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BOARD  
4. Establishment and incorpor ation of the Betwa River Board. —(1) With effect from such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the Betwa R iver Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract  and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Union Minister in charge of Irrigation shall be the Chairman of the Board and the other 
members of the Board shall be the following, namely: — 
3[(a) where the same Union Minister is not in charge of both Irrigation and Power, the Union 
Minister in charge of Power or such Minister or Deputy Minister in the Union Ministry or 
Department in charge of Power as may be specified in this behalf by the Uni on Minister in charge of 
Power;  
                                                           
1. 25th October , 1976, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1518 (E), dated 14th October , 1976, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,   
     Part II, sec. 3( i).     
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1993, s. 2, for “Rajghat Reservoir” (w.e.f. 27 -8-1993).  
3. Subs. by Act 47 of 1977, s. 2, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 26 -12-1977).  3 (b) the Chief Ministers of M adhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh; and  
(c) the Ministers of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh in charge of Finance, Irrigation and 
Power :] 
Provided that when a proclamation made under article 356 of the Constitution is in force in relation to 
the State of Madhya Pradesh or Uttar Pradesh, the Central Government may appoint three persons to 
represent such State on the Board and the persons so a ppointed shall vacate their offices upon the 
revocation or cesser of operation of such proclamation.  
(4) The Board may permit any officer of the Central Government or the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh or Uttar Pradesh to attend any of its meetings and take part in the proceedings but such officer 
shall not be entitled to vote.  
(5) The Board may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined 
by regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with  any of the 
provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the 
Board relevant to the purpose for which he has been associated, but shall not be entitled to vote.  
5. Executive Committee. —(1) The Cen tral Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute an Executive Committee consisting of officers of that Government and officers of the 
Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.  
(2) The composition of the Executive Committee sh all be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that — 
(a) an officer of the Central Government shall be the Chairman of the Committee;  
(b) the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh shall have equal representation.  
(3) Subject to the general superinten dence and control of the Board, the management of the affairs of 
the Board shall vest in the Executive Committee and the Chairman and other members of the Committee 
shall assist the Board in such m anner as the Board may require.  
(4) Subject to the rules, a nd to the directions of the Board, the Executive Committee may exercise any 
power and do any act or thing which may be exercised or done by the Board.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by the Executive Committee and all other matters relating to the 
Executive Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.  
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Bo ard or the Executive Committee. —No 
act or proceeding of the Board or the Executive Committee sha ll be invalidated by reason of — 
(a) any vacan cy in the Board or the Executive Committee;  
(b) any defect in the composition of, or in any appointment to, the Bo ard or the Executive 
Committee;  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board or the Executive Committee not affecting the 
merits of the case.  
7. Chief Engineer and Financial Adviser. —(1) The Central Government may, after consultation 
with th e Governments of Madhya Pradesh  and Uttar Pradesh, appoint an Engineer (to be the Chief 
Engineer of the Board and to be known as the Chief Engineer, Rajghat Dam Project), and a Financial 
Adviser, and a Secretary, to the Board from amongst the officers of the Government s of Ma dhya Pradesh 
and Uttar Pradesh:  
Provided that the Central Government shall, so far as practicable, ensure that officers from the same 
State do not hold the posts of Chief Engineer and Secretary at the same time:  4 1[Provided further that the Central Government may, with the concurrence of the Governments of 
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, appoint an officer of the Central Govern ment  as the Financial 
Adviser].  
(2) Subject to the general superintendence and control of the Board and the Executive Committee, the 
Chief Engineer of the Board appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Board a nd shall exercise and discharge — 
(a) such powers and duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Board;  
(b) such other powers and duties as ma y be determined by regulations.  
(3) The Financial Adviser appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be the  Chief Accounts Officer of the 
Board.  
(4) The terms and conditions of service of the Chief Engineer of the Board, and of the Financial 
Adviser, and the Secretary, to the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
8. Other offic ers and employees of the Board .—(1) Subject to the rules, the Board may appoint 
such officers and employees as it may deem necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions:  
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, utilise the services of the officers and employees 
offered by the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh in such a manner that equal 
representat ion is given to the two States.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Board shall be such as 
may be determined by regulations.  
9. Advisory Committees. —Subject to the rules, the Board may from time to time, constitute one or 
more Advisory Committees to assist the Board and the Executive Committee in the efficient discharge of 
their functions.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE BOARD  
10. Functions of the Board. —Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the Board 
may, if satisfied that the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh have complied with or 
arranged to comply with the conditions spe cified in section 11, — 
(a) carry out surveys and investigations in the Betwa Inter -State river valley and prepare a 
comprehensive project report for the construction of Rajghat Dam and appurten ant works 2[and for 
the generation of power at Rajghat  Dam, including the construction of a power house (hereinafter 
referred to as the Rajghat Power House) near the dam and appurtenant works] and finalise the same 
after consulting the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh and taking into account th e 
suggestions if any made by those Governments;  
(b) prepare detailed reports and estimates in respect of the Project and allocate the cost among the 
Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh;  
(c) draw up standards and specifications for implementatio n of the project and for the 
maintenance thereof;  
(d) construct the Rajghat Dam 2[and the Rajghat Power House] and the common carrier from the 
dam to irrigate areas in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh;  
(e) lay down rules of operation  and management of Rajg hat Dam;  
(f) perform any other function which is supplemental, incidental, or consequential to all or any of 
the functions s pecified in clauses ( a) to ( e). 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -12-1977)  5 11. Conditions subject to which the Board may exercise its functions. —(1) The exercise by the 
Board of the functions specified in section 10 shall be subject to the following conditions, namel y:— 
(i) that the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh shall at all times make, to the 
satisfaction of the Board, suitable provisions as to the moneys, la nd facilities and electrical power for 
construction and all other things required by the Boa rd; 
(ii) that the liability for the entire expenditure on the 1[Rajghat Dam and Rajghat Power House 
including appurtenant works and on the generation of power at Ra jghat Dam] and all other 
expenditure incurred by the Board in the discharge of its functions shall be shared by the 
Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh in such proportion as may be specified by the 
Board:  
Provided that the Board may specify dif ferent proportions for different works or matters having 
regard to the benefits which may accrue to the States and other relevant factors;  
(iii) that the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh shall extend full co -operation to 
the Board and shall in particular make available to the Board the land and electric power required by 
it for construction purposes as expeditiously as possible.  
(2) For the purposes of clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), the expenditure on the Rajghat  Dam shall 
include the expenditure incurred by the Government of Uttar Pradesh on the Rajghat Dam Project before 
the establishment of the Board and the Board shall determine the amount of expenditure so incurred by 
the Government of Uttar Pradesh and the e xtent to which it shall be reimbursed by the Government of 
Madhya Pradesh.  
12. Powers of the Board. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, the Board shall 
have the power to do anything which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out its 
functions under this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such power shall include the 
powers— 
(a) to acquire, hold and dispose of such properties both movable and immovable as the Board 
deems necessa ry; 
(b) to publish statistics or other information relating to the various aspects of flood control and 
drainage in the Betwa River Valley 2[, the regulation of 3[Rani Laxmibai Sagar ] and the generation of 
power at Rajghat Dam] ; 
(c) to require the Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh to furnish such information 
as the Board may require in the discharge of its functions.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
13. Betwa River Board Fund. —(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to  be called the Betwa River 
Board Fund and there shall be credited thereto the sums paid to the Board by the Governments of Madhya 
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh and all other sums received by the Board.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for  meeting the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the officers and other 
employees of the Board and other administrative expenses of the Board;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1977, s. 5, for “Rajghat Dam including appurtenantworks” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “and the regulation of Rajghat Reservoir” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1977).  
3. Subs. by Act 49 of 1993, s. 3, for “Rajghat Reservoir” (w.e.f. 27 -8-1993).  6 (b) for meeting the expenditure on surveys and investigations undertaken by the Board;  
(c) for meeting  the cost of construction of the 1[Rajghat Dam, the Rajghat Power House and 
appurtenant works];  
(d) for meeting the other expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
14. Budget. —The Board shall prepare in such form and at such t ime each year as may be prescribed 
its budget for the next financial year showing the estimated expenditure, the amount of expenditure which 
the State Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh have undertaken to provide for and forward 
the same to th e Central Government and the said State Governments.  
15. Annual report. —(1) The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time each year as may be 
prescribed its annual report giving a full account of its activities during the previous year and forward 
copies thereof to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
(2) The Board shall forward copies of its annual reports to the Governments of Madhya Pradesh and 
Uttar Pradesh.  
16. Account s and audit.—The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner 
as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Di rections by Central Government. —In the discharge of its functions, the Board shall be 
guided by such directions and instructions on questions of policy as may be given to it by the Central 
Government.  
18. Disputes between the Board and the State Governments. —If any dispute arises between t he 
Board and the Government of Madhya Pradesh or Uttar Pradesh or both regarding any matter covered by 
this Act or touching or arising out of it, it shall be referred to the Central Government and the decision of 
the Central Government shall be final and b inding on the Board and the said Governments.  
19. Power to enter. —Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any officer of the Board generally or 
specially authorised by the Board in this behalf may, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or 
premises  and there do such things as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of lawfully carrying 
out any works or of making any surveys, examination or investigation, preliminary or incidental to the 
exercise of any power or the performance of any function by  the Board under  this Act:  
Provided that no person shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed court or garden attached to 
a dwelling house, unless with the consent of the occupier thereof, without previously giving such occupier 
at least seven days' notice in writin g of his intention to do so.  
20. Members, officers and employees of t he Board to be public servants. —All members of the 
Board and the Executive Committee and all officers and employees of the Board shall be deemed, when 
acting or purp orting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act to be public servants within 
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the Central Government or the Government of Madhya Pradesh  or Uttar Pradesh or any 
member  of the Board or the Executive Committee or any officer or employee of the Board for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done unde r this Act or the rules or regulations.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Board for any damage caused or likely to 
be caused by anything in good faith done or purported to be done under this Act or the rules or 
regulations and, i n particular, it shall not be the responsibility of the Board to provide for relief measures 
necessitated by floods or by breaches and failure of works.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1977, s. 7, for “Rajghat Dam and appurtenant works” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1977).  7 22. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the composition of, and the procedure to be foll owed, by the Executive Committee and all 
other matters relating to the Executive Committee , under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 5) of section 5;  
(b) the powers and duties which may be exercised or discharged by the Chief Engineer of the 
Board, under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 7;  
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the Chief Engineer of, and the Financial Adviser and 
the Secretary to, the Board, under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(d) appointment  of officers and employees of the Board, under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(e) the form in which and the time at which the budget and annual report of the Board shall be 
prepared, under section 14, and  sub-section ( 1) of section 15;  
(f) the manner in whi ch the accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited, under section 
16; 
(g) the form and manner in which disputes may be referred under section 18 to the Central 
Government and the procedure to be followed by the Central Government for the settleme nt of such 
disputes.  
23. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and 
the rules, for enabling it to discharg e its functions under this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which and the purposes for which the Board may associate with  itself any 
persons, under sub -section ( 5) of section 4;  
(b) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be discharged by the Chief 
Engineer of the Board, under sub -section ( 2) (b) of section 7;  
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the  officers (other than the Chief Engineer of the Board, 
Financial Adviser and Secretary to the Board) and other employees of the Board, under sub -section 
(2) of section 8.  
24. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every regulati on made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive session s and if, before t he expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, as 
the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be, s hould not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of  
anything previously  done un der that rule or regulation.  8 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( f)] 
DESCRIPTION OF RAJGHAT  DAM 
The Dam is to be built across the Betwa river about one furlong upstream of Lalitpur Chanderi 
Causeway at Rajghat on the river Betwa, District Lalitpur  of Uttar Pradesh. The Dam will comprise a 
masonry section in the river bed and earthen flanks on both sides. It will also include the earth dam to be 
constructed in the saddles on either side for creating a reservoir.  
--------------------------The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act to have overriding effect.  
CHAPTER II  
ABOLITION OF BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM  
4. Abolition of bonded labour system.  
5. Agreement, custom, etc., to be void.  
CHAPTER III  
EXTINGUISHMENT OF LIABILITY TO REPAY BONDED DEBT  
6. Liability to repay bonded debt to stand extinguished.  
7. Property of bonded labourer to be freed from mortgage, etc.  
8. Freed bonded labourer not to be evicted from homestead, etc.  
9. Creditor not to accept payment against extinguished debt.  
CHAPTER IV  
IMPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES  
10. Authorit ies who may be specified for implementing the provisions of this Act.  
11. Duty of District Magistrate and other officers to ensure credit.  
12. Duty of District Magistrate and officers authorised by him.  
CHAPTER V  
VIGILANCE  COMMITTEES  
13. Vigilance Committe es. 
14. Functions of Vigilance Committees.  
15. Burden of proof.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PROCEDURE FOR TRIAL  
16. Punishment for enforcement of bonded labour.  
17. Punishment for advancement of bonded debt.  
18. Punishment for extracting bonded labour under the bonded labour system.  
19. Punishment for omission or failure to restore possession o f property to bonded labourers.  
20. Abetment to be an offence.  
21. Offences to be tried by Executive Magistrates.  
22. Cognizance of offences.  
23. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
25. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
26. Power to make rules.  
27. Repeal and saving.  2 THE BONDED LABO UR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1976  
[9th February , 1976.]  
An Act to provide for the abolition of bonded labour system with a view to preventing the 
economic and physical exploitation of the weaker sections of the people and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Bonded Labour System 
(Abolition) Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 25th day of October, 1975.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “advance”  means an advance, whether in cash or in kind, or partly in cash or partly in kind, 
made by one person (hereinafter referred to as the creditor) to another person (hereinafter referred to 
as the debtor);  
(b) “agreement ” means an agreement (whether written or oral, or partly written and partly oral) 
between a debtor and cre ditor, and includes an agreement providing for forced labour, the existence 
of which is presumed under any social custom prevailing in  the concerned locality.  
Explanation .—The existence of  an agreement between the debtor and creditor is ordinarily 
presumed, under the social custom, in relation to the following f orms of forced labour, namely: — 
Adiyamar, Baramasia, Basahya, Bethu, Bhagela, Cherumar, Garru -Galu, Hali, Hari, Harwai, 
Holya, Jana, Jeetha, Kamiya, Khundit -Mundit, Kuthia, Lakhari, Munjhi, Mat, Munish system, 
Nit-Majoor, Paleru, Padiyal, Pannayilal, Sagri, Sanji,Sanjawa t, Sewak, Sewakia, Seri, Vetti;  
(c) “ascendant ” or “ descendant ”, in relation to a person belonging to a matriarc hal society, means 
the person who corresponds to such expression in accordance with the law of succe ssion in force in 
such society;  
(d) “bonded debt ” means an advance obtained, or presumed to have been obtained, by a bonded 
labourer under, or in pursuance of, the bonded labour system;  
(e) “bonded labour ” means any labour or service rendered under the bonded labour system;  
(f) “bonded labourer ” means a labourer who incurs, or has, or is presumed to have, incurred, a 
bonded debt;  
(g) “bonded labour system”  means the system of forced, or partly forced, labour under which a 
debtor enters, or has, or is presumed to have, entered, into an agreement with t he creditor to the effect 
that,— 
(i) in consideration of an advance obtained by him or by any of his lineal ascendants or 
descendants (whether or not such advance is evidenced by any document) and in consideration of 
the interest, if any, due on such advance, or  
(ii) in pursuance of any customary or social obligation, or  
(iii) in pursuance of an obligation devol ving on him by succession, or  
(iv) for any economic consideration received by him or by any of his lineal ascendants or 
descendants, or  3 (v) by reason of his birth in any particular caste or community,  
he would— 
(1) render, by himself or through any member of his family, or any person dependent on him, 
labour or service to the creditor, or for the benefit of the creditor, for a specified period or for an 
unspecified period, either without wages or for nominal wages, or  
(2) forfeit the freedom of employment o r other means of livelihood for a specified period o r 
for an unspecified period, or  
(3) forfeit the right to move freely throug hout the territory of India, or  
(4) forfeit the right to appropriate or sell at market value any of his property or product of hi s 
labour or the labour of a member of his family or any person dependent on him,  
and includes the system of forced, or partly forced, labour under which a surety for a debtor enters, or 
has, or is presumed to have, entered, into an agreement with the creditor to the effect that in the event 
of the failure of the debtor to repay the deb t, he would render the bonded labour on behalf of the 
debtor . 
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any system of forced, or partly 
forced labour under which any workman being contract labour as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (37 of 1970), or an inter -State 
migrant workman as defined in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Inter -State Migrant 
Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Co nditions of Service) Act, 1979 (30 of 1979), is required to 
render labour or service in circumstances of the natu re mentioned in sub -clause ( 1) of this clause or is 
subjected to all or any of the disabilities referred to in sub -clauses ( 2) to ( 4), is “bonded labour system ” 
within the meaning of this clause ;] 
(h) “family ”, in relation to a person, includes the ascendant and descendant of such person;  
(i) “nominal wages ”, in relation to any labour, m eans a wage which is less than, — 
(a) the minimum wages fixed by the Government, in relation to the same or similar labour, 
under any law for the time being in force, and  
(b) where no such minimum wage has been fixed in relation to any form of labour, the wages 
that are normally paid,  for the same or similar la bour, to the labourers working in the same 
locality;  
3. Act to have overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act, or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ABOLITION OF BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM  
4. Abo lition of bonded labour system. —(1) On the commencement of this Act, the bonded labour 
system shall stand abolished and every bonded labourer shall, on such commencement, stand freed and 
discharged from any obligati on to render any bonded labour.  
(2) After the commenceme nt of this Act, no person shall — 
(a) make any advance under, or in pursuance of, the bonded labour system, or  
(b) compel any person to  render any bonded labour or other form of forced labour . 
                                                           
1. Explanation  added by Act 73 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -12-1985).  4 5. Agreement, custom, etc., to be void. —On the commencement of this Act, any custom or tradition 
or any contract, agreement or other instrument (whether entered into or executed before or after the 
commencement of this Act), by virtue of which any person, or any member of the family or dependant of 
such person, is required to do any work or render any service as a bonded labourer, shall be void and 
inoperative.  
CHAPTER III  
EXTINGUISHMENT OF LIABILITY  TO REPAY BONDED DEBT  
6. Liability to repay bon ded debt to stand extinguished. —(1) On the commencement of this Act, 
every obligation of a bonded labourer to repay any bonded debt, or such part of any bonded debt as 
remains unsatisfied immediately before such commencement, shall be deemed to have been extinguished.  
(2) After the commencement of this Act, no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court or 
before any other authority for the recovery of any bonded debt or any part thereof.  
(3) Every decree or order for the recovery of bonded debt, passed before the commencement of this 
Act and not fully satisfied before such commencement, shall be deemed, on such commencement, to have 
been fully satisfied.  
(4) Every attachment made before the commence ment of this Act, for the recovery of any bonded 
debt, shall, on such commencement, stand vacated; and, where, in pursuance of such attachment, any 
movable property of the bonded labourer was seized and removed from his custody and kept in the 
custody of a ny court or other authority pending sale thereof, such movable property shall be restored, as 
soon as may be practicable after such commencement, to the possession of the bonded labourer.  
(5) Where, before the commencement of this Act, possession of any pr operty belonging to a bonded 
labourer or a member of his family or other dependant was forcibly taken over by any creditor for the 
recovery of any bonded debt, such property shall be restored, as soon as may be practicable after such 
commencement, to the p ossession of the person from whom it was seized.  
(6) If restoration of the possession of any property referred to in sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) is 
not made within thirty days from the commencement of this Act, the aggrieved person may, within such 
time as may be prescribed, apply to the prescribed authority for the restoration of the possession of such 
property and the prescribed authority may, after giving the creditor a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard, direct the creditor to restore to the a pplicant the possession of the concerned property within such 
time as may be specifi ed in the order.  
(7) An order made by any prescribed authority, under sub -section ( 6), shall be deemed to be an order 
made by a civil court and may be executed by the court  of the lowest pecuniary jurisdiction within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction the creditor voluntarily resides or carries on busines s or personally 
works for gain.  
(8) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, where any attached property was sold 
before the commencement of this Act, in execution of a decree or order for the recovery of a bonded debt, 
such sale shall not be affected by any provision of this Act:  
Provided that the bonded labourer, or an agent authorised by him in th is behalf, may, at any time 
within five years from such commencement, apply to have the sale set aside on his depositing in court, for 
payment to the decree -holder, the a mount specified in the proclama tion of sale, for the recovery of which 
the sale was or dered, less any amount, as well as mesne profits, which may, since the date of such 
proclamation of sale, have been received by the decree -holder.  
(9) Where any suit or proceeding, for the enforcement of any obligation under the bonded labour 
system, inclu ding a suit or proceeding for the recovery of any advance made to a bonded labourer, is 
pending at the commencement of this Act, such suit or other proceeding shall, on such commencement, 
stand dismissed.  
(10) On the commencement of this Act, every bonded labourer who has been detained in civil prison, 
whether before or after judgment, shall be released from detention forthwith.  5 7. Property of bonded labourer t o be freed from mortgage, etc. —(1) All property vested in a 
bonded labourer which was, immediately  before the commencement of this Act under any mortgage, 
charge, lien or other incumbrances in connection with any bonded debt shall, in so far as it is relatable to 
the bonded debt, stand freed and discharged from such mortgage, charge, lien or other incu mbrances, and 
where any such property was, immediately before the commmencement of this Act, in the possession of 
the mortgagee or the holder of the charge, lien or incumbrance, such property shall (except where it was 
subject to any other charge), on such  commencement, be restored to the possession of the bonded 
labourer.  
(2) If any delay is made in restoring any property, referred to in sub -section ( 1), to the possession of 
the bonded labourer, such labourer shall be entitled, on and from the date of such  commencement, to 
recover from the mortgagee or holder of the lien, charge or incumbrance, such mesne profits as may be 
determined by the civil court of the lowest pecuniary jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdictio n such property is situat ed. 
8. Freed bonded labourer not to be evicted from homestead, etc. —(1) No person who has been 
freed and discharged under this Act from any obligation to render any bonded labour, shall be evicted 
from any homestead or other residential premises which he w as occupying immediately before the 
commencement of this Act as part of the consi deration for the bonded labour.  
(2) If, after the commencement of this Act, any such person is evicted by the creditor from any 
homestead or other residential premises, referr ed to in sub -section ( 1), the Executive Magistrate in charge 
of the Sub -Division within which such homestead or residential premises is situated shall, as early as 
practicable, restore the bonded labourer to the possession of such homestead or other reside ntial premises.  
9. Creditor not to accept pay ment against extinguished debt. —(1) No creditor shall accept any 
payment against any bonded debt which has been extinguished or deemed to have been extinguished or 
fully satisfied by virtue  of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to  three years and also with fine.  
(3) The court, convicting any person under sub -section ( 2) may, i n addition to the penalties which  
may be imposed under that sub -section, direct the person to deposit, in court, the amount accepted in 
contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), within such period as may be specified in the order for 
being refund ed to the bonded labourer.  
CHAPTER IV  
IMPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES  
10. Authorities who may be specified for implement ing the provisions of this Act. —The State 
Government may confer such powers and impose such duties on a District Magistrate as may be 
necessary  to ensure that the provisions of this Act are properly carried out and the District Magistrate may 
specify the officer, subordinate to him, who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any 
of the duties, so conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers or duties shall be 
carried out by the officer so specified.  
11. Duty of District Magistrate and o ther officers to ensure credit. —The District Magistrate 
authorised by the State Government under section 10 and the offic er specified by the District Magistrate 
under that section shall, as far as practicable, try to promote the welfare of the freed bonded labourer by 
securing and protecting the economic interests of such bonded labourer so that he may not have any 
occasion or reason to contract any further bonded debt.  
12. Duty of District Magistrate and officers auth orised by him. —It shall be the duty of every 
District Magistrate and every officer specified by him under section 10 to inquire whether, after the 
commencement of this Act, any bonded labour system or any other form of forced labour is being 
enforced by, or on behalf of, any person resident within the local limits of his jurisdiction and if, as a 
result of such inquiry, any person is found to be enorcing the bond ed labour system or any other system 
of forced labour, he shall forthwith take such action as may be necessary to eradicate the enforcement of 
such forced labour.  6 CHAPTER V  
VIGILANCE  COMMITTEES  
13. Vigilance Committees. —(1) Every State Government shall, by  notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute such number of Vigilance Committees in each district and each Sub -Division as it may 
think fit.  
(2) Each Vigilance Committee, constituted for a district, shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the District Magistrate, or a person nominated by him, who shall be the Chairman;  
(b) three persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and residing in the 
district, to be nominated by the District Magistrate;  
(c) two social workers, resident in the district, to be nominated by the District Magistrate;  
(d) not more than three persons to represent the official or non -official agencies in the district 
connected with rural development, to be nominated by the State Government;  
(e) one pers on to represent the financial and credit institutions in the district, to be nominated by 
the District Magistrate.  
(3) Each Vigilance Committee, constituted for a Sub -Division, shall consist of the following 
members, namely: — 
(a) the Sub -Divisional Magistrate, or a person nominated by him, who shall be the Chairman;  
(b) three persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and residing in the               
Sub-Division, to be nominated by  the Sub -Divisional Magistrat e; 
(c) two social workers, resident in the Sub -Division, to be nominated by  the Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate;  
(d) not more than three persons to represent the official or non -official agencies in the             
Sub-Division connected with rural development t o be nomina ted by the District Magistrate;  
(e) one person to represent the financial and credit institutions in the Sub -Division, to be 
nominated by  the Sub -Divisional Magistrate;  
(f) one officer specified under section 10 and functioning in the Sub -Divisi on. 
(4) Each Vigilance Committee shall regulate its own procedure and secretarial assistance, as may be 
necessary, shall be provided by — 
(a) the District Magistrate, in the case of a Vigilance Committe e constituted for the district;  
(b) the Sub -Divisional Magistrate, in the case of a Vigilance Committee constituted for the                  
Sub-Division.  
(5) No proceeding of a Vigilance Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of any defect in the 
constitution, or in the proceedings, of the Vigilance Committee.  
14. Fun ctions of Vigilance Committees. —(1) The functions of each Vigilance Committee shall 
be,— 
(a) to advise the District Magistrate or any officer authorised by him as to the efforts made, and 
action taken, to ensure that the provisions of this Act or of any rule made there under are properly 
implemented;  
(b) to provide for the economic and social rehabili tation of the freed bonded labourers;  
(c) to co -ordinate the f unctions of rural banks and co -operative societies with a view to canalising 
adequate credit to the freed bonded labourer;  
(d) to keep an eye on the number of offences of which cognizance  has been taken under this Act;  7 (e) to make a survey as to whether there is any offence of which cognizance ou ght to be taken under 
this Act;  
(f) to defend any suit instituted against a freed bonded labourer or a member of his family or any 
other person depend ant on him for the recovery of the whole or part of any bonded debt or any other debt 
which is claimed by such person to be bond ed debt.  
(2) A Vigilance Committee may authorise one of its members to defend a suit against a freed bonded 
labourer and the member so authorised shall be deemed, for the purpose of such suit, to be the authorised 
agent of the freed bonded labourer.  
15. Bu rden of proof. —Whenever any debt is claimed by a bonded labourer, or a Vigilance 
Committee, to be a bonded debt, the burden of proof that such debt is not a bonded debt shal l lie on the 
creditor.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PROCEDURE FOR TRIAL  
16. Punishment for enforcement of bonded labour. —Whoever, after the commencement of this 
Act, compels any person to render any bonded labour shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to two thousa nd rupees.  
17. Punishment for advancement of bonded debt. —Whoever advances, after the commencement 
of this Act, any bonded debt shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years and also with fine which may extend to two thou sand rupees.  
18. Punishment for extracting bonded labour under the bonded labour system. —Whoever 
enforces, after the commencement of this Act, any custom, tradition, contract, agreement or other 
instrument, by virtue of which any person or any member of th e family of such person or any dependant 
of such person is required to render any service under the bonded labour system , shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to two 
thousand r upees; and, out of the fine, if recovered, payment shall be made to the bonded labourer at the 
rate of rupees five for each day for which the bonded labour was extracted from him.  
19. Punishment for omission or failure to restore possession o f property to bonded                
labourers. —Whoever, being required by this Act to restore any property to the possession of any bonded 
labourer, omits or fails to do so, within a period of thirty days from the commenc ement of this Act, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; and, out of the fine, if recovered, payment shall be made to 
the bonded labourer at the rate of rupees five for each day during which possession of the property was 
not restored to him.  
20. Abetment to be an offence. —Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall, 
whether or not the offence abetted is committed, be punishable with the same punishment as is provided 
for the offence which has been abetted.  
Explanation ,—For the purpose of this Act, “abetment ” has the meaning assigned to  it in the Indian 
Penal Code (45  of 1860).  
21. Offences to be tried by Execut ive Magistrates. —(1) The State Government may confer, on                
an Executive Magistrate, the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class                      
for the trial of offences under this Act; and, on such conferment of powers, the Executive Magistate,                 
on whom the powers are so conferred, shall be deemed, for the purposes of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), to be a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or of the second  class, as the 
case may be.  
(2) An offence under this Act may be tri ed summarily by a Magistrate.  
22. Cognizance of offences. —Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.  8 23. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accord ingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on  the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanatio n.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Protection o f action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any State Government or any officer of the State Government or any member of the Vigilance 
Committee for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be don e under this Act.  
25. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred. —No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any 
matter to which any provision of this Act applies and no injunction shall be granted by any civil court in 
respect of anything which is done  or intended to be done by or under this Act.  
26. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the authority to which application for the restoration of posses sion of property referred to in 
sub-section ( 4), or sub -section ( 5), of section 6 is to be submitt ed in pursuance of s ub-section ( 6) of 
that section;  
(b) the time within which application for restoration of possession of property is to be made, 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 6, to the prescribed authority;  
(c) steps to be taken by Vigilance Committee s under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, to 
ensure the implementation of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall  thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
27. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Ordinance, 1975 ( 17 of 1975) 
is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance (including 
any notification published, direction or nomination made, power confe rred, duty imposed or officer 
specified) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE BRAITHWAITE AND COMPANY (INDIA) LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1976  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Central Government or the Government company not to be liable for prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in a 
Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount.  
8. Payment of further amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Managemen t, etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
11. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Employment of certain employees to continue.  
13. Provident and other funds . 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONERS OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Gover nment company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
18. Priority of claims.  
19. Examination of claims.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims.  2 SECTIONS  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act To have overriding effect.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Government 
company.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
27. Delegation of powers.  
28. Penalties.  
29. Offences by companies.  
30. Power to make rules.  
31. Power to remove difficulties.  
32. Declaration as to the policy of the State.  
33. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE .3 THE BRAITHWAITE AND COMPANY (INDIA) LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 96 OF 1976  
[5th September , 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of Messrs.  Braithwaite and 
Company (India) Limited for the purpose of ensuring the continuity of production of goods 
which are vital to the needs of the country, and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS  Messrs.  Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited was engaged in the manufacture and 
production of railway wagons, structural steel works for bridges and heavy workshop buildings, pressed 
steel tanks, cranes , road rollers, jute carding machines, roll formers, power sweepers, gr ey iron castings 
and steel forgings and also in the machining of intricate components of large sizes;  
AND WHEREAS as a result of heavy losses suffered by the Company, there had been a c losure of 
certain works owned by the Company;  
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of speedily bringing the closed works of the Company into operation, 
the management of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by the Central Government,                     
for a limited period, under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act,                         
1951  (65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Company to ensure the continuance 
of the production of good s which are vital to the needs of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Braithwaite and Company 
(India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1976.  
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1975.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of April, 1975;  
(b) “Company ” means the Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited, being a company                         
as defined in the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at 5, Hide Road,                    
Calcutta -700043;  
(c) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 14;  
(d) “Ordinance ” means the Braithwait e and Company (India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1976  (7 of 1976);  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “specified date” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purposes of any 
provision of this Act, by notification, specify and different dates may be specified for different 
provisions of this Act;  
(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined bu t defined in the Companies                           
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  4 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Company .—On the appointed day, the 
undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, be transferred to, and shal l vest in, the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including lands, b uilding s, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash 
on hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such 
property as were immediately before the appointed day in t he ownership, possession, power or control of 
the Company, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Go vernment under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction or decree or order of any court restricting 
the use  of such property in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of 
such property shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For th e removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interest, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amounts specified in section 7, and also out of the 
monies determined under section 8, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(5) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
property which has vested in the Central Government, under section 3, inst ituted or preferred by or 
against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially 
affected by reason of transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of anything contained in this Act, 
but the suit, appea l or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the 
Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6, to vest in a 
Government company, against that Government company.  
5. Central Governm ent or the Government company not to be liable for prior                           
liabilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall 
be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against i t and not against the Central 
Government, or, where the undertakings are directed under section 6, to vest in a Government company, 
against that Government company.  
(2) For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly  provided in this section or in any other provision of this Act, no 
liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable 
against the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed un der 
section 6 to vest in a Government company, against that Government company;  5 (b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, where 
the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest in a Government company, 
against that Government company;  
(c) no liabi lity incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6, t o vest in a Government 
company, against that Government company.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in a 
Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central 
Government  may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with 
such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and int erest of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings, which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing 
to vest in the Central Government, vest in the Government company either on the date of the notification 
or on s uch earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings, vest in a 
Government company under sub -section ( 1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such undertakings, and all the rights and 
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the d ate of such 
vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under                     
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees sixteen crores and twenty -five lakhs.  
8. Payment of further amount .—(1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 
undertakings, there shall be given to the Company by the Central Government an amount calculated at the 
rate of rupee s fifty thousand per annum for the period commencing on the date on which the management 
of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by the Central Government and ending on the 
appointed day.  
(2) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the  provisions of sections, 3, 4 and 5, there shall 
also be given, in cash, by the Central Government to the Company, an amount equal to an amount 
calculated at the rate of rupees fifty thousand per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day 
and end ing on the date of promulgation of the Ordinance.  
(3) The amount specified in section 7 and the amounts determined under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall 
carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum for the period commencing on the date of 
promulgation of the Ordinance and ending on the date on which payment of such amounts is made by the 
Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 7.  
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company, in                  
relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall  be 
discharged from the amounts referred to in section 7, and also from the amounts determined under                   
sub-sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Compa ny. 6 CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management , etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—(1) The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company,                    
the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Go vernment under section 3, 
shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of               
section 6, vest in the Government company specified in such direction, or  
(b) where no such direction has been made by the Central Government, vest in one or more 
Custodians appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2). 
and thereupon the Gove rnment company so specified or the Custodian so appointed, as the case may be, 
shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as the Company is authorised to 
exercise and do in relation to it s under takings.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals or a Government company as the 
Custodian of the undertakings of the Company in relation to which no direction has been made by it 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 6.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc. —(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in a Government 
company or on the appointment of a Custodian, all persons in cha rge of the management of the 
undertakings of the Company immediately before such vesting or appointment, shall be bound to deliver 
to the Government company or the Custodian, as the case may be, all assets, books of account, registers 
or other documents in  their custody relating to the undertakings of such Company.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Government company or the Custodian as to its or his powers and duties and th e 
Government company or Custodian may also, if it or he so desires, apply to the Central Government at 
any time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the undertakings of the Company 
shall be conducted by it or him or in relation to a ny other matter arising in the course of such 
management.  
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the undertakings of the Company such 
remuneration as the Central Government may fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
Governm ent. 
11. Accounts and audit .—The Custodian of the undertakings of the Company shall maintain an 
account of the undertakings of the Company in such form and manner and under such conditions as may 
be prescribed and the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , shall apply to the audit of the 
account so maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts of a company.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Employment of certain employees to continue .—(1) Every person who is a workman within  
the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), and has been, immediately before the 
appointed day, employed in any undertaking of the Company shall become, on and from the appointed 
day, an employee of the Central Government or, as the case may be, of the Government company in 
which the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings, have vested under this 
Act, and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the Government company, as the 
case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have 
been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment under the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, is duly 
terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  7 (2) Every person who is not a w orkman within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes                               
Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), and who has been, immediately before the appointed day, employed in any 
undertaking of the Company shall become, as from the appointed day, an employe e of the Central 
Government or the Government company, and shall hold office or service therein by the same tenure, at 
the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as 
to pension and gratuity and other  matters as would have been  admissible to him if the undertakings of the 
Company had not been  transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government or the Government 
company, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Central Govern ment or the 
Government company is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment 
are duly altered by the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industri al Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking of the Company to the Central Government or the Government company shall not 
entitl e such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the 
time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
(4) Where, under the terms of any contract of service o r otherwise, any person, whose services 
become transferred to the Central Government or the Government company by reason of the provisions of 
this Act, is entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any payments for any leave not availed of or any 
other payment, not being payment by way of gratuity or pension, such person may enforce his claim 
against the Company, but not against the Central Government or the Government company.  
13. Provident and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of the undertakings 
of the Company, the monies relatable to the officers or other employees, whose services have become 
transferred by or under this Act to the Central Government or the Government company, shall, out of the 
monies standing , on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident, superannuation, welfare or other 
fund, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government or the Government company, as the 
case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or that Governmen t 
company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONERS OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company under sections 7 and 8, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in t he same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed  out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an amount eq ual to the amount specified in section 7, and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company under section 8.  8 (2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every  amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the de posit account referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the Company.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government company .—(1) The Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive up to the 
specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to the Company, in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government, or the Government company, realised after 
the appointed day notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, may make a claim to 
the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for dischar ging any 
liability of the Company in relation to any period prior to the appointed day; and every such claim shall 
have priority in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which 
such liability has been dischar ged by the Central Government or the Government company.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before the specified date, sh all be the 
liabilities of the Company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
18. Priority of claims .—The claims arisi ng out of the matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with th e following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I will have precedence over all other categories and Category II will have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories, except Category VI, shall rank equally and be 
paid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal 
proportions and be paid accordingly;  
(c) the liabilities specified in Category VI shall be discharged, subject to the priorities specified in 
this section, in accordance with the terms of the secured loans and the priority, inter se , of such loans; 
and 
(d) the question of discharging any liability with regard to  a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
19. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be excluded from the benefit of the disbursements made by the 
Commissioner.  9 (2) Not less than fourteen days ‟ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of a daily newspaper in English language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the regional 
language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall cal l upon the claimant 
to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the di sbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of bein g heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he will hold hi s sittings and shall,  
for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of  the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any com mission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 345 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner, may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil c ourt of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
the appeal shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of that High Court.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person o r 
persons to whom such sums are due, and, on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of 
such claim shall stand discharged.  
22. Disbursement of amount s to the Company .—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to 
the undertakings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipmen t or other property, has vested in the Central 
Government or Government company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property 
does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the Government 
company to conti nue to possess such machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and 
conditions under which they were possessed by the Company immediately before the 1st day of April, 
1975.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general r evenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed for a period of three years 
from the last day on which the disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Centr al Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be 
preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if 
such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being treate d as an order for 
the refund of the revenue.  10 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act To have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or  in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Government  
company .—(1) Every  contract entered into by the Company in relation to its undertakings for any 
service, sale or supply, and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry 
of one hundred and eighty days from the date of promulgation of the Ordi nance, cease to have effect 
unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, in writing, by the Central Government or 
Government company, and, in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or Government company 
may make such altera tion or modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract, and 
shall not make any alteration or modification in a contract, unless it is satisfied that such contract is 
unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or detrimental to the interests of the Central 
Government or the Government company.  
(2) The Central Government or Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract, and, shall not 
make any alteration or modification therein, except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and except after recording, in writing, its reasons for refusal to ratify the 
contract or for making any alteration or modificati on therein.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosec ution or other legal proceeding  
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Custodian or the 
Government company or any officer or other perso n authorised by that Government or Government 
company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or 
other employees o r the Government company or any officer or other person authorised by that company 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act.  
27. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the power conferred by section 30, may also be 
exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
28. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or c ontrol any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the Government 
company; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Company or willfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or Government 
company or any person or body of persons specified by that Government or Government company, 
any document relating to such undertaking which may be in his pos session, custody or control or fails 
to deliver to the Central Government or the Government company or any person or body of persons 
specified by that Government or Government company, any assets, books of account, registers or 
other documents in his posse ssion, custody or control, relating to the undertaking of the Company; or  11 (c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any undertaking of the Company 
or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false or 
grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
29. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been c ommitted by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shal l be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exerci sed 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the conse nt or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any  of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation shall be given to the 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(b) the form and the manner in which, and the conditions under which, the Custodian  shall 
maintain accounts as required by section 11;  
(c) the manner in which the monies in any provident or other fund referred to in section 13 shall 
be dealt with;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by  the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter hav e effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
31. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period o f two years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
32. Declaration as to the policy of the State.—It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect 
to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified i n clause ( b) of article 39 of the 
Constitution.  12 Explanation .—In this section, “State ” has the same meaning as in article 12 of the Constitution.  
33. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Braithwaite and Company (India) Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1976  (7 of 1976), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  13 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 18, 19 and 20)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY  
PART „A‟ 
Post-take-over management period  
Category I — 
Wages, salaries and other dues to the employees of the Company.  
Category II — 
(a) (i) Loans advanced by the Central Government.  
(ii) Secured loans advanced by banks and financial institutions.  
Category III — 
(a) Any other loans.  
(b) Credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or manufacturing 
operations.  
Category IV — 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues or Central Government or a State Government.  
PART „B‟  
Pre-take-over management period  
Category V — 
Arrears in relation to contribution to be made by the Company to the provident fund, salaries and 
wages and other amounts due to employees.  
Category VI — 
Secured loans.  
Category VII — 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Government, a State Government, a 
local authority or a State Electricity Board.  
Category VIII — 
(a) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of trading or manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any other dues.  
 
--------------------------The Delhi Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE DELHI SALES TAX (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION) ACT, 1976  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Validation . 
  2 THE DELHI SALES TAX (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 91 OF 1976  
[2nd September,  1976 .] 
An Act to amend retrospectively the law relating to sales tax as in force in the Union territory of 
Delhi during a past period and to validate taxes on the sale or purchase of certain goods 
during such period.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Yea r of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Delhi Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Delhi” means,— 
(i) as respects any period before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, the Part C State of Delhi;  
(ii) as respects any period after such commencement, the Union territory of Delhi;  
(b) “principal Act ” means the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act ,1941 (Bengal Act 6 of 1941), as it 
applied to Delhi, from time to time;  
(c) “sales tax  extension notifications ” means— 
(i) notification No. S.R.O. 615, dated the 28th day of April, 1951;  
(ii) notification No. S.R.O. 1204, dated the 6th day of August , 1951; and  
(iii) notification No. S.R.O. 1564, dated the 4th day of October, 1951,  
of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
3. Validation .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), each of the sales tax extension 
notifications shall, for all purposes (including the levy, assessment and collection of taxes under the 
principal Act and the purposes of section 73 of the Delhi S ales Tax Act, 1975 ) (43 of 1975) , be deemed to 
have been, an d to be, a law enacted by Parliament which took effect on the date on which such 
notification was published in the Gazette of India and accordingly anything done or purporting to have 
been done or any action taken or purporting to have been taken before th e commencement of this Act 
under the principal Act or under the said section 73 shall be deemed to be, and to have always been, as 
valid and effective as if this section had been in force when such thing was done or such action was taken.  
(2) Notwithstandi ng anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 
6 of the principal Act shall, for all purposes (including the levy, assessment and collection of tax under 
that Act and the purposes of section 73 of the Delhi Sales Tax  Act, 1975 ) (43 of 1975 ), have effect and be 
deemed always to have had effect as if the said sub -section ( 2) (herei nafter referred to as the named sub-
section) conferred powers on the Central Government to add to, or omit from or otherwise amend, by 
notifi cation in the Official Gazette, the Schedule (hereinafter referred to as the named Schedule) 
mentioned in the named sub -section, without giving any previous notice of its intention so to do.  
(3) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or  other authority, every notification, 
to add to, or omit from, or otherwise amend, the named Schedule, issued or purporting to have been 
issued by the Central Government under the named sub -section shall be, and shall be deemed always to 
have been, as vali d and effective as if this section had been in force when such notificat ion was issued 
and accordingly — 
(a) any tax levied, assessed or collected or purporting to have been levied, assessed or collected 
under the principal Act by reason of any amendment (w hether by way of omission or otherwise) to 
the named Schedule specified in such notification shall be deemed to have been validly levied, 
assessed or collected in accordance with law;  3 (b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court or before any 
authority for the refund of, and no enforcement shall be made by any court or other authority of any 
decree or order directing the refund of, any such tax which has been collected;  
(c) recoveries shall be made, in accordance with the pr oviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 73 of the 
Delhi Sales Tax Act, 1975 (43 of 1975), of all amounts which would have been collected as tax under 
the principal Act by reason of any amendment referred to in clause ( a) but which had not been 
collected.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or omission on the part of any person 
shall be punishable as an offence which would not have been so punishable if this section had not come 
into force.  
--------------------------The Departmentalisation of Union Accounts (Transfer of Personnel) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE DEPARTMENTALIS ATION OF UNION ACCOUNTS  
(TRANSFER OF PERSONNEL) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1976  
[8th Apri l, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the transfer of officers serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts 
Department to any Ministry, Department or office of the Central Government for facilitating 
the efficient discharge by such Ministry, Department or office of the responsibility in 
connection with compiling the accounts thereof.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic  of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Departmentalis ation of Union 
Accounts (Transfer of Personnel) Act, 1976.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of March, 1976.  
2. Transfer of officers and employees of the Indian Audit and Accounts Department .—(1) 
Where the President has by order under the first proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 10 of the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (56 of 1971),  
provided for relieving, with effect from any date (hereinafter referred to as the prescribed date), the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General from the responsibility for compiling any accounts of the Union or of 
any services or departments of the Union as may b e specified in such order, then, subject to the provisions 
of this Act, it shall be lawful for the Central Government, on the advice of a Committee established under 
sub-section ( 2), to transfer, by order and with effect from such date or dates (which may be either 
retrospective to any date not earlier than the prescribed date or prospective) as may be specified in the 
order, to any Ministry or Department of the Central Government or any of it s attached or subordinate 
offices, any of the officers or employe es serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department, for the 
purpose of facilitating the efficient discharge by such Ministry, Department or office of the responsibility 
of compiling such accounts:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made in relation to any such officer or 
employee serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department who has, in respect of the proposal made 
on the advice of the Committee to transfer such officer or employee under this sub -section, intimated, 
within such  time as may be specified in this behalf his unwillingness to be so transferred, unless the 
Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary in the public interest to transfer such officer or 
employee as aforesaid:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall affect the right of any such officer or employee 
to resign or retire from service in accordance with the rules applicable to him in the Indian Audit and 
Accounts Department.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more Advisory Committees consisting of 
such number of members as it thinks fit for the purpose of assisting it in regard to the transfer of officers 
and employees under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) An officer or other employee transferred to any Ministry, Departme nt or office of the Central 
Government by an order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, on and from the date of transfer, cease to be an 
officer or employee in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department and shall, subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 4) and of any law or rules made under Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution, hold office 
in such Ministry, Department or office with such designation as the Central Government may specify.  
(4) Every officer or employee transferred under sub -section ( 1) shal l be entitled to be appointed to a 
post carrying a scale of pay not less favourable than that of the post which he held immediately before the 
date of such transfer and in the same capacity (whether substantive or officiating) in which he held the 
post las t mentioned:  
  2 
 Provided that if immediately before the date of such transfer any such officer or employee is 
officiating in a higher post in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department either in a leave vacancy or in 
any other vacancy of a specified duration,  his pay, on transfer, shall be protected for the unexpired period 
of such vacancy.  
3. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Departmentalisation of Union Accounts (Transfer of Personnel) 
Ordinance, 1976 (2 of 1976), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal , anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Disturbed Areas (Special Courts) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE DISTURBED AREAS (SPECIAL COURTS) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 77 OF 1976  
[11th June, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the speedy trial of certain offences in certain areas and for matters 
connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Pa rliament in the Twenty -seventh Y ear of  the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Disturbed Areas (Special 
Courts) Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force  on such date1 as the Central Government m ay, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States or for different parts 
thereof.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(b) “disturbed area ” means an area decl ared as a disturbed area under s ection 3;  
(c) period of disturbance, in relation to a disturbed area, means the period during which it is to be 
a dist urbed area for the purposes of s ection 3;  
(d) “scheduled offence ” means an offence specified in the S chedule being an offence forming part 
or arising out of, or connected with, any such disturbance as is referred to in section 3;  
(e) “Special Court ” means a Special Court constituted under section 4;  
(f) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act, and defined in the Code shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Code.  
3. Declaration of an area as disturbed area .—(1) Where a Sta te Government is satisfied that — 
(i) there was, or  
(ii) there is,  
in any area within a State extensive disturbance of the public peace and tranquillity , by reason of 
differences or disputes between members of different religious, racial, language or regional groups or 
castes or communities, it may, by notification in the O fficial Gazette, declare such area to be a disturbed 
area.  
(2) A notification issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any area shall specify the period during 
which the area shall, for the purposes of this section, be a disturbed area and where the State Government 
is satisfied that there was such disturbance of public peace and tranquillity as is referred to in               
sub-section ( 1) in that area from any date prior to the issue of such notification, the period specified in the 
notificat ion may commence from that date : 
Provided that — 
(a) no period commencing from a date ea rlier than three months before the date of publication of 
the notifica tion shall be specified therein ; and  
(b) so much of the period specified in such notification as is subsequent to the date of publication 
of the notification shall not, in the first ins tance, exceed three months but  the State  Government may 
amend  such notification to extend such period from time to time by any period not exceeding three 
                                                           
1. 15th August , 1976 , vide notification No.  S. O. 549(E), d ated 13th  August , 1976 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 2 
 months at any one time if in the opinion of the State Government there continues to be in such area 
such disturbance of public peace and tranquillity as is referred to i n sub -section ( 1): 
Provided further that where the State Government is satisfied that there is no longer such disturbance 
of public peace and tranquillity as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) in such area, it shall amend the 
notification issued under that sub -section in respect of that area to limit the period specified therein 
(whether originally or by amendment under the preceding proviso) accordingly.  
4. Constitution of Special Courts .—(1) The State Government may, for the purpose of providing 
speedy trial of scheduled offences committed in disturbed  areas, by notification in the O fficial Gazette, 
constitute as many Special Courts as may be necessary in or in relation to such disturbed area  or areas as 
may be specified in the notification.  
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a single judge who shall be appointed by the High Court upon a 
request made by the State Government.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section, the word “appoint” shall have the  meaning giv en to it in the 
Explanation  to section 9 of the Code.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a j udge of a Special Court unless — 
(a) he is qualified for appointment as a judge of a High Court, or  
(b) he has , for a period of not l ess than one year, been a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions 
Judge.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), a person shall not be eligible for being 
appointed as, and for being, a Judge of a Special Court in any State after he has attained the age at which 
Session s Judges in that State have to retire from service.  
5. Jurisdiction of Special Courts .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any other 
law, a scheduled offence committed in any disturbed area at any time during the period during which it is 
a disturbed area shall be triable, whether during or after such period, only by the Spec ial Court constituted 
in or in relation to the disturbed area in which the offence has been committed.  
(2) When trying any scheduled offence, a Special Court may also try any offence other than the 
scheduled offence with which the accused may, under the Co de, be charged at the same trial if the offence 
is connected with the scheduled offence.  
6. Procedure and powers of Special Courts .—(1) Every scheduled offence shall be cognizable.  
(2) A Special Court may take cogniz ance of any scheduled offence, — 
(a) where under the Code such offence is an offence triable exclusively by a Court of Session, 
upon i ts being committed to it under s ection 209 of the Code as if the Special Court were a Court of 
Session; 
(b) in any other case, upon a police report of the fact s together with a certificate from the public 
prosecutor to the effect that   the offence is triable exclusively by the Special Court.  
(3) Where a scheduled offence is an offence triable exclusively by a Court of Session under the Code, 
a Special Court shal l have all the powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a 
Court of Session, so far as may be in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for trial before 
a Court of Session.  
(4) Where a scheduled offence is an offen ce which is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
exceeding three years but which, according to the provisions of the Code, is not an offence triable 
exclusively by a Court of Session, a Special Court may on taking cognizance of the offences perform the 
functions of a Magistrate under s ection 207 of the Code and thereafter try such offence so far as may be in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for trial before a Court of Session as if the Special 
Court were a Court of Session and the cas e had been committed to it for trial under the provisions of the 
Code.  
  3 
 (5) Where a scheduled offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years 
or with fine or with both, a Special Court may, notwithstanding anything contained i n sub -section ( 1) of 
section 260 or s ection 262 of the Code, try the offence in a summary way in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed in the Code and the provisions of sections  263 to 265 of the Code, shall  so far as 
may be, apply to such trial:  
Provided that when, in the course of a summary trial under this sub -section, it appears to the Special 
Court that the nature of the case is such that it is undesirable to try it summarily, the Special Court shall 
recall any witnesses who may have been exam ined and proceed to re -hear the case in the manner 
provided by the provisions of the Code for the trial of such offence and the said provisions shall apply to 
and in relation to a Special Court as they apply to and in relation to a Magistrate : 
Provided fur ther that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be 
lawful for a Special Court to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.  
(6) A Special Court may, with a view to obtaining the evidence of a ny person suspected to have been 
directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, an offence, tender a pardon to such person on condition of 
his making a full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances within his knowledge relating to the 
offence and to every other person concerned whether as principal or abettor in the commission thereof 
and any pardon so tende red shall, for the purposes of s ection 308 of the Code, be deemed to have been 
tendered un der s ection 307 thereof.  
7. Power to transfer cases t o regular courts .—Where, after taking  cognizance of any offence, a 
Special Court is of opinion that the offence is not a scheduled offence, it shall, notwithstanding that it has 
no Jurisdiction to try the case, transfer the case for trial to any court havi ng juris diction under the Code 
and the c ourt to which the case is transferred may proceed with the case as if it had taken cognizance of 
the offence.  
8. Appeal and revision .—The High Court may exercise, so far as they may be applicable, all the 
powers conf erred by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code on a High Court, as if a Special Court is a 
Court of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.  
9. Overriding effect of Act .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall have notwi thstanding anything 
contained in the Code or any other law, but save as expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of the 
Code shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, apply to the proceedings 
before a Special Cour t; and for the purposes of the said provisions of the Code, the Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Court of Session and the person conducting a prosecution before a Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a public prosecutor.  
(2) In particular and without p rejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), 
the provisions of sections  326 and 475 of the Code shall, so far as may be, apply to the proceedings before 
a Special Court, and for this purpose references in those provisions to a  Magistrate shall be construed as 
references to the Special Court.  
10. Saving .—(1) Nothing in this Act shall a ffect the jurisdiction exercisable by,  or the procedure 
applicable to, any court or other authority under any law relating to the naval, military or air forces or any 
other armed forces of the Union.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of any such law as is referred 
to in sub -section ( 1), a Special Court shall be deemed to be a court of ordinary criminal justice.  
 
  4 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( d)] 
1. Offences under the following provi sions of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860): — 
Section 120B; 
Sections 143 to 145, 147, 148, 151 to 155, 157, 158 and 160;  
Sections 182, 183, 186 to 190;  
Sections 193 to 195, 199, 201 to 203, 211 to 214, 216, 216 A and 225;  
Sections 295 to 298;  
Sections 302, 303, 304, 307, 308, 323 to 335, 341 to 348, 352 to 358, 363 to 369 and 37 6; 
Sections 379, 380, 382, 384 to 387, 392 to 399, 402, 411, 412, 426, 427, 431, 435, 436, 440, 447 
to 462;  
Sections 504 to 506 and 509.  
2. Offences under the following provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959) :— 
Sections 25 to 30.  
3. Offences under the following provisions of the Indian Explosives Act, 1884 (4 of 1884): — 
Sections 6( 3) and 8 (2). 
 
--------------------------The Election Laws (Extension to Sikkim) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE ELECTION LAWS (EXTENSION TO SIKKIM) ACT , 1976  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1976  
[25th January, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the 
Representation of the People Act, 1951, to the State of Sikkim.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Election Laws (Extension to 
Sikkim) Act, 1976.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 9th day of September, 1975.  
2. Extension and amendment of election laws .—(1) The Acts mentioned in the Schedule are 
hereby extended to, and shall be in force in, the State of Sikkim.  
(2) With effect from the commencement of this Act, the Acts mentioned in the Schedule shall be 
amended as specified therein.  
(3) Any reference in the Acts mentioned in the Schedule to a law not in force, or to a functionary 
not in existence, in the State of Sikkim shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in 
force, or to the corresponding functionary in existence, in that State:  
Provided that if any question arises as to who such corresponding functionary is, or if there is no 
such corresponding functionary, the Central Government shall decide as to who such fun ctionary will 
be and the decision of the Central Government shall be final.  
3. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Election Laws (Extension to Sikkim)                            
Ordinance, 1975  (9 of 1975) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under or by virtue of the said 
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under or by virtue of this Act.  
________  
 
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2 ) 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950  
(43 OF 1950)  
Section 7A. —After section 7, insert: — 
“7A. Total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Sikkim and Assembly 
constituencies. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, in the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Sikkim [deemed under the Constitution (Thirty -six Amendment)       
Act, 1975 to be the Legislative Assembly of that State duly constituted], the total number of seats 
to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from Assembly constituencies shall be 32.  
(2) Every Assembly constituency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be a single member 
constituency.  
(3) In the Legislative Assembly so deemed to be duly constituted, the extent of each 
constituency and the reservation of seats shall be as provided for immedi ately before the 
commencement of the Constitution (Thirty -sixth Amendment) Act, 1975. ”. 
  2 
 Section 25A. —In Part III, after section 25, insert:  — 
“25A.  Conditions of registration as elector in  Sangha constituency in Sikkim. —
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 15 and 19, for the Sangha constituency in the  
State of Sikkim, only the Sang has belonging to monasteries, recognised for the purpose of the 
elections held in Sikkim in April, 1974, for forming the Assembly for  Sikkim, shall be entitled to 
be registered in the electoral roll, and the said electoral roll shall, subject to the provisions of 
sections 21 to 25, be prepared or revised in such manner as may be directed by the Election 
Commission, in consultatio n with the Government of Sikkim. ”. 
The First Schedule. —In the First Schedule, under the heading “I. STATES ”, after serial number 15 
and the entries relating thereto, insert: — 
“15A. Sikkim        . .            . .                 . .                . .                . .              1             . .        ”.      
 
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951  
(43 OF 1951 ) 
Section 4. —In section 4, omit “and” at the end of clause ( cc) and after that clause, insert: — 
“(ccc) in the case of the seat allotted to the State of Sikkim, he is an elector for the 
Parliamentary constituency for Sikkim. ”. 
Section 5A .—After section 5, insert: — 
“5A. Qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly of                            
Sikkim. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5, a person shall not be qualified to be 
chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of Sikkim (deemed to be the Legislative 
Assembly of that State duly constituted under the Constitution) unless — 
(a) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkim ese of Bhutia -Lepcha origin, he is a person 
either of Bhutia or Lepcha origin, he is person either of Bhutia or Lepcha origin and is an 
elector for any Assembly constituency in the State other than the con stituency reserved for the 
Sang has; 
(b) in the case  of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Nepali origin, he is a person of Nepali 
origin and is an elector for any Assembly constituency in the State;  
(c) in the case of a seat reserved for Scheduled Castes, he is a member of any of the castes 
specified in the Representation of Sikkim Subjects Act, 1974 and is an elector for any 
Assembly constituency in the State; and  
(d) in the c ase of a seat reserved for Sang has, he is an elector of the Sangha 
constituency. ”. 
Section 12A. —After section 12, insert: — 
“12A. Notif ication for election to fill the seat allotted to the State of Sikkim in the 
Council of States. —For the purpose of filling for the first time the seat allotted to the State of 
Sikkim by the Constitution (Thirty -sixth Amendment) Act, 1975 in the Council of States, the 
President shall, by a notification published in the Gazette of India, on such date as may be 
recommended by Election Commission, call upon the elected members of the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Sikkim to elect a member in accordance wi th the provisions of this Act 
and of the rules and orders made thereunder and the election so held shall for all purposes and 
intent be deemed to have been held under section 12. ”. 
Section 14A. —After section 14, insert: — 
“14A. Notification for electing the  representative of the State of Sikkim to the existing 
House of the People. —For the purpose of electing a representative of the State of Sikkim to the 
House of the People, specified in clause ( e) of article 371F of the Constitution , the Election 3 
 Commission  shall call upon the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim to 
elect the representative in accordance with such of the provisions of this Act, and the rules and 
orders made thereunder , as are applicable to the election of the members of  the Council of 
States. ”. 
Section 33. —In section 33, after sub -section ( 1), insert: — 
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), for election to the Legislative 
Assembly of Sikkim (deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of that State duly constituted under 
the Constitution), the nomination paper to be delivered to the returning officer shall be in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the said nomination paper shall be subscribed by the candidate as assenting to 
the nomin ation,  and— 
(a) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Bhutia -Lepcha origin, also by at least 
twenty electors of the constituency as proposers and twenty electors of the constituency as 
seconders;  
(b) in the c ase of a seat reserved for Sang has, al so by at least twenty electors of the 
constituency as proposers and at least twenty electors of the constituency as seconders;  
(c) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Nepali origin, by an elector of the 
constituency as proposer:  
Provided furthe r that no nomination paper shall be delivered to the returning officer on a day 
which is a public holiday. ”. 
Section 34. —In section 34, in sub -section ( 2), for “under sub -section ( 1) of section 33 ”, substitute 
“under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be,  sub-section  (1A) of section 33 ”. 
Section 35. —In section 35, for “under sub -section ( 1)”, substitute “under sub -section ( 1) or, as the 
case may be, sub -section  (1A)”. 
 
--------------------------The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1976  
[11th February, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the payment of equal remuneration to men and women workers and for the 
prevention of discrimination, on the ground of sex, against women in the matter of 
employment and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Pa rliament in the Twenty -seventh Y ear of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Equal Remuneration 
Act, 1976 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1, not being later than three years from the passing of this Act, 
as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
different establishments or employments.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Gov ernment ” means, — 
(i) in relation to any employment carried on by or under the authority of the Central 
Government or a railway administration, or in relation to a banking company, a  mine,  oilfield or 
major port or any c orporation established by or under a Central Act, the Central Government, and  
(ii) in relation to any other employment, the State Government;  
(b) “commencement of this Act ” means, in relation to an establishment or employment, the date 
on which this Act comes into force in respect of that establishment or employment;  
(c) “employer ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Payment of Gratuity 
Act, 1972  (39 of 1972);  
(d) “man” and “woman ” mean  male and female human beings, respectively, of any age;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “remuneration ” means the basic  wage or salary, and any additional emoluments whatsoever 
payable, either in cash or in kind, to a person employed in respect of employment or work done in 
such employment, if the terms of the contract of employment, express or implied, wer e fulfilled;  
(h) “same work or work of a similar nature ” means work in respect of which the skill, effort and 
responsibility required are the same, when performed under similar working conditions, by a man or a 
woman and the differences, if any, between th e skill, effort and responsibility required of a man and 
those required of a woman are not of practical importance in relation to the terms and conditions of 
employment;  
(i) “worker ” means a worker in any establishment or employment in respect of which thi s Act has 
come into force;  
(j) words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
                                                           
1. 8th March, 1976, vide notification No. S.O. 175(E), d ated 6 th March, 1976, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,       
sec. 3( ii). 2 
 3. Act to have over riding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement or 
contract of service, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act, or in any instrum ent 
having effect under any law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER II  
PAYMENT OF REMUNERATION AT EQUAL RATES TO MEN AND WOMEN WORKERS  
AND OTHER MATTERS  
4. Duty of employer to pay equal remuneration to men and women workers for same work or 
work of a similar nature .—(1) No employer shall pay to any worker, employed by him in an 
establishment or employment, remuneration, whether payable in cash or in kind, at rates less favourable 
than those at which remuneration is paid by him to the workers of the opp osite sex in such establishment 
or employment for performing the same work or work of a similar nature.  
(2) No employer shall, for the purpose of complying with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), reduce the 
rate of remuneration of any worker.  
(3) Where, in  an establishment or employment, the rates of remuneration payable before the 
commencement of this Act for men and women workers for the same work or work of a similar nature are 
different only on the ground of sex, then the higher (in cases where there ar e only two rates), or, as the 
case may be, the highest (in cases where there are more than two rates), of such rates shall be the rate at 
which remuneration shall be payable, on and from such commencemen t, to such men and women 
workers:  
Provided that nothi ng in this sub -section shall be deemed to entitle a worker to the revision of the rate 
of remuneration payable to him or her with reference to the service rendered by him or her before the 
commencement of this Act.  
5. No discrimination to be made while rec ruiting men and women workers .—On and from the 
commencement of this Act, no employer shall , while  making recruitment for the sam e wo rk or work of a 
similar nature, 1[or in any condition of service subsequent to recruitment such as promotions, training or 
transfer,] make any discrimination against women except where the employment of women in such work 
is prohibited or restricted by or under any law for the time being in force:  
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not affect any priority or res ervation for Scheduled 
Castes or Scheduled Tribes, ex -servicemen, retrenched employees or any other class or category of 
persons in the matter of recruitment to the posts in an establishment or employment.  
6. Advisory Committee .—(1) For the purpose of prov iding increasing employment opportunities for 
women, the appropriate Government shall constitute one or more Advisory Committees to advise it with 
regard to the extent to which women may be employed in such establishments or employments as the 
Central Gove rnment may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  
(2) Every Advisory Committee shall consist of not less than ten persons, to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government, of which one -half shall be women.  
(3) In tendering its advice, the Advisory Committ ee shall have regard to the number of women 
employed in the concerned establishment or employment, the nature of work, hours of work, suitability of 
women for employment, as the case may be, the need for providing increasing employment opportunities 
for wo men, including part -time employment, and such other relevant factors as the Committee may think 
fit. 
(4) The Advisory Committee shall regulate its own procedure.  
(5) The appropriate Government may, after considering the advice tendered to it by the Advisory 
Committee and after giving to the persons concerned in the establishment or employment an opportunity 
to make representations, issue such directions in respect of employment of women workers, as the 
appropriate Government may think fit.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 49 of  1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  3 
 7. Power of appropriate Government to appoint authorities for hearing and deciding claims and 
complaints .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such officers, not below the 
rank of a Labour Officer, as it thinks fit to be the authorities for the p urpose of hearing and deciding — 
(a) complaints with regard to the contravention of any provision of this Act;  
(b) claims arising out of non -payment of wages at equal rates to men and women workers for the 
same w ork or work of a similar nature;  
and may, by the same or subsequent notification, define the local limits within which each such authority 
shall exercise its jurisdiction.  
(2) Every complaint or claim referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) If an y question arises as to whether two or more works are of the same nature or of a similar 
nature, it shall be decided by the authority appointed under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Where a complaint or claim is made to the authority appointed under sub -section ( 1), it may, after 
giving the applicant and the employer an opportunity of being heard, and after such inquiry as it m ay 
consider necessary, direct, — 
(i) in the case of a claim arising out of non -payment of wages at equal rates to men and women 
workers for the same work or work of a similar nature, that payment be made to the worker of the 
amount by which the wages payable to him exceed the amount actually paid;  
(ii) in the case of complaint, that adequate steps be taken by the employer so as to ensure that 
there is no contravention of any provision of this Act.  
(5) Every authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall have all the powers of a Civil Court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the purpose of taking evidence and of enforcing the 
attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of documents, and every such authority shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(6) Any employer or w orker aggrieved by any order made by an authority appointed under            
sub-section ( 1), on a complaint or claim may, within thirty days from the date of the order, prefer an 
appeal to such authority as the appropriate Government may, by notification,  specify in this behalf, and 
that authority may, after hearing the appeal, confirm, modify or reverse the order appealed against and no 
further appeal shall lie against the order made by such authority.  
(7) The authority referred to in sub -section ( 6) may,  if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented 
by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the period specified in sub -section ( 6), allow the 
appeal to be preferred within a further period of thirty days but not thereafter.  
(8) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 33C of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), 
shall apply for the recovery of monies due from an employer arising out of the decision of an authority 
appointed under this section.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
8. Duty of employers to maintain registers .—On and from the commencement of this Act, every 
employer shall maintain such registers and other documents in relation to the workers employed by him 
as may be prescribed.  
9. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Gover nment may, by notification, appoint such persons as it may 
think fit to be Inspectors for the purpose of making an investigation as to whether the provisions of this 
Act, or the rules made thereunder, are being complied with by employers, and may define th e local limits 
within which an Inspector may make such investigation.  
  4 
 (2) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) An Inspector may, at any place within the loc al limits of his jurisdiction, — 
(a) enter, at any reasonable time, with such assistance as he thinks fit, any building, factory, 
premises or vessel;  
(b) require any employer to produce any register, muster -roll or other documents relating to the 
employment of  workers, and examine such documents;  
(c) take, on the spot or otherwise, the evidence of any person for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether the provisions of this Act are being, or have been, complied with;  
(d) examine the employer, his agent or servant o r any other person found in charge of the 
establishment or any premises connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has reasonable 
cause to believe to be, or to have been a worker in the establishment;  
(e) make copies, or take extracts from, any r egister or other document maintained in relation to 
the establishment under this Act.  
(4) Any person required by an Inspector to produce any register or other document or to give any 
information shall comply with such requisition.  
10. Penalties .—(1) If after the commencement of this Act, any employer, being required  by or under 
the Act, so to do — 
(a) omits or fails t o maintain any register or other document in relation to workers employed by 
him, or  
(b) omits  or fails to produce any register, muster -roll or other document relating to the 
employment of workers, or  
(c) omits or refuses to give any evidence or prevents his agent, servant, or any other person in 
charge of the establishment, or any worker, from giv ing evidence, or  
(d) omits or refuses to give any information,  
he shall be punishable  1[with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both ]. 
(2) If, after the commencement of this Act, any employer — 
(a) makes any recruitment in contravention of the provisions of this Act, or  
(b) makes any payment of remuneration at unequal rates to men and women workers, for the 
same work or work of a similar nature, or  
(c) makes any discrimina tion between men and women workers in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act, or  
(d) omits or fails to carry out any direction made by the appropriate Government under            
sub-section ( 5) of section 6,  
he shall be punishable  2[with fine which s hall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend 
to twenty thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than three months but 
which may extend to one year or with both for the first offence, and with imprisonment wh ich may extend 
to two years for the second and subsequent offences ]. 
(3) If any person being required so to do, omits or refuses to produce to an Inspector any register or 
other document or to give any information, he shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1987, s. 3, for “with fine which may extend to  one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 16-12-1987) . 5 
 11. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liabl e to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such direct or, manager, secretary or  other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and incl udes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
1[12. Cognizance and trial of offences .—(1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or 
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punisha ble under this Act except upon — 
(a) its own knowledge or upon a complaint made by the appropriate Government or an officer 
authorised by it  in this behalf, or  
(b) a complaint made by the person aggrieved by the offence or by any recognised welfare 
institution or organisation.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section “recognised welfare institution or organisation ” 
means a social welf are institution or organisation recognised in this behalf by the Central or State 
Government.]  
13. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which complaint or claim referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 7 shall be 
made;  
(b) registers and other documents which an employer is required under section 8 to maintain in 
relation to the workers employed by him;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under  this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry o f the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modifie d form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1987, s. 4, for section 12 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987) . 6 
 14. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
directions to a State Government as to the carrying into execution of this Act in the State.  
1[15. Act not to apply in certain special cases .—Nothing in this Act shall apply — 
(a) to cases affecting the terms and conditions of a woman’ s employment in complying with the 
requirements of any law giving special treatment to women, or  
(b) to any special treatment accorded to women in connection with — 
(i) the birth or expected birth of a child, or  
(ii) the terms and conditions relating to retir ement, marriage or death or to any provision 
made in connection with the retirement, marriage or death.]  
16. Power to make declaration .—Where the appropriate Government is, on a consideration of all 
the circumstances of the case, satisfied that the differe nces in regard to the remuneration, or a particular 
species of remuneration, of men and women workers in any establishment or employment is based on a 
factor other than sex, it may, by notification, make a declaration to that effect, and any act of the 
employer attributable to such a difference shall not be deemed to be a contravention of any provision of 
this Act.  
17. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by notifi cation, make any order, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, which appears to it to be necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that every such order shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of  
Parliament.  
18. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Equal Remuneration Ordinance, 1975  (12 of 1975)  is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
(including any notification, nomination, appointment, order or direction made thereunder) shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act as if this Act were in 
force when such thing was done or action was taken.  
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1987, s. 5, for section 1 5 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  
--------------------------The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) ACT, 1976  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
  CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Application of other laws not barred.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND FOREIGN HOSPITALITY  
4. Candidate for election, etc., not to accept foreign contribution.  
5. Organisation of a political nature not to accept foreign contribution except with the prior 
permission of the Central Government.  
6. Certain associations and persons receiving foreign contribution to give intimation to the Central 
Government.  
7. Recipients of scholarships, etc., to give intimation to the Central  Government.  
8. Persons to whom section 4 shall not apply.  
9. Restrictions on acceptance of foreign hospitality.  
10. Power of Central Government to prohibit receipt of foreign contribution etc., in certain cases.  
11.  Application to be made in prescribed fo rm for obtaining prior permission to accept foreign 
contribution or hospitality.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
12. Power to prohibit payment of currency received in contravention of the Act.  
13. Recipients of foreign contribution to maintain accounts, etc.  
14. Inspection of accounts or records.  
15. Seizure of accounts or records.  
15A. Audit of accounts.  
16. Seizure of article or currency received in contravention of the Act.  
17. Seizure to be made in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
18. Con fiscation of article or currency obtained in contravention of the Act.  
19. Adjudication of confiscation.  
20. Opportunity to be given before adjudication of confiscation.  
21. Appeal.  
22. Penalty for article or currency obtained in contravention of section 12. 
23. Punishment for the contravention of any provision of the Act.  
24. Power to impose additional fine where article or currency is not available for confiscation.  
25. Penalty for offences where no separate punishment has been provided.  
25A. Prohibition  of acceptance of foreign contribution.  
26. Offences by companies.  2 SECTIONS  
27. Bar to the prosecution of offences under the Act.  
28. Investigation into cases under the Act.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Power to make rules.  
31. Power to exempt.  
32. Act not to apply to Government transactions.  3 THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1976  
[31st March , 1976.]  
An Act to regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality by 
certain persons or associations, with a view to ensuring that parliamentary institutions, 
political associations and academic and other voluntary organisations as well as individuals 
working in the important areas of national life may function in a manner consistent with the 
values of a sovereign democratic republic, and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Foreign 
Contr ibution (Regulation) Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of In dia, and it shall also apply to — 
(a) citizens of India outside India; and 
(b) associates, branches or subsidiaries, outside India, of companies or bodies corporate, 
regis tered or incorporated in India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a)  “association ” means an association of individuals, whether incorporated or not,                   
having an office in India and includes a society, whether registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860 ), or not, and any other organisation, by whatever name called;  
(b) “candidate for election ” means a person who has been duly nomina ted as a candidate for 
election to any Legislature;  
(c) “foreign contribution ” means the donation, delivery or trans fer made by any foreign source, — 
(i) of any article, not being an article given to a person as a gift for his personal use, if the 
market value, in India, of such article, on the date of such gift, does not exceed one thousand 
rupees;  
(ii) of any curre ncy, whether Indian or foreign;  
(iii) of any foreign security as defined in clause ( i) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 19 73 (46 of 1973 ). 
2[Explanation .—A donation, delivery or transfer of any article, currency or foreign security 
referred to in this clause by a ny person who has received it f rom any foreign source, either directly  or 
through one or m ore persons, shall also be deemed to be foreign contribution within the meaning of 
this clause; ] 
(d) “foreign hospitality ” means any offer, not being a purely casual one, made by a foreign source 
for providing a person with the costs of travel to any foreign country or territory or with free board, 
lodging, transport or medical treatment;  
                                                           
1. 5th August, 1976, vide notification No. G.S.R. 755(E), dated 5th August, 1976, see Gazette of India, Ext raordinary,   
     Part II, sec. 3( i).     
2. The Explanation  ins. by Act 1 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1984).   4 (e) “foreign source”  includes— 
(i) the Government of any foreign country or territory and  any agency of such Government,  
(ii) any international agency, not bein g the United Nations or any of i ts specialised agencies, 
the World Bank, International Monetary Fund or such other agency as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official G azette, specify in this behalf,  
(iii) a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of the Companie s Act,                         
1956, (1 of 1956 ) and also includes — 
(a) a company which is a subsidiary of a foreign company, and  
(b) a multi -national corporation within the meaning of this Act,  
(iv) a corporation, not being a foreign company, incorporated  in a foreign country or territory,  
(v) a multi -national corporation within the meaning of this Act,  
(vi) a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, (1 of 1956 ) if more than 
one-half of the nominal value  of its share capital is held, either singly or in the aggregate, by one 
or more of the following, namely: — 
(a) Government of a foreign country or territory,  
(b) citizens of a foreign country or territory,  
(c) corporations incorporated in a foreign country or territory,  
(d) trusts, societies o r other associations of individuals (whether incorporated or not), 
formed or registered in a foreign country or territory,  
(vii) a trade union in any foreign country or territory, whether or not registered in such 
foreign country or territory,  
(viii) a for eign trust by whatever name called, or a foreign foundation which is either in the 
nature of trust or is mainly financed by a foreign country or territory,  
(ix) a society, club or other association of individuals formed or registered outside India,  
(x) a citizen of a foreign country,  
but does not include any foreign institution which has been permitted by the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, to carry on its activities in India;  
(f) “Legislature ” means— 
(i) either House of Parliament,  
(ii) the Legislative Assembly of a State, or in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, 
either House of the Legislature of that State,  
(iii) Legislative Assembly of a Union territory constituted under the Government of Union 
Terri tories Act, 1963 (20 of 196 3), 
(iv) the Metropolitan Council of Delhi constituted under section 3 of the Delhi 
Administr ation, Act, 1966  (19 of 1966) , 
(v) Municipal Corporations in metropolitan areas as defined in the Code of Crimina l 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , 
(vi) District Councils and Regional Councils in the States of Assam and Meghalaya and in the 
Union territory of Mizoram as provided in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, or  
(vii) any other elective body as may be notified by the Central Governm ent, 5 as the case may be;  
1[(g) “political party”  means— 
(i) an association or body of individual citizens of India — 
(1) which is, or is deemed to be, registered with the Election Commission of I ndia as a 
political party under  the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968, as in 
force for the time being; or  
(2) which has set up candidates for election to any Legislature, but is not so registered  or 
deemed to be registered under  the Election Symbols (Reservation a nd Allotment) Order, 
1968;  
(ii) a political party mentioned in column 1 of Table I to the notification of the Election 
Commission of India No. 56/J&K/84 , dated the 27th September, 1984, as in force for  the time 
being;]  
(h) “prescribe d” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “registered newspaper ” means a newspaper registered under the Press and Registration of 
Books Act, 1867  (25 of 1867) ; 
(j) “subsidiary ” and “associate ” have the meanings, respectively assigned to them in t he 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(k) “trade union ” means a trade union registered under the Trad e Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926 ) 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Act,  a corporation incorporate d in a foreign country or 
territory shall be deemed to be a multi -nation al corporation if such corporation — 
(a) has a subsidiary or a branch or a place of business in two or more countries or territories; or  
(b) carries on business, or otherwise operates, i n two or more countries or territories.  
(2) Words and expressions used herein or not defined but defined in the Foreig n Exchange Regulation 
Act, 1973  (46 of 1973) , have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
(3) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act or in the Foreign                          
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973) , but defined in the Represe ntation of the People Act,                 
1950  (43 of 1950) , or the Representa tion of th e People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951 ), have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in such Act.  
3. Applic ation of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation  of, any other law for the time  being in force.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND FOREIGN HOSPITALITY  
4. Candidate for election, etc., not to accept foreign contribution. —(1) No foreign contribution 
shall be accepted by any — 
(a) candidate for election,  
(b) correspondent, columnist , cartoonist, editor, owner, printer or publisher  of a registered 
newspaper,  
(c) 2[Judge, Government servant] or employee of any corporation , 
(d) member of any Legislature,  
(e) political party or office -bearer thereof . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1985, s. 2, for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 20 -10-1984).  
2. Subs . by s. 3, ibid., for “Government servant” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1984).  6 Explanation .—In clause ( c) and in section 9, “corporation ” means a corporation owned or controlled 
by G overnment and includes a Govern ment company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) . 
(2) (a) No person, resident in India, and no citizen of India resident outside India, shall accept any 
foreign contribution, or acquire o r agree to acquire any currency from a foreign source, on behalf of any 
political party, or  any person referred to in sub -section (1), or both.  
(b) No person , resident in India, shall deliver any currency, whether Indian or foreign , which has been 
accepted from any foreign source, to any person if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such 
other person intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to any political party or any person referred to 
in sub -section ( 1), or both.  
(c) No citizen of India resident outside India shall deliver any currency, whether Indian or foreign, 
which has been accepted from any foreign sou rce, to— 
(i) any political party or  any person referred to in sub -section ( 1), or both, or  
(ii) any other person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such other person 
intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to a political party or to any person referred to in            
sub-section ( 1), or both.  
(3) No person receiving any currency, whether Indian or foreign, from a foreign source on behalf of 
any association, referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 6, shall deliver such currency — 
(i) to any association or o rganisation other than the association for which it was received, or 
(ii) to any other person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such other person 
intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to an association other than the association for which 
such currency was received.  
5. Organisation of a polit ical nature not to accept foreign contribution except with the prior 
permission of the Central Government. —(1) No organisation of a political nature, not being a political 
party, shall, accept any foreign contribution except with the prior permission of the Central Government.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “organisation of a political nature, not being a 
political party ” means such o rganisation as the Central Government may, having regard to the activities 
of the organisation or the ideol ogy propagated by the organisation or the programme of the organisa tion 
or the association of the o rganisation with the activities of an y political party, by an  order published in the 
Official G azette, specify in this behalf.  
(2) (a) Except with the prior permission of the Central Government, no person, resident in India, and 
no citizen of India, resident outside India, shall accept any foreign contribution, or acquire or agree to 
acquire any foreign currency, on behalf of an organisation referred to in sub-section ( 1). 
(b) Except with the prior permission of the Central Government, no person, resident in India, shall 
deliver any foreign currency to any person if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such other 
person intends, or is likely, to deliver such curren cy to an organisation referred to i n sub -section ( 1). 
(c) Except with the prior approval of the Central Government, no citizen of India, resident outside 
India, shall deliver any currency, whether Indian or foreign, which has been accepted from any foreign  
source, to — 
(i) any organisation referred to in sub -section ( 1), or 
(ii) any person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such person intends, or is 
likely, to deliver such currency to an o rganisation referred to in sub -section ( 1). 7 6. Certain associations and persons receiving foreign contribution to give intima tion to the 
Central Government. —1[(1) No association [other than an organisation referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5] having a definite cultural, economic, educational, r eligious or social programme shall accept 
foreign contrib ution unless such association, — 
(a) registers itself with the Central Government in accordance with the  rules made under this Act; 
and 
(b) agree s to receive such foreign contributions only through su ch one of the branches of a bank 
as it may specify in its application for such registration,  
and every association so registered shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, 
an intimation to the Central Government as to the amount of each foreign contribution received by it, the 
source from which and the manner in which such foreign contribution  was re ceived and the purposes for 
which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was utilised by it:  
Provided that where such asso ciation obtains any foreign contribution through any branch other than 
the branch of the bank through which it has agreed to receive foreign contribution or fails to give such 
intimation within the prescribed time or in the prescribed manner, or give s any intimation which is false, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such association shall not, 
after the date of issue of such notification, accept any foreign contribution without the prior permission of 
the Centra l Government.  
(1A) Every association referred to in sub -section ( 1) may, if it is not registered with the Centr al 
Government under that sub -section, accept any foreign contribution only after obtaining the prior 
permission of the Central Government and sha ll also give, within such time and in such manner as may be 
prescribed, an intimation to the Central Government as to the amount of foreign contribution received by 
it, the source from which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was received an d the 
purposes for which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was utilised by it.]  
(2) Every candidate for election, who had received any foreign contribution, at any time within o ne 
hundred and eighty days imme diately preceding the date on wh ich he is duly nominated as such 
candidate, shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the 
Central Government as to the amount of foreign contribution received by him, the source from which and 
the manner in whic h such foreign contri bution was received and the pur poses for which, and the manner 
in which, such foreign contribution was utilised by him.  
7. Recipients of scholarships, etc., to give intima tion to the Central Government. —(1) Every 
citizen of India recei ving any scholarship, stipend or any payment of a like nature from any foreign 
source shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Central 
Government as to the amount of the scholarship, stipend or other paymen t received by him and the 
foreign source from which, and the purpose for which, such scholarship, stipend or other payment has 
been, or is being, received by him.  
(2) Where any recurring payments are being received by any citizen of India from any foreign source 
by way of scholarship, stipend or other payment, it shall be sufficient if the intimation referred to in     
sub-section ( 1) includes a precise information as to the intervals at which, and the purpose for which, such 
recurring payments will be rec eived by such citizen of India.  
(3) It shall not be necessary to give such intimation as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) or                          
sub-section ( 2) in relation to scholarships, stipends or payments of a like natu re, if the annual value o f 
such scholarships, stipends or other payments does not exceed such limits as the Central Government 
may, by rules made under this Act, specify in this behalf.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1985, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1985).  8 8. Persons to whom section 4 shall not apply. —Nothing contained in sect ion 4 shall apply to the  
acceptance , by any person specified in that s ection, of any foreign contribution, where such contribution 
is accepted by him, subject t o the provisions of section 10 — 
(a) by way of salary, wages  or other remuneration due to him or to any group of persons working 
under him, from any foreign source or by way of payment in the ordinary course of business 
transacted i n India by such foreign source; or  
(b) by way of payment , in the course of internati onal trade or commerce , or in the ordinary course 
of business transacted by him outside India; or  
(c) as an agent of a foreign source in relation to any transaction made by such foreign source with 
Government; or  
(d) by way of a gift or presentation made to him as  a member of any Indian delegation, provided 
that such gift or pre sent was accepted in accordance  with the regulations made by the Central 
Government with regard to the acceptance or retention of such gift or presentation; or  
(e) from his relative  when such foreign contribution  has been received with the previous 
permission of the Central Government:  
Provided that no such permission shall be required if the amount of foreign contribution received 
by him from his relative does not exceed, in value, eight thousand rupees per annum and an 
intimation is given by him to the Central Government as to the amount received, the source from 
which and the manner in which it was received and the purpose for which and the manner in which it 
was utilised by him;  
(f) by way of remittance received, in the ordinary course of business, through any official 
channel, post office or any authorised dealer in foreign exchange under the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973 ). 
Explanation .—In this Act, the expression “relative ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ). 
9. Restrictions on acceptance of foreign hospitality. —No member of a Legislature , office -bearer of 
a political party, 1[Judge, Government servant]  or employee of any corporation shall, while visiting any 
country or territory outside India, accept, except with the prior permission of the Central Gover nment, 
any foreign hospitality:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary to obtain any such permission  for an emergent medical aid 
needed on account of sudden illness contracted during a visit outside India, but, where such foreign 
hospitality has been received, the person receiving such hospitality shall give, within one month from the 
date of receipt of such hospitality an intimation to the Central Government as to the receipt of such 
hospitality, and the source from which, and the manner in which, such hospitality was received by him . 
10. Power of Central Government to prohibit receipt of foreign contrib ution etc., in certain 
cases.—The Central, Government may— 
(a) prohibit any association, not specified in section 4, or any person, from accepting any foreign 
contribution;  
(b) 2[without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 6, require any ass ociation 
specified in that sub -section]  to obtain  prior permission of the Central Government before accepting 
any foreign contribution;  
(c) require any person or class  of persons or any association , not being an association specified in 
section 6, t o furnish intimation within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed as to the 
amount of any foreign contribution received by such person or class of persons or association, as the 
case may be, and the source from which and the manner in which suc h contribution was received and 
the purpose for which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was utilised;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1985, s. 5, for “Government servant” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “require any association, specified in section 6” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1985).   9 (d) require any person or class of persons, not specified in section 9, to obtain prior permission o f 
the Central Government before  accepting any foreign hospitality;  
(e) require any person or class of persons, not specified in section 9, to furnish intimation, within 
such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, as to the receipt of any foreign hospitality, the 
source from which  and the manner in which such hospitality was received:  
Provided that no such prohibition or requirement shall be made unless the Central Government is 
satisfied that the acceptance of foreign contribution by such association or person or class of persons,  
as the case may be, the acceptance of foreign hospitality by such person, is likely to affect 
prejudicial ly— 
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or  
(ii) the public interest; or  
(iii) freedom or fairness of election to any Legislature; or  
(iv) frie ndly relat ions with any foreign State; or  
(v) harmony between r eligious, racial, linguistic or  regional groups, castes or communities.  
11. Application to be made in prescribed form for obtaining prior permission to accept forei gn 
contribution or hospitality. —(1) Every individual, association, organisation or other person, who is 
required by or under this Act to obtain the prior permission of the Central Government to accept any 
foreign contribution or foreign hospitality, shall, before the acceptance of any such contribution or 
hospitality, make an application for such permission to the Central Government in such form and in su ch 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) If an application referred to in sub -section ( 1) is not disposed of within ninet y days from the date 
of receipt of such application, the permission prayed for in such application shall, on the expiry of the 
said period of ninety days, be deemed to have been gra nted by the Central Government:  
Provided that, where, in relation to an app lication, the Central Government has informed the applicant 
the special difficulties by reason of which his application cannot be disposed of within the said period of 
ninety days, such application shall not, until the expiry of a further period of thirty days, be deemed to 
have been granted by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
12. Power to prohibit payment of currency received in contravention of the Act. —Where the 
Central Government is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it may deem fi t, that any person has in his 
custody or control any article or currency, whether Indian or foreign, which has been accepted by such 
person in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, it may , by order in writing, prohibit such 
person from paying , delivering transferring or otherwise dealing with, in any manner whatsoever, such 
article or currency save in accordance with the written orders of the Central Government and a copy of 
such order shall be served upon the person so prohibited in t he presc ribed manner, and there  upon the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4), and ( 5) of section 7 of the Unlawful Activities (Pr evention) Act, 
1967 (37 of 1967 ) shall, so far as may be, apply to, or in relation to, such article or currency and 
references in the said sub -sections to moneys, securities or credits shall be construed as references to such 
article or currency.  
13. Recipients of foreign contribu tion to maintain accounts, etc. —Every association, referred to in 
section 6, shall maintain, in such form  and in such manner as may be prescribed, — 
(a) an account of any foreign contribution received by it, and  
(b) a record as to the manner in which such contribution has been utilised by it.  
14. Ins pection of accounts or records. —If the Central Government has , for any reason, to be 
recorded in writing, any ground to suspect that any provision of this Act has been, or is being, 
contravened by — 
(a) any political party, or  10 (b) any person, or  
(c) any organisation, or  
(d) any association,  
it may, by general or special order, authorise such gazetted officer, holding 1[Group A Post] , as it may 
think fit (hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer), to inspect any account or record maintained by 
such political party, person, organisatio n or association, as the case may be, and thereupon every such 
authorised officer shall have the right to enter in or upon any premises at any reasonable hour, before 
sunset and after sunrise, for the purpose of inspecting the said account or record:  
Provided that no gazetted officer shall be authorised to inspect the account or record maintained by a 
political party, unless he has been holding a 1[Group A Post] in connection with the affairs of the Union, 
or a State, for not less than ten years . 
15. Seizure of accounts or records. —If, after inspection of an account or record referred to in 
section 14, the authorised officer has any reasonable cause to believe that any provision of this Act or of 
any other law relating to foreign exchange has been, or is being contravened, he may seize such account 
or record and produce the same before the court in which any proceeding is brought for such 
contravention:  
Provided that the authorised officer shall return such account or record to the person from whom it 
was seized if no proceeding is brought within six months from the date of such seizure for the  
contravention disclosed by such account or record.  
2[15A. Audit of accounts. —Where any organisation or association fails to furnish any returns under 
this Act wit hin the time specified therefor or the returns so furnished are not in accordance with law or if, 
after inspection of such returns, the Central Government has any reasonable cause to believe that any 
provision of this Act has been, or is being, contravened , that Government may, by general or special 
order, authorise such gazetted officer, holding a Group A post, as it may think fit, to audit any books of 
account kept or maintained by such organisation or association, as the case may be, and thereupon every 
such officer shall have the right to enter in or upon any premises at any reasonable hour, before sunset 
and after sunrise, for the purpose of audi ting the said books of account:  
Provided that any information obtained from such audit shall be kept confiden tial and shall not be 
disclosed except for the purposes of this Act.]  
16. Seizure of article or currency received in contravention of the Act. —If any gazetted officer, 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government, by general or special order, has any reason to believe 
that any person has in his possession or control any article exceeding rupees one thousand in value, or 
currency, whether Indian or foreign, in relation to which any provision of this Act has been, or is being, 
contravened, he may sei ze such article or currency.  
17. Seizure to be made in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. —Every 
seizure made under this Act shall be made in accordance with the provision of section 100 of the C ode of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
18. Confiscation of article or currency obtain ed in contravention of the Act. —Any article or  
currency which is seized under section 16 shall be liable to confiscation if such article or currency has 
been adjudged under section 19 to have been received or  obtained in contravention of this Act,  
19. Adjudication of confiscation. —Any confiscation referred to in section 18 may be adjudged — 
(a) without limit, by the Court of Session within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the seizure 
was made; and  
(b) subject to such limits as may be prescribed, by such officer, not below the rank of an Assistant 
Sessions Judge, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, specify in this 
behalf.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1985, s. 7, for “class I post” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1984).   11 20. Opportunity to be given befor e adjudication  of confiscation. —No order of adjudication of 
confiscation shall be made unless a reasonable opportunity of making a representation against such               
confiscation has been given to the perso n from whom any article or cur rency has been seized.  
21. Appeal.—(1) Any person aggrieved by any order m ade under section 19 may prefer  an appeal, — 
(a) wh ere the order has been made by the Court of Session, to the High Court to which such 
Court is subordinate; or  
(b) where the order has been made by any officer specified under clause ( b) of section 19, to the 
Court of Session within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such order of adjudication of 
confiscation was made,  
within one month from the date of communicati on to such person of the order:  
Provided that the appellate court may, if, it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from prefe rring the appeal , within the said period of one month, allow such appeal to be preferred 
within a further period of one month, but not thereafter.  
(2) Any organisation referred to in section 5, or any person or association referred to in section 9 or 
section 10, aggrieved by an order made in pursuance of the Explanation  to sub -section ( 1) of section 5 or 
by an order of the Central Government  refusing to give permission, or by any order made by the Central 
Government, under section 5 or section 9 or section 10, as the case may be, may within sixty da ys from 
the date of such order  prefer an appeal against such order to the High Co urt within the  local limits of 
whose jurisdiction the appellant ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain , or, 
where the appellant is an  organization or association, the principal office of su ch organization or 
association i s located.  
(3) Every appeal preferred under this section shall be deemed to be an appeal from an original decree 
and the provisions of Order XLI of the First Schedule to th e Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , 
shall, as far as may be, apply thereto as they apply to an appeal from an original decree.  
22. Penalty for article or currency obtained in contravention of section 12. —If any person, on 
whom any prohibitory order has been served under section 12, pays, delivers, transfers or otherwise deals 
with, in any manner whatsoever, any article or currency, whether Indian or foreign, in contravention of 
such prohibitory order, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years, or with fine, or with both; and notwithstanding anything containe d in the Code of Crimi nal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ), the court trying such contravention may also impose on the person 
convicted an additional fine equivalent to the market value of the article or the amount of the currency in 
respect of which the prohib itory order has been contravened by him or such part thereo f as the court may 
deem fit.  
23. Punishment for the contraventi on of any provision of the Act. —(1) Whoever accepts, or 
assists any person, political party or organisation in accepting, any foreign contribution or any currency 
from a foreign source , in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder, shall be 
punished with im prisonment for a term which may  extend to five years, or with fine, or with both . 
(2) Whoever accepts an y foreign hospitality in contravention of any provision of this A ct or any rule 
made thereunder shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine, or with both.  
24. Power to impose additional fine where article or  currency is not available for     
confiscation. —Notwithstanding any thing contained in the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ), 
the Court trying a person , who, in relation to any article or currency, whether Indian or foreign , does or 
omits to do any act whi ch act or omission would render  such article or currency liable to confiscation 
under this Act, may, in the event of the conviction of such person for the act or omission aforesaid, 
impose on such person a fine not exceeding  five times the value of the article or currency or one thousand 
rupees, whichever is more, if such article or currency is not available for confiscation, and the fine so 
imposed shall be in addition to any other fine which may be imposed on such person un der this Act.  12 25. Penalty for offences where no separate punishment has been provided. —Whoever fails to 
comply with any provision of this Act for which no separate penalty has been provided in this Act shall 
be punished with imprisonment for a term which m ay extend to one year, or with fine not exceeding one 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
1[25A. Prohibition of acceptance of foreign contribution. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, whoever, havin g been convicted of any offence  under sub -section ( 1) of section 23 or section 25, 
in so far as such offence relates to the acceptance or utilisation of foreign contribution, is again convicted 
of such offence shall not accept any foreign contribution for a period of three years from the date of the 
subsequent conviction.]  
26. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act or any rule made thereunder has 
been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge 
of, and was responsible to, the compa ny for the conduct of the business of the company , as w ell as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render su ch person liable to any punishment 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an o ffence under this Act or any 
rule made thereunder has been com mitted by a  company and it is proved that the offence has been   
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary o r other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm, society, trade union or other 
association of individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, society, trade union or other association of individuals, means 
a partner in the firm or a member of  the governing body of such society, trad e union or other 
association of  individuals.  
27. Bar to the prosecu tion of offences under the Act. —No court shall take cognizance of any 
offence under this Act, except with the previous sanction of the Central Gover nment or any officer 
authorised by that Government in this behalf.  
28. Investigation into cases under the Act. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the C ode of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Act may also be investigated 
into by such authority as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and the authority so specified 
shall have all the powers which an officer -in-charge of a police station has while making an investigation 
into cognizable offence.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the Central Government in respect of any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance  of the provisions of this Act or, any rule or order 
made thereunder.  
30. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without p rejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, intima tion is to be given by an association 
referred to in section 6, with regard to the foreig n contributions received by it;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1985, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1984).  13 (b) the limits up to which receipt of scholarships, stipends or payments of a like nature need not 
be intim ated to the Central Government;  
(c) the time within which, a nd the manner in which, intima tion is  to be given by persons receiving 
any scholarship, stipend or any payment of a lik e nature from a foreign source;  
(d) the time within which, and the manner in which a candidate for election should give 
intimation as to the amount of foreign contribution re ceived by him at any time within one hundred 
and eighty days from the date  when he became such candidate;  
(e) the form and manner in which an application shall be made for obtaining prior permission of 
the Central Government to receive foreign contr ibution  or foreign hospitality;  
(f) the manner of service of the prohibitory o rder made under section 12;  
(g) the form and manner in which account or record referred to in section 13 shall be maintained;  
(h) the limits up to which an officer, not below the rank o f an Assistant Sessions Judge, may 
make adjudication of confiscation;  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid , as soon as may be after it 
is made, before  each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the success ive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
31. Power to exempt. —If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in 
the interests of the general public so to do, it may, by order and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the order, exempt any association (not being a political party ), organisation or any individual 
(not being a candidate for election) from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act and may, 
as often as may be n ecessary, revoke or modify such  order.  
32. Act not to ap ply to Government transactions. —Nothi ng contained in this Act shall apply to 
any transaction between the Government of India and the Government of any foreign country or territory.  
 
--------------------------The High Court at Patna (Establishment of a Permanent Bench at Ranchi) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE HIGH COURT AT PATNA (ESTABLISHMENT OF A PERMANENT  
BENCH AT RANCHI) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 57 OF 1976  
[8th April, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a permanent bench of the High Court at Patna at 
Ranchi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the High Court at Patna (Establishment of a Permanent Bench 
at Ranchi) Act, 1976.  
2. Establishment of a permanent bench of High Court at Patna at Ranchi .—There shall be 
established a permanent bench of the High Court at Patna at Ranchi, and such Judges of the High Court at 
Patna, being not less than three in number, as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, from time to tim e, 
nominate, shall sit at Ranchi in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in 
that High Court in respect of cases arising in the districts of Hazaribagh, Giridih, Dhanbad, Ranchi, 
Palamau and Singhbhum:  
Provided  that the Chi ef Justice of that High Court may, in his discretion, order that any case or class 
of cases arising in any such district shall be heard at Patna . 
 
--------------------------The Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE INDIAN IRON AND STEEL COMPANY (ACQUIS ITION OF SHARES) ACT, 1976  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE SHARES OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer and vesting of shares of the Company in the Central Government . 
4. Payment of amounts . 
5. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments . 
6. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner . 
7. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
7A.  Power of Commissioner to inquire int o disputes as to persons entitled to any amount . 
7B.  Deposit of amount in court . 
8. Examination of claims . 
9. Admission or rejection of claims . 
10. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants . 
11. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account . 
12. Power of inspection . 
CHAPTER III  
  MISCELLANEOUS  
13. Act to have overriding effect . 
14. Penalties.  
15. Offences by companies.  
16. Limitation of cognizance of offences . 
17. Power to make rules . 
18. Repeal and saving.  
 
  2 THE INDIAN IRON AND STEEL COMPANY (ACQUIS ITION OF SHARES) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 89 OF 1976  
[2nd September , 1976.]  
An Act to provide for the acquis ition of certain shares of the Indian Iron and Steel Company 
Limited with a view to securing the proper management of the affairs of the Company and  
the continuity and development of the production of goods which are vital to the needs of the 
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the management of the undertaking of the Indian Iron and Steel Company Limited was 
taken over by the Central Government for a limited period under the Indian Iron and Steel Company 
(Taking Over of Management) Act, 1972  (50 of 1972) , in order to secure the proper management of such 
undertaking;  
AND WHEREAS the top management of the Company w as guilty of mismanagement of the affairs of 
the Company and restoration, after the expiry of the limited period aforesaid, of the management of the 
affairs of the Company to such top management would be prejudicial to the interests of the Company and 
to the public interest;  
AND WHEREAS investment  of a large amount is necessary for the maintenance and development of the 
production of the undertakings of the Company;  
AND WHEREAS acquisition by the Central Government of an effective control over the affairs of the 
Company is necessary to enable it to make the investment aforesaid;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Indian Iron and Steel Company 
(Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1976.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 17th day of July, 1976.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 17th day of July, 1976;  
(b) “bank ” means a banking company within the meaning of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 
(10 of 1949);  
(c) “Company ” means the Indian Iron and Steel Company Limited, being a company within the 
meaning of the Companies Ac t, 1956 (1 of 1956), and having its registered office at IISCO House, 
50, Chowringhee Road, Calcutta;  
(d) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 5;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette ; 
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “share ” means a share, whether equity or preference, in the capital of the Company, and 
includes a share pledged by any shareholder with any bank or other creditor, but does not include any 
share in the capital of the Company held by — 
(i) any State Government;  
(ii) the State Bank of India, established under section 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955 
(23 of 1955) and its subsidiary banks;  
(iii) the Steel Authority of India Limited, a c ompany formed and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at Hindustan Times House, 
Kasturba Gandhi Marg, New Delhi;  3 (iv) the Life Insurance Corporation of India, established under section 3 of the Life Insurance 
Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956 ); 
(v) the Unit Trust of India, established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 
(52 of 1963);  
(vi) any corresponding n ew bank, within the meaning of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undert akings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970);  
(vii) any general insurance company nationalised by the General Insurance Business 
(Nationalis ation) Act, 1972 (57 of 1972);  
1[(h) “shareholder ” means, — 
(i) a person who, immediately before the appointed day, was registered by the Company as 
the holder of any share and includes his legal representative; or  
(ii) a person who, before the appointed day, had lodged with the Company a prope r 
instrument of transfer of any share in the form prescribed under section 108 of the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ), and executed in accordance with the  provisions of that section; or  
(iii) a person who claims under a proper instrument of transfer of any  share in the form 
prescribed under section 108 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , and delivers such 
instrument, duly executed, to the Commissioner 2[before the expiry of one hundred and twenty 
days from the date of commencement of the Indian Iron and  Steel Company (Acquis ition of  
Shares) Amendment Act, 1981  (59 of 1981) ];] 
(i) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any 
provision of this Act, by notification, specify.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE SHARES OF T HE COMPANY  
3. Transfer and vesting of shares of the Company in the Central Government. —(1) On the 
appointed day, all the shares of the Company shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vested 
in, the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Govern ment shall be deemed, on and from the appointed day, to have been registered 
in the Register of members of the Company as the holder of each share which stands transferred to, and 
vested in, it by virtue of the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) All the sh ares which have vested in the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), shall, by force 
of such vesting, be freed and discharged of all trusts, liabilities, obligations, mortgages, charges, liens and 
other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, i njunction or any decree or order of the court, 
tribunal or other  authority restricting the use of such shares in any manner, shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) 
shall not be deemed to affect — 
(a) any right of the Company subsisting, immediately before the appointed day, against any 
shareholder to recover from such shareholder any sum of money on the ground that the shareholder 
has not paid or credited to  the Company the whole or any part of the value of the shares held by him, 
or on any other ground whatsoever; or  
(b) any right of the shareholder subsisting, immediately before the appointed day, against the 
Company to receive any dividend or other payment  due from the Company.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 1977, s. 2, for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 13 -10-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 59 of 1981, s. 2, for “on or before such date as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this   
behalf” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1981).  4 4. Payment of amounts. —(1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under 
section 3, of the shares of the Company, there shall be given by the Central Government to the 
shareholders of the Company, in cash and in the manner specified in section 6, an amount of rupees seven 
crores, twenty -three lakhs, ninety -five thousand and one hundred and thirty -seven and fifteen paise.  
(2) The amount, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall carry simple interest at the rate of fou r per cent . 
per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of 
such amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
5. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. —(1) The Central Government shall,  for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company under section 4, by notification, appoint a 
Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon t he Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act, and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to ex ercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act, and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowan ces of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
6. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. —(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty  days from the specified date , pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
shareholders of the Company, — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 4; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount determined under  sub-section ( 2) of section 4.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the  said deposit account and the said deposit account shall b e operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account, referred to in 
sub-section ( 2), shall enure to the benefit of the shareholders of the Company.  
7. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. —(1) Every shareholder, having a claim in relation to 
any share acquired by this Act, shall prefer such  claim before the Commissioner 1[before the expiry of 
one hundred and twenty days from the date of commencement of the Indian Iron and Steel Company 
(Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act, 1981  (59 of 1981) ]: 
2[Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim before the expiry  of the said period of one hundred and twenty days, he may 
entertain the claim within a further period of one hundred and twenty days and not thereafter.]  
3[(1A) Every claim preferred under sub -section ( 1) as it stood before the commencement of the Indian 
Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act, 1981  (59 of 1981) , after the expiry of 
the period or date specified therein shall be deemed to have been preferred under the said sub -section as 
amended by the said Amendment Act and shall be de alt with (even if it had been disallowed before such 
commencement) as if it had been preferred within time.]  
(2) Every shareholder of a preference share shall have a pre ferential claim with regard to the amount 
paid by the Central Government to the Commiss ioner.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1981, s. 3, for “ on or before the 30th day of November, 1977” (w.e.f. 29-12-1981). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for the proviso ( w.e.f. 29-12-1981). 
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 29-12-1981). 5 1[7A. Power of Commissioner to inquire into disputes as to persons entitled to any amount. —
Where there is any dispute as to the person or persons who are entitled to any amount payable under this 
Act (including any dispute as to who are the legal re presentatives of any deceased claimant to the 
amount), the Commissioner may, after making such inquiry as he may deem fit, make the payment to 
such person as appears to him to be best entitled to receive the amount:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is una ble to determine as to who is the person entitled to the 
amount and considers that the matter could more appropriately be dealt with by the principal civil court of 
original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office o f the Company is 
situated, he may refer such dispute to the said court, whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that nothing contained herein shall affect the liability of any person, who may 
receive the whole or any part of the amount allowed under this Act, to pay the same to the person lawfully 
entitled thereto.  
7B. Deposit of amount in court. —Where any dispute has been referred under section 7A by the 
Commissioner to the civil court referred to therein, he shall deposit the amount in  that court.]  
8. Examination of claims. —On receipt of the claims made under section 7, the Commis sioner shall 
separately arrange the claims in relation to preference shares and in relation to the equity shares and 
examine the claims in relation to each suc h share.  
9. Admission or rejection of claims. —(1) After examining the claims, the Commissioner shall fix a 
certain date on or before which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be excluded from the 
benefit of the disbursements made by the Com missioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of the daily newspaper in the English language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the 
regional language as the Commissioner may co nsider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the 
claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the 
advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant, who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner, shall be excluded from the disbursement made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary, and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after gi ving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, incl uding the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit,  in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of th e Indian Pen al Code ( 45 of 1 860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 345 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
                                                           
1. Ins by Act 39 of 1977, s . 4 (w.e.f. 13 -10-1977).   6 (7) A claimant, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner, may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated.  
10. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants. —(1) After admitting a claim 
under this Act, the amount due in respect of each share acquired by virtue of this Act shall be paid by the 
Commissioner at the rate of rupees thirty -two and paise seventy -five per preference share, and at the rate 
of rupees four an d paise seventy per equity share to the person or persons to whom such sums are due, 
and on such payment, the liability of the Central Government in respect of the share so acquired shall 
stand discharged.  
(2) The Commissioner shall also apportion amongst the shareholders, the amount paid to hi m by way 
of interest under sub -section ( 3) of section 6, and such apportionment shall be made on the basis of the 
amount due to each shareholder.  
11. Undisburse d or unc laimed amount to be deposited to the general reve nue account. —Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed  or unclaimed for a period of 1[six months] 
from the last day on which the disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be 
preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if 
such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being t reated as an order for 
the refund of revenue.  
12. Power of inspection. —For the purposes of ascertaining whether any person claiming payment 
under this Act is a shareholder, the Commissioner shall have the right to — 
(a) require any person, having the posses sion, custody or control, of any register or record of the 
Company, to produce such register or record before the Commissioner,  
(b) require any person to make any statement or furnish any information which may be required 
by the Commissioner.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
13. Act to have overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law, other than this Act, or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law, other than this  Act. 
14. Penalties. —If any person, — 
(a) makes any claim for any payment under this Act, knowing or having reason to believe that 
such claim is false or without any basis; or  
(b) when required under this Act so to do, — 
(i) omits  or fails to produce any register or record of the Company; or  
(ii) makes any statement or furnishes any information which is false in any material particular 
and which he knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true; or  
(c) makes any such statement as aforesaid in any book, account, record, reg ister, return or other 
document , 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1981, s.  4, for “three years” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1981).  7 15. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the com pany, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and p unished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence  was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the comm ission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent or co nnivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against an d punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
16. Limitation of cognizance of offences. —No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under this Act, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of an officer authorised by 
that Government in this behalf.  
17. Power to make rules. —(1) The C entral Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in sess ion, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making  any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be with out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
18. Repeal and saving. —The Indian Iron and Steel Company (Acquisition of Shares) Ordinance, 
1976 (10 of 1976), is hereby repealed:  
Provided that notwithstanding such repeal, anythin g done or any action taken under the said 
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act.  
--------------------------The Iron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare Cess Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE IRON ORE MINES  MANGANESE ORE MINES  AND CHROME ORE  MINES 
LABOUR  WELFARE CESS ACT, 1976  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Levy and collection of cess  on iron ore and manganese ore . 
4. Payment of duty of customs and duty of excise . 
5. Crediting proceeds of duty to Consolidated Fund of India . 
6. Power of Central Government to exempt . 
7. Interest payable by occupiers of factories and owners of mines.  
8. Penalty for non-payment of duty of excise within the prescribed period.  
9. Recovery of amounts due under the Act . 
10. Penalty for evasion of duty of excise . 
11. Offence by companies . 
12. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
13. Repeal and saving . 
14. Power to make rules . 
  2 THE IRON ORE  MINES  1[, MANGANESE ORE MINES  AND CHROME OR  EMINES  
LABOUR  WELFARE ] CESS ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 55 OF 1976  
[7th April, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the levy and collection of access  on iron ore  2[, manganese ore and chrome 
ore] for the financing of activities to promote the welfare of persons employed in the iron or e 
mines3[,manganese ore mines and chrome ore mines] and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Iron Ore Mines             
1[, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare] Cess Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date4 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply in the first 
instance the provisions of this Act, only to iron ore mines, or only to manganese ore mines,5[or only to 
chrome ore mines ,] in a State with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, and if that 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary  or expedient so to do, it may extend this Act to all iron ore 
mines6[, manganese ore mines and chrome ore mines] in that State with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the notification published in the Official Gazette.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “export ” means taking out of India to a place outside India;  
(b) “Fund ” means the Iron Ore Mines 7[, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare ] Fund formed under section 3 of the Iron Ore  Mines  7[, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome 
Ore Mines Labour Welfare] Fund Act, 1976  (61 of 1976) ; 
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Iron Ore Mines 7[, 
Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare ] Fund Act, 1976  (61 of 1976) , shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Levy and collection of cess on iron ore and manganese ore .—With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be levied and 
collected as a cess for the purposes of the Iron Ore Mines  8[, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore 
Mines Labour Welfare ] Fund Act, 1976  (61 of 1976) — 
(i) on all  iron ore produced in any mine, — 
(a) a duty of customs, where such iron ore is exported; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1982, s. 3,for “and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “and manganese ore” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “and manganese ore mines” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
4. 1st September, 1978, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1041(E), dated 9th August, 197 8, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,   
     Part II, sec. 3 ( i). 
5. Ins. by Act 44 of 1982, s. 3  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “and manganese ore mines” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
7.  Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
8.  Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  3 (b) a duty of excise, where such iron ore is sold or otherwise disposed of to the occupier of 
any metallurgical factory, or to any person who in turn sells it to a metallurgical factory, or is 
used by the owner of the min e in any metallurgical factory,  
at such rate not exceeding one rupee per metric tonne of iron ore as the Central Government may, 
from time to time, fix by notific ation in the Official Gazette;  
(ii) on all mang anese ore produced in any mine, — 
(a) a  duty of customs, where such manganese ore is exported; or  
(b) a duty of excise, where such manganese ore is sold or otherwise disposed of to the 
occupier of any metallurgical factory, or to any person who in turn sells it to a metallurgical 
factory, or is used by the owner of the mine in any metallurgical factory,  
at such rate not exceeding six rupees per metric tonne of manganese ore as the Central Government 
may, from time to time, fix by notification in the Official Gazette;  
1[(iii) on all c hrome ore produced in any mine, — 
(a) a duty of customs, where such chrome ore is exported; or  
(b) a duty of excise, where such chrome ore is sold or otherwise disposed of to the occupier 
of any metallurgical factory, or to any person who in turn sells it to a metallurgical factory, or is 
used by the owner of the mine in any metallurgical factory,  
at such rate not exceeding six rupees per metric tonne  of chrome ore as the Central Government may, 
from time to time fix, by notification in the Official Gazette.]  
Explanation .—Where the owner of any iron ore mine or manganese ore mine  1[or chrome ore mine] 
is also the occupier of a metallurgical factory, th en, for the purposes of sub -clause ( b) of clause  (i) 2[or 
sub-clause ( b) of clause ( ii) or sub -clause ( b) of clause ( iii), all the iron ore or manganese ore or chrome 
ore,] as the case may be, produced in the mine and not sold or otherwise disposed of to the occupier of 
any other metallurgical factory or to any other person shall be deemed, unless the contrary is proved, to 
have been used by such owner for  his own metallurgical factory.  
4. Payment of duty of customs and duty of excise .—(1) Every  duty of customs leviable under this 
Act on any iron ore or manganese ore  3[or chrome ore] shall be payable to the Central Government by the 
the person by whom the iron ore or,  4[manganese ore, or chrome ore, as the case may be,] is exported.  
(2) Every duty of  excise leviable under this Act on any iron ore or manganese ore  3[or chrome ore] 
shall be payable — 
(a) to the occupier of the metallurgical factory by the person by whom such iron ore  or 
manganese ore3[or chrome  ore] is sold or otherwise disposed of to su ch occupier,  
(b) to the Central Government, by the owner of the iron ore mine or manganese ore mine  3[or 
chrome ore mine] where the iron ore or manganese ore  3[or chrome ore ]is used by such owner in any 
metallurgical factory,  
within  such period as may be prescribed.  
(3) All amounts referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall be collected by the occupier of the 
metallurgical factory in such manner, and paid by him to the Central Government within such period, as 
may be prescrib ed.] 
5. Crediting proceeds of duty to Consolidated Fund of India .—The proceeds of duty of customs 
and duty of excise levied under section 3 shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1982, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “or sub -clause ( b) of clause ( ii),  all the iron ore or manganese ore,”(w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “as the case may be, manganese ore” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  4 6. Power of Central Government to exempt .—Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in this Act, if 
the Central Government is of opinion that in respect of any metallurgical factory or class of metallurgical 
factories the levy of the duty of customs or duty of excise on iron ore or manganese ore1[or chrome ore] 
under this Act is disproportionate to the cost of collection of such duty of customs or duty of excise from 
such metallurgical factory or class of metallurgical factories, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to such exceptions and modification s as may be specified in the said notification, 
exempt such metallurgical factory or class of metallurgical factories from all or any  of the provisions of 
this Act.  
7. Interest payable by occupiers of factories and owners of mines .—If any occupier of a fac tory or 
any owner of an iron ore mine or a manganese ore mine2[or a chrome ore mine ]fails to pay any amount 
payable by him to the Central Government under section 4 within the period prescribed thereunder, such 
occupier or owner, as the case may be, shall be liable to pay simple interest at twelve per cent.per annum 
on the amount to be paid from the date on which such payment is due till such amount is actually paid.  
8. Penalty for non -payment of duty of excise within the prescribed  period.—If any duty of e xcise 
payable by the occupier of the metallurgical factory or the owner of the iron ore mine or manganese ore 
mine3[or chrome ore mine ]to the Central Government under section 4 is not paid to that Government 
within the period prescribed thereunder, it shall be deemed to be in arrears and the authority prescribed in 
this behalf may, after such inquiry as it deems fit, impose on the occupier of the metallurgical factory or, 
as the case may be, on the owner of the iron ore mine or manganese ore mine3[or ch rome ore mine]a 
penalty not exceeding the amount of duty of excise in arrears:  
Provided that before imposing any such penalty such occupier or such owner, as the case may be, 
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard and, if after such hearing  the said authority is 
satisfied that the default was for any good and sufficient reason, no penalty shall be imposed under this 
section.  
9. Recovery of amounts due under the Act .—Any amount due under this Act (including the interest 
or penalty, if any, pa yable under section 7 or section 8, as the case may be) from any occupier of a 
metallurgical factory or any owner of an iron ore mine or a manganese ore mine  4[or a chrome ore 
mine]may be recovered by the Central Government in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
10. Penalty for evasion of duty of ex cise.—(1) Whoever wi lfully  or intentionally evades or attempts 
to evade the payment of duty of excise payable by him to the Central Government under this Act, shall, 
on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section, save on a complaint 
made by, or under the authority of, the Central Government.  
11. Offence by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has  been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence an d shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the  consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liab le to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 44 of 1982, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
2.  Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
3.  Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
4.  Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  5 Explanation .— For the purpose s of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner  in the firm.  
12. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer or other employee of the Central Government for 
anything which is in good faith done or inten ded to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
13. Repeal and saving .—(1) As from the commencement of this Act, the Iron Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare Cess Act, 1961 (58 of 1961) , shall stand repealed.  
(2) (a) The amount collected as cess, under the  Act repealed by sub -section ( 1), shall be credited to 
the Consolidated Fund of India.  
(b) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, 
credit to the Fund an amount not exceeding the proceeds of cess credite d under clause ( a), after deducting 
the cost of collection as determined by that Government.  
14. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the assessment and collection of the duty of customs or duty of excise levied under section 3;  
(b) the making of refunds, remissions and recoveries of the duty of customs or duty of excise 
levied under section 3;  
(c) the period within which the person selling or otherwise disposing of the iron ore or manganese 
ore1[or chrome ore] to the occupier of th e metallurgical factory shall pay the duty of excise to such 
occupier under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(d) the period within which the owner of the iron ore mine or manganese ore mine1[or chrome ore 
mine] shall pay the duty of excise to the Central Gove rnment under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(e) the manner in which the occupier of the metallurgical factory shall collect the duty of excise 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(f) the period within which the occupier of the metallurgical factory shall pa y to the Central 
Government the duty of excise collected by him under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(g) the authority which may impose any penalty under section 8;  
(h) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed, or provided for, by rules under t his 
Act. 
(3) In making any rule under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may direct that a 
breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, a s the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1982, s. 1 1 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
--------------------------The Iron Ore Mines, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE IRON ORE MINES  1[, MANGANESE ORE MINES AND CHROME ORE MINES  
LABOUR WELFARE ] FUND ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1976  
[10th April, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the financing of activities to promote the welfare of persons employed in 
the iron ore mines 2[, manganese ore mines  and chrome ore mines].  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title , extent and commencement . (1) This Act may be called the Iron Ore Mines                
1[, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare] Fund Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates m ay be appointed for different States:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply in the first 
instance the provisions of this Act, only to iron ore mines, or only to manganese ore mines  4[, or only to 
chrome or e mines] in a State with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, and if that 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may extend this Act to all iron ore 
mines  5[, manganese ore mines and chrome ore m ines] in that State with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the notification published in the Official Gazette.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “agent ” and “owner ” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( c) and ( l) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952  (35 of 1952);  
6[(aa) “chrome ore ” includes f erro-chrome ]; 
(b) “contractor ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the 
Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970  (37 of 1970);  
(c) “factory ” and “occupier ” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( m)    
and ( n) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948  (63 of 1948);  
(d) “Fund ” means the Iron Ore Mines  7[, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour 
Welfare]  Fund formed under section 3;  
(e) “manager ” means the manager referred to in section 17 of the Mines Act, 1952  (35 of 1952);  
(f) “manganese ore ” includes ferr ogenous manganese ore or ferro -manganese ore;  
(g) “metallurgical factory ” means — 
(i) a factory in which iron or steel or manganese  6[or c hrome] is being processed or 
manufactured;  
(ii) any other factory, being a factory in which iron ore or manganese   ore 6[or chrome  ore] is 
used for any purpose which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be a metallurgical factory for the purposes of this Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1982, s. 3, for “and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 2 , ibid.,  for “and manganese ore mines” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
3. 1st September , 1978 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 1042 , dated 9 th August , 1978 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
4. Ins. by Act 45 of 1982, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “and mangane se ore mines” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
6. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
7. Subs. by s.  4, ibid.,  for “and Manganese Ore Mines La bour Welfare” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  2 
 (h) a person is said to be employed in an iron ore mine or manganese ore mine  1[or chrome ore 
mine] ,— 
(1) if he is employed within the premises or in the vicinity of such mine by the owner, agent 
or manager of such mine or by a contractor or any other agency exclusively in any one or  more of 
the following, namely: — 
(i) any iron ore or manganese ore  1[or chrome ore]  mining operation;  
(ii) the operation, servicing, maintenance or repair of any machinery or any part thereof 
used in or about such mine;  
(iii) the loading, unloading or despatch of iron ore or manganese ore  1[or chrome ore]  or 
any other material connected with the mining of iron ore or manganese ore  1[or chrome ore] ; 
(iv) any work in any office, canteen or creche situated within the precincts of such mine;  
(v) any welfare, health, sanitary or conservancy services or any watch and ward duties at 
any place situated within such premises or vicinity, not being a place occupied by any 
residential building; or  
(2) if, in any such area as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette 
in this behalf, he is employed by the owner, agent or manager of such mine or by a contractor or 
any other agency exclusively in the loading, unloading or despatch of iron ore or manganese ore           
1[or chrome ore] or any other material connected with the mining of iron ore or manganese ore        
1[or chrome ore] ; 
(i) “prescribed ” means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Iron Ore Mines and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare Fund .—There shall be formed a 
Fund, to be called the Iron Ore Mines  2[, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare] 
Fund, and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) an amount which the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide from and out of the proceeds of duty of customs and duty of excise 
credited under section 5 of the Iron Ore Mines 2[, Manganese Ore Mine s and Chrome Ore Mines 
Labour Welfare ] Cess Act, 1976  (55 of 1976) , after deducting therefrom, the cost of collection as 
determined by the Central Government under this Act;  
(b) any income from investment of the amount credited under the Act referred to in  clause ( a) and 
any other moneys received by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act.  
4. Application of F und.—The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the 
expenditure incurred in connection with the measures which, in the opinion of that Government, are 
necessary or expedient to promote the welfare of persons employed in the iron ore mines  3[, manganese 
ore mines and chrome  ore mines], and in particular — 
(a) to defray the cost of measures for the benefit of persons employed  in the iron ore mines or 
manganese ore mines  4[or chrome ore m ines] directed towards — 
(i) the provision and improvement of public health and sanitation, the prevention of disease 
and the provision and improvement of medical facilities;  
(ii) the provision and improvement of water supplies and facilities for washing;  
(iii) the provision and improvement of educational facilities;  
(iv) the provision and improvement of housing and recreational facilities including standards 
of living, nutrition and a melioration of social conditions;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “and manganese ore mines” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  3 
 (v) the provision of transport to and from the place of work;  
1[(vi) the provision of family welfare, including family planning education and services ]; 
(b) to grant loan or subsidy to a State Government, a local authority  or the owner of an iron ore 
mine or of a manganese ore mine  2[or of a c hrome ore mine], in aid of any scheme approved by the 
Central Government for any purpose connected with the welfare of persons employed in iron or e 
mines or manganese ore mines  2[or chrome ore mines] ; 
(c) to pay annually grants -in-aid to such of the owners of iron ore mines  or manganese ore mines 
2[or chrome ore m ines] who provide to the satisfaction of the Central Government welfare measures 
of the prescribed standard for the benefit  of persons employed in their mines, so, however, that the 
amount payable as grants -in-aid to such owners shall not exceed — 
(i) the  amount spent by them in the provision of welfare measures as determined by the 
Central Government or any person specified by it in this behalf, or  
(ii) such amount as may be prescribed,  
whichever is less:  
Provided that no grant -in-aid shall be payable in respect of any welfare measures provided b y the 
owner of an iron ore mine or of a manganese ore mine 2[or of a chrome ore m ine] where the amount 
spent thereon determined as aforesaid is less than the amount prescribed in this behalf;  
(d) to meet the allowa nces, if any, of the members of the Advisory Committee and the Central 
Advisory Committee constituted under section 5 and section 6 respectively and the salaries and 
allowances, if any, of persons appointed under section 8;  
(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direct to be defrayed from the 
Fund.  
5. Advisory Committees .—(1) The Central Government may, — 
(a) constitute for each State which produces iron ore or manganese ore  3[or chrome o re] an 
Advisory Committee, or  
(b) where  4[any two of or all such o res] are produced in a State, constitute, for such State, an 
Advisory Committee in respect of  5[any one of such ores only, or in respect of any two of such ores 
only, or in respect of all such ores] , 
to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be 
referred to it by that Government, including matters relating to the application of the Fund.  
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of  persons as may be appointed to it by 
the Central Government of whom one shall be a woman and the members shall be chosen in such manner 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided that each Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members representing 
Gover nment, the owners of iron ore mines  6[, manganese ore mines and chrome o re mines] and the 
persons employed in the iron ore mines  6[, manganese ore mines and chrome o re mines] . 
(3) The Chairman of each Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of the members of every 
Advisory Committee.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1987, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -5-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1982, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
3. Ins. by s. 7 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “both iron ore and manganese ore” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
5. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “iron ore only or manganese ore only, or in respect of both ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
6. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “and manganese ore mines ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  4 
 6. Central Advisory Committee .—(1) The Central Government may constitute a Central Advisory 
Committee to co -ordinate the work  of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to advise 
the Central Government on any matter arising out of the administration of this Act.  
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons as may be appointed by 
the Central Government of whom one shall be a woman and the members shall be chosen in such manner 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of memb ers 
representing the Government , the owners of iron ore m ines 1[, manganese ore mines and chrome o re 
mines ] and the persons employed in the iron ore mines  1[, manganese ore mines and chrome o re mines].  
(3) The Chairman of the Central Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of the members of the 
Central Advisory Committee.  
7. Power to co -opt, etc .—(1) The Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, at 
any time and for such period as it thinks fit, co -opt any person or persons to the Advisory Committee.  
(2) A person co -opted under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise all the powers and functions of a member 
under this Act but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(3) The Advisory Committee or the Central Adv isory Committee may, if it considers it necessary or 
expedient so to do, invite any person to attend its meeting and when such person attends any meeting, he 
shall not be entitled to vote thereat.  
8. Appointment of Welfare Commissioners, etc., and their powers .—(1) The Central Government 
may appoint as many Welfare Commissioners, Welfare Administrators, Inspectors and such other officers 
and staff as it thinks necessary for the purposes of this Act and the Iron Ore Mines  2[, Manganese Ore 
Mines and Chrome  Ore Mines Labour Welfare]  Cess  Act, 1976  (55 of 1976) . 
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct a Welfare Commissioner to 
appoint such staff as is considered necessary for the purposes of this Act and the Iron Ore Mines             
2[, Manganese Ore Mines and Chrome Ore Mines Labour Welfare ] Cess Act, 1976  (55 of 1976) . 
(3) Every person so appointed shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of      
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(4) Any Welfare  Commissioner, Welfare Administrator or Inspector may, — 
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he may think fit, enter at any reasonable time, any place which 
he considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act;  
(b) do within such pl ace anything necessary for the proper discharge of his duties; and  
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
9. Power of Central Government to exempt .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if 
the Central Government is satisfied that there is in force in any State or part thereof a law making 
adequate provision for the financing of activities to promote the welfare of persons employed in the iron 
ore mines or manganese ore mines  3[or chrome ore m ines] , it may, by notification in the Of ficial Gazette, 
direct that all or any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply or shall apply to such State or part 
thereof subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the notification.  
10. Annual report of activities financed  under the Act .—The Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be after the end of each financial year, cause to be published in the Official Gazette a report giving 
an account of its activities financed under this Act during the previous financial year, tog ether with a 
statement of accounts.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1982, s. 8, for “and manganese ore mines” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “and Manganese Ore Mines Labour Welfare” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  5 
 11. Power to call for information .—The Central Government may require an occupier of                  
a metallurgical factory or the owner, agent or manager of an iron ore mine or of a manganese ore mine  
1[or of a chrome ore m ine] to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in 
such form and within such period as may be prescribed.  
12. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which the Fund may be applied for the measures specified in section 4;  
(b) the conditions governing the grant of loan or subsidy under clause ( b) of section 4;  
(c) the standard of welfare measures to be provided by owners of iron ore mines or ma nganese 
ore mines  2[or chrome ore m ines] for the purposes of clause ( c) of section 4;  
(d) the determination of  the amount referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of section 4 and in 
the proviso to that clause;  
(e) the composition of the Advisory Commi ttees and the Central Advisory Committee constituted 
under section 5 and section 6 respectively, the manner in which the members thereof shall be chosen, 
the term of office of such members, the allowances, if any , payable to them including co -opted 
members  and invit ees, and the manner in which the said Advisory Committees and the Central 
Advisory Committee shall conduct their business;  
(f) the recruitment, conditions of service and the duties of all persons appointed under section 8;  
(g) the powers that may  be exercised by a Welfare Commissioner, Welfare Administrator or an 
Inspector under section 8;  
(h) the furnishing to the Central Government by the occupiers of metallurgical factories and the 
owners, agents or managers of iron ore mines or of manganese or e mines  2[or of chrome ore m ines] , 
of such statistical and other information as may be required to be furnished, from time to time, by that 
Government under section 11;  
(i) the  form in which and the period within which statistical and other information are to be 
furnished under clause ( h); 
(j) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed, or provided for, by rules under         
this Act.  
(3) In making any rule under cla use ( h) or clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may 
direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is mad e, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the suc cessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however , that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1982, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-7-1983).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1983).  
--------------------------The Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE LEVY S UGAR PRICE EQUALISATION FUND ACT , 1976  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1976  
[16th February, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment, in the interest of the general public, of a fund to ensure 
that the price of levy sugar may be uniform throughout India and  for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Levy Sugar Price 
Equalisation  Fund Act, 197 6. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “controlled price ” means the price of the relevant grade of levy sugar, determined from time 
to time under sub -section ( 3C) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955), or 
under the Defence  and Internal Security of India Rules, 1971, in relation to any year of production;  
(b) “excess realisation ”, in relatio n to each grade of levy sugar, — 
(i) means the price realised by any producer, on the sale of levy sug ar of such grade, in  
excess of — 
(a) the controlled price, or  
(b) where any fair price has been fixed by a court for levy sugar of such grade, such fair 
price, and  
(ii) includes any realisation representing the difference between the controlled price and the 
price allowed by the court by an  interim order, if such interim order is set aside, whether by the 
court which made the order or in appeal or revision;  
2[Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where in relation to levy 
sugar of any grade sold by any producer, the producer has realised towards duties of excise with 
respect to such sugar any amount in excess of the amount payable by way of such duties, such 
excess shall also be deemed to be excess realisation wi thin the meaning of this clause ]; 
(c) “fair price ”, in relation to levy sugar, means the price fixed by the court in excess of the 
controlled price, and, where an interim price, fixed by the court, is superseded by a price which is 
finally fixed by the court, the price so finally fixed;  
(d) “Fund ” means the  Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund, established under section 3;  
3[(e) “levy sugar ” means the sugar requisitioned by the Central Government under clause ( f) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955  (10 of 1955);]  
(f) “prescri bed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “producer ” means a person carrying on the business of manufacturing sugar by the vacuum 
pan process.  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1976, vide notification No. G .S.R. 251(E), dated 25th  March, 1976, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,       
sec. 3( i). 
2. The Explanation  ins. by Act  54 of  1984, s.  2 (w.e.f.  23-8-1984).   
3. Subs. by s. 2 , ibid.,  for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  2 
 3. Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund .—(1) There  shall be established a Fund, to be called the 
Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund.  
(2) Save as otherwise  1[provided in sub -section ( 5)], there shall be credited to the Fund, in such 
manner as may be prescribed, — 
(a) the amounts representing all excess realisations made by the producers, irrespective of 
whether such excess realisations were made before or after the commencement of this Act;  
(b) the amounts representing any loans which may be advanced, or grants which may be made, by 
the Central Governmen t for carrying out the objects of the Fund.  
(3) Save as otherwise  1[provided in sub -section ( 5)], every producer shall, — 
(a) in the case of an excess realisation made before the commencement of this Act, within thirty 
days from such commencement,  
(b) in th e case of an excess realisation made after such commencement, within thirty days from 
the date on which such excess realisation was made,  
credit to the Fund, the amount representing such excess realisations, together with interest due thereon at 
the rate o f twelve and a half per cent.  per annum, from the date on which such amount was realised by 
him: 
2[Provi ded that — 
(a) the interest due on so much of any amount of any excess realisation made before the date of 
commencement of Levy Sugar Price Equalisation  Fund (Amendment) Act, 1984  (54 of 1984) , as is 
not credited to the Fund together with interest at the aforesaid rate of twelve and a half per cent.  per 
annum before the expiry of sixty days from the date of such commencement; and  
(b) the interest due on s o much of the amount of any excess realisation made on or after the date 
of such commencement as is not credited to the Fund together with interest at the aforesaid rate of 
twelve and a half per cent.  per annum within sixty days from the date on which such  amount was 
realised,  
shall be at the rate of fifteen per cent.  per annum from the date on which such amount was realised by the 
producer.]  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(5) Where, in pursuance of an  4[interim order made by any court , whether before or afte r the 
comm encement of this Act]  any amount representing the difference between the controlled price and the 
interim price allowed by the court is, — 
(a) held  by any producer either with himself or with any other person or with any court, 
Government, bank or other authority, or  
(b) collected and kept by the producer under the cover of any guarantee,  
such producer shall, on the final disposal of the proceedings of the court aforesaid,  5[credit to the Fund, 
within sixty days from the date of such final disposal, such amount, to the extent it represents any excess 
realisation together with interest due thereon at the rate of twelve and a half per cent . per annum fr om the 
date on which such amount was realised by him:  
Provided that— 
(i) the interest due on so much of such amount as was realised before the date of commencement 
of the Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund (Amendment) Act, 1984 (54 of 1984) and is not cred ited 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1984, s. 3, for “provided in sub -section ( 4)” (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  
2. The proviso i ns. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  
3. Sub-section ( 4) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-8-1984).  
4. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for “interim order referred to in sub -section ( 4)” (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  
5. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  3 
 to the Fund together with interest at the aforesaid rat e of twelve and a half per cent.  per annum before 
the expiry of sixty days from the date of such commencement, and  
(ii) the interest due on so much of such amount as is realised after such commenc ement and not 
credited to the Fund together with interest at the aforesaid rate of twelve and a half per cent . per 
annum within sixty days from the date on which such amount was realised, 
shall be at the rate of fifteen per cent.  per annum from the date on which such amount was realised by the 
producer]  
1[(5A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the interest payable on the amount of 
any excess realisation required to be credited to the Fund under that sub -section in  respect of any period 
during which such amount was by reason of any order of any court held by the producer with any other 
person or with any court, Government, bank or other authority referred to in clause ( a) of that               
sub-section, shall be the interest which actually accrued on such a mount in respect of such period.]  
1[(5B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), any amount representing the difference 
between the controlled price and the interim price allowed by the court whi ch— 
(a) is held by any producer with any other person or with any court, Government, bank or other 
authority referred to in clause ( a) of that sub -section, or  
(b) is under the cover of any guarantee referred to in clause ( b) of that sub -section,  
shall, as soon as may be after the final disposal of the proceedings of the Court aforesaid, be credited, to 
the extent such amount represents excess realisation together with the interest, if any, which has accrued 
thereon or been guaranteed in respect th ereof, to the Fund by such other person, the court, Government, 
bank or other authority aforesaid or, as the case may be, by the bank or other person furnishing such 
guarantee and the amount so credited shall be set off against the amount (including intere st) required to be 
credited by the producer under sub -section ( 5). 
(5C) The provisions of sub -section ( 5B) shall apply in relation to every amount representing the 
difference between the controlled price and the interim price allowed by the court which,         
immediately before the commencement of the Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund (Amendment)                             
Act, 1984  (54 of 1984) — 
(a) is held by any producer with any other person or with any court, Government, bank or other 
authority mentioned in clause ( a) of that sub -section , or 
(b) is under the cover of any guarantee mentioned in clause ( b) of that sub -section,  
notwithstanding that the final disposal of the proceedings of the court aforesaid took place before such 
commencement and f or this purpose the reference in that sub -section to “final d isposal of the proceedings 
of the court ” shall be construed as a reference to such commencement.  
(5D) Where any amount is credited to the Fund under sub -section ( 5B), such crediting shall, — 
(a) in a case falling under clause ( a) of that sub -section, operate as the discharge of the liability in 
relation to such amount of the person, court, Government, bank or other authority so crediting the 
amount;  
(b) in a case falling under clause ( b) of that s ub-section, have effect as if it had been made in 
accordance with the guarantee given by the bank or other person crediting the amount and for this 
purpose such guarantee shall be deemed to have provided for such crediting.]  
(6) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the obligation to credit amounts representing 
excess realisations to the Fund shall be in addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the 
contravention  of any provision of this Act.  
(7) The Fund shall be administered, subjec t to the provisions of section 8, by the Central Government.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1984, s . 3 (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  4 
 4. Determination of questions as to making of excess realisations .—If any question arises as to 
whether any producer has realised, on the sale of levy sugar, any amount in excess of the controlled price, 
or, as the case may be, the fair price, it shall be decided by the Central Government after giving an 
opportunity to such producer of being heard and after making such inquiry as that Government may deem 
fit. 
5. Discharge of persons of liability in respect of amounts credited to the Fund .—Where any 
amount is credited to the Fund under section 3,  1[the producer concerned] shall, upon such crediting, be 
discharged from the liability to make repayment of such amounts to the persons entitled  thereto and such 
discharge from liability to make repayment shall be without any prejudice to any penalty which may be 
imposed on such producer for each excess realisation made by him.  
6. Right of buyer to claim refund .—(1) Where  any amount is credited to the Fund, a refund shall be 
made from the Fund to the buyer of levy sugar from whom any excess realisation was made by the 
producer or dealer:  
Provided that no buyer shall be entitled to claim a refund under this sub -section if h e,— 
(a) being a wholesale dealer, had passed on the incidence of such excess over the controlled or 
fair price of levy sugar to the retail dealer by whom the price of such sugar was paid, or  
(b) being a retail dealer, had passed on the incidence of such ex cess over the controlled or fair 
price of levy sugar to the consumer by whom the price of such sugar was paid , 2[or] 
2[(c) being a person who is not a wholesale dealer or a retail dealer had passed on the incidence of 
such excess over the controlled or fair price of levy sugar to any other person as part of the price of 
any product in the manufacture of which such sugar has been used or, as the case may be, to the 
consumer by whom the price of such sugar was paid.]  
(2) Every application for refund under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Central Government 
within six months from the date on which the excess realisation, in relation to which such refund is 
claimed, is credited to the Fund, and every such application shall be in such form as may be prescr ibed 
and shall be accompanied by such documentary or other evidence as the applicant may furnish to 
establish that the excess realisation, in relation to which such refund is claimed, was made from him.  
(3) The Central Government shall, if satisfied, on a scrutiny of the claim made under sub -section ( 1), 
that an excess realisation was made from the claimant, direct that refund be made from the Fund to the 
claimant to the extent of the  3[excess realisation made from him together with interest (if any) thereo n 
credited to the Fund]:  
Provided that if the amount standing to the credit of the Fund is not sufficient to enable the Central 
Government to make the refund, such refund shall be made from the Central revenues.  
7. Excess realisation not to be paid to any producer of sugar .—Notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract, no amount, representing 
excess realisations made by a producer or excess realisations made by a producer under the cover of any 
guarantee given by any person shall be paid to any producer.  
8. Fund to vest in the Central Government .—(1) Any money paid into the Fund, which remains 
unclaimed after the expiry of the period of six months from the date on which it is credited to the Fund, 
shall vest in the Central Government and such amount shall be utilised by that Government in such 
manner  as may be prescribed having regard to the interests of the consumers of levy sugar as a class and 
the need to ensure that the retail price of levy sugar throughout India is uniform:  
Provided that, notwithstanding the vesting of such money in the Central G overnment, a claim for the 
refund of money standing to the credit of the Fund may be made [in the manner specified in                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 6] at any time by a buyer who is lawfully entitled to make such claim, and every 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1984, s. 4,  for “the producer by whom such amount is credited” (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 5 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “excess reali sation made from him” (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  5 
 such claim, if  admitted, shall be dealt with as if the money relatable to such claim had not vested in the 
Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall not grant any loan or give any financial assistance from the Fund 
except for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) The  Central Government shall maintain, or if it thinks fit specify the authority which shall 
maintain, proper and separate account and other relevant records in relation to the Fund in such form as 
may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Au ditor General of India.  
9. Power to require producers to maintain accounts, etc. —The Central Government may, if it is 
satisfied that it is expedient or necessary so to do for carrying out the provisions of this Act, by an order, 
direct any producer to main tain such books of account and other records in relation to levy sugar as it may 
think fit and to produce such books of account and other records for inspection and may also direct such 
producer to furnish such information relating to levy sugar as may be specified in the order.  
10. Power of entry, search and seizure .—(1) Any authority specified by the Central Government in 
this behalf may, if it is satisfied that any provision of this Act has been, or is being, or is about to be, 
contravened, authorise  any person to enter and search any premises where any accounts, books, registers 
and other documents relating to levy sugar and belonging to, or under the control of, a producer or his 
agent, are maintained or kept for safe custody.  
(2) The person so auth orised may seize any such accounts, books, registers or other documents if he 
has any reason to believe that a contravention of this Act has been, or is being, or is about to be, 
committed:  
Provided that the accounts, books, registers or other documents se ized under this section shall not be 
retained in custody of the Central Government for a period exceeding ninety days:  
Provided further that where such accounts, books, registers and other documents are required for the 
purposes of any prosecution, they ma y be retained in the custody of the Central Government for a further 
period, not exceeding ninety days, for the purposes of such prosecution.  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to searches and 
seizures, shall, so far as may be, apply to searches and seizures made under this Act.  
11. Power of Central Government to recover excess realisations as arrears of land revenue .—If 
any producer makes any default in crediting to the Fund  1[any excess realisation  made by him, or any 
interest due on such excess realisation or any part of such excess realisation or interest, such excess 
realisation or such interest or such part], as the case may be, shall be recoverable by the Central 
Government from such producer a s an arrear of land revenue.  
12. Dissolution of the Fund .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare that, with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, the Fund shall cease to 
exist and thereupon all the amounts lying to the credit of the Fund shall be cred ited to the Central 
revenues and refund, if any, made, by the Central Government, after such cesser, to any buyer of levy 
sugar shall be treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
13. Penalties .—(1) If any producer — 
(a) makes any default in crediting t o the Fund any excess realisations made by him or any part 
thereof  2[any excess realisation made by him or any interest due on such excess realisation or any part 
of such excess realisation or interest] , or 
(b) having been required by the Central Governme nt so to do, omits or fails to — 
(i) maintain any books, accounts or other records in relation to levy sugar, or  
(ii) produce  any books, accounts or other records for inspection, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1984, s. 6, for “any excess realisations made by him or any part thereof, such excess realisations or such 
part” (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -8-1984).  6 
 (iii) furnish any information or furnishes any information which is incorre ct or false in 
material particulars,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except on the complaint 
in writing made by the Central Government or by any officer or authority authorized, in writing, by that 
Government in this behalf.  
14. Removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear 
to it to be necessary to remove the difficulty.  
15. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedi ng shall 
lie against the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
16. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which amoun ts shall be credited to the Fund under section 3;  
(b) the form in which an application for refund, referred to in section 6, shall be made;  
(c) the manner in which amounts standing to the credit of the Fund shall be utilised, as required 
by section 8;  
(d) the form in which the account and the relevant records, referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 8, shall be maintained;  
(e) any other matter in relation to which such rules are required to be, or may be, made.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Governmen t under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such mo dified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
--------------------------The Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of Settlements) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION (MODIFICATION  OF SETTLEMENTS)           
ACT, 1976  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Modification of settlements . 
 
  2 THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION (MODIFICATION  OF SETTLEMENTS)           
ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 72 OF 1976  
[29th May , 1976.]  
An Act to provide for the modification of the settlements arrived a t between the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India and their workmen.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of Settlements) 
Act, 1976.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Corporation ” means the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under section 3 of 
the Life Insurance Corp oration Act, 1956 (31 of 1956);  
(b) “salary” means basic pay and includes — 
(i) special pay, if any;  
(ii) dearness allowance; and  
(iii) additional  dearness allowance;  
(c) “settlements ” means,— 
(i) the settlement which was arrived at between the Corporation and their workmen on the 
24th day of January, 1974 , under section 18, read with clause ( p) of section 2, of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947 ); and  
(ii) the settlement which was arrived at between the Corporation and their workmen on the 
6th day of February, 1974, under section 18, read with clause ( p) of section 2, of the said Act and 
in respect of the terms of which there was no a pproval as provided for in sub -clause ( 2) of clause 
12 thereof.  
3. Modification of settlements. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947  (14 of 1947 ),the provisions of each of the settlements, in so far as they relate to the payment of an 
annual cash bonus to every Class III and Class IV employee of the Corporation at the rate of fifteen per 
cent. of  his annual salary, shall not have any force or effect and shall not be deemed to have had any force 
or effect on and from the 1st day of April , 1975 . 
--------------------------The Metal Corporation (Nationalisation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
  
THE  METAL CORPORATION (NATIONALISATIO N AND MISCELLANEOUS 
PROVISIONS)  ACT, 1976                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. “Undertaking ”—meaning of.  
CHAPTER  II 
TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION  
4. Taking over of management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation.  
5. Appointment of Administrator to take over the management of the undertaking.  
6. Application of Act 1 of 1 956. 
CHAPTER III  
ACQUISITION OF THE UNDETAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION  
7. Vesting of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation in the Central Government.  
8. Central Government to be the lessee of the State Government.  
9. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation in 
a Government company.  
CHAPTER IV  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
10. Payment of amount for deprivation of management.  
11. Payment of amount for acquisition of the undertaking.  
12. Time of payment.  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION  
13. Management, etc., of the undertaking.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE METAL CORPORATION  
14. Provisions relating to employees.  
15. Provident and other funds.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
16. Act to have overriding effect.  
17. Contracts in bad faith may be cancelled or varied.  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
19. Delegation of powers.  
20. Penalties.  
21. Offences by companies.  
22. Power to make rules.  
23. Power to remove difficulties.  
24. Abolition of Tribunal, etc.  
25. Repeal of Ordinance and saving.  
  3 
 THE METAL CORPORATION  (NATIONALISATION AND MISCELLANEOUS 
PROVISIONS) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 100 OF 1976  
[7th September, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the taking over of th e management of the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation, after such undertaking is deemed to have been transferred to, and re -vested in, 
the said Corporation, and for the subsequent acquisition of the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation for the  purpose of enabling the Central Government, in the public interest, to 
exploit to the fullest extent possible, the zinc and lead deposits in and around Zawar area in 
the State of Rajasthan and to utilise those minerals in such manner as to subserve the 
common good, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Metal Corporation 
(Nationalisation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976 . 
(2) Sections 20 and 21 shall come into force at once and the other provisions of this Act shall be 
deemed to have come into force on the 22nd day of October, 1965.  
2. Definitions .—In thi s Act, unless the context oth erwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 2nd day of August, 1976;  
(b) “commencement of this Act ” means the 22nd day of October, 1965;  
(c) “Metal Corporation ” means the Metal Corporation of India Limited, a company within the 
meaning of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), and having its registered office at Calcutta;  
(d) “Mineral Concession Rules ” means the Mineral Concession Rules, for the time being in force, 
made by the Central Government under the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development)     
Act, 1957  (67 of 1957);  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette ; 
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the Companies         
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. “Undert aking”—meaning of .—For the purposes of this Act, the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, leaseholds (including mining leases, if any), 
powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, 
works, mines, workshops, projects, smelters, refineries, stores, instruments, machinery, locomotives, 
automobiles and other vehicles, mined or extracted zinc or lead ores, concentrates and metals, in process 
or in sto ck or in transit, cash balances, cash in hand, reserve fund, investments and book debts and all 
other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the date of 
commencement of this Act in the ownership, possession, po wer or control of the  Metal Corporation , 
whether within or without India, and all books of account, registers, maps, sections, drawings, records of 
survey and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto; and shall also be deemed to include 
all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind of the Metal Corporation  in relation to its 
undertaking.  
  4 
 CHAPTER II  
TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION  
4. Taking over of management of the undertaking of the Meta l Corporation .—(1) On the 
commencement of this Act, the Metal Corporation of India (Acquisition of Undertaking)                      
Act, 1966  (36 of 1966), shall stand repealed, and on such repeal, the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation, which had been transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government by virtue of the 
provisions of section 3 of the Act so repealed, and the undertaking of the Metal Corporation together with 
all its properties, assets, liabilities and obligations specified in sub -section (1) of section 4 of that Act and 
such other properties, assets, liabilities and obligations, acquired or incurred, for the purposes of its 
undertaking, after the 22nd day of October, 1965, which stood, by virtue of the provisions of section 12 of 
the sa id Act, transferred to, and vested in, the Government company formed in pursuance of the 
provisions of section 12 of the Act aforesaid shall, by virtue of the provisions of this Act, be deemed to 
have been retransferred to, and re -vested in, the Metal Corp oration, and, immediately thereafter, the 
management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation shall be deemed to have been transferred to, and 
vested in, the Central Government.  
(2) Any contract, whether express or implied, or other arrangement, in so f ar as it relates to the 
management of the business and affairs of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, and in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have terminated on such 
commencement.  
(3) All persons in charge of the management, including persons holding offices as directors, managers 
or in any other managerial capacity specified in section 197A of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), of 
the Metal Corporation immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall b e deemed to have 
vacated their offices as such on such commencement.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no person in 
respect of whom any contract of management or other arrangement is terminated by reason o f the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) or who  ceases to hold office by reason of the provisions contained in        
sub-section ( 3), shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature termination of the contract 
of management or other arrangement o r for the loss of office, as the case may be.  
5. Appointment of Administrator to take over the management of the undertaking .—(1)  The 
Central Government may, as soon as it is convenient administratively so to do, appoint, with effect from 
such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the commencement of this Act), any person or body 
of persons (including a Government company, whether in existence at the commencement of this Act or 
incorporated thereafter) as the Administrator of the undertaking  of the Metal Corporation and the 
Administrator so appointed shall carry on the management of such undertaking for and on behalf of the 
Central Government.  
(2) On the appointment of the Administrator under sub -section ( 1), the management of the 
undertaking  of the Metal Corporation shall vest in such Administrator and all persons in charge of the 
management of such undertaking immediately before such appointment shall cease to be in charge of 
such management and shall be bound to deliver to the Administrator  all assets, books of account, registers 
and other documents in their custody relating to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation.  
(3) The Central Government may issue such directions (including instructions as to initiating, 
defending or continuing any legal proceedings before any court, tribunal or other authority) to the 
Administrator as to his powers and duties as the Central Government may deem desirable and the 
Administrator may also apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to  the manner in 
which the management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, or in relation to any other matter 
arising in the course of such management, shall be conducted.  
(4) Where any property, the management of which has vested in the Central Gove rnment under 
section 4, is in the possession, custody or control of any person, such person shall deliver the property to 
the Central Government forthwith.  5 
 (5) Any person who, at the commencement of this Act, has in his possession or under his control any 
books, papers or other documents relating to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation shall be liable to 
account for such books, papers and other documents to the Administrator and shall deliver them up to the 
Administrator or to such person as may be auth orised by the Central Government or the Administrator in 
this behalf.  
(6) The Metal Corporation  shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this 
behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all the properties and assets ( including 
particulars of book debts and investments and belongings) of the Metal Corporation  at the commencement 
of this Act, all liabilities and obligations of the Metal Corporation  subsisting at such commencement and 
also of all agreements entered into b y the Metal Corporation  and in force on such commencement, 
including agreements, whether express or implied, relating to leave, pension, gratuity and other terms of 
service of any officer or other employee of the Metal Corporation  under which, by virtue of  the provisions 
of this Act, the Central Government has, or will have, or may have, liabilities, and for this purpose, the 
Central Government shall afford the Metal Corporation  all reasonable facilities.  
(7) The Administrator shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government and shall 
receive, from the funds of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation such remuneration as may be fixed by 
the Central Government.  
6. Application of Act 1 of 1956 .—(1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Co mpanies        
Act 1956, or in the memorandum or articles of association of the  Metal Corporation , so long as the 
management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation remains ves ted in the Central Government, — 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of the Metal Corporation  or any other person to 
nominate or appoint any person to be a director of the  Metal Corporation ; 
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of the Metal Corporation  on or a fter 
the commencement of this Act shall be given effect to unless approved by the Central Government;  
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of the Metal Corporation  or for the appointment of 
liquidator or receiver in respect of the undertaking thereof shall  lie in any court except with the 
consent of the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), and to the other provisions contained in this 
Act and subject to such other exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, a s the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf, the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), shall continue to apply 
to the Metal Corporation in the same manner as it applied thereto before the date of commencement of 
this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
ACQUISITION OF THE UNDETAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION  
7. Vesting of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation in the Central Government .—(1) On the 
appointed day, the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, and the right, title and interest of the Metal 
Corpo ration  in relation to its undertaking, shall stand transferred to, and shall vest absolutely in, the 
Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, all property included in the undertaking of 
the Metal Corporation which has vested in the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall, by force 
of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trusts, obligations, mortgages, charges, liens and other 
incumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction or any decree or ord er of a court, tribunal or 
other authority restricting the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property 
included in the undertaki ng of the Metal Corporation, or any other person holding any charge, lien or 
other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his 
rights and interests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in w hole or in part, from the Central 6 
 Government but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property 
which has vested in the Central Government.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, all contracts and working arrangements 
which are subsisting immediately before the appointed day and affecting the Metal Corporation  shall, in 
so far as they relate to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, cease to have effect or be enforceable 
against the Metal Corporation  or any person who was surety or had guaranteed the performance thereof 
and shall be of as full force and effec t against or in favour of the Central Government and enforceable as 
fully and effectually as if, instead of the  Metal Corporation , the Central Government had been named 
therein or had been a party thereto.  
(4) Subject to the other provisions contained in t his Act, any proceeding or cause of action pending or 
existing immediately before the appointed day by or against the Metal Corporation  or the Central 
Government or the Government company referred to in section 12 of the Metal Corporation of India 
(Acquisi tion of Undertakings) Act, 1966  (36 of 196 6), in relation to the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation  may, as from that day, be continued and enforced by or against the Central Government or 
the Government company referred to in section 9, as it might have  been enforced by or against the  Metal 
Corporation , the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, if this Act had not 
been enacted, and shall cease to be enforceable by or against the  Metal Corporation , its surety or 
guarantor.  
8. Central Government to be the lessee of the State Government .—(1)  Where the right of the 
Metal Corporation under any mining lease granted, or deemed to have been granted to it by any State 
Government or any other person, vest in the Central Government under  section 7, the Central 
Government shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee of such 
State Government or such other person, as the case may be, in relation to such mine, as if a mining lease 
in respect of such mine ha d been granted to the Central Government, and the period of such lease shall be 
the entire period for which such lease could have been granted by the State Government or such other 
person under the Mineral Concession Rules, and, thereupon all the rights un der such mining lease, 
including surface, underground and other rights granted to the lessee shall be deemed to have been 
transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government.  
(2) On the expiry of the term of any lease referred to in sub -section ( 1), such  lease shall, if so desired 
by the Central Government, be renewed by the State Government or other person on the same terms and 
conditions on which such lease was held immediately before the appointed day by the  Metal Corporation , 
for the maximum period fo r which such lease could be renewed under the Mineral Concession Rules.  
9. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation 
in a Government company .—(1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with 
such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to impose, direct, by any order in writing, 
that the undertaking of the Metal Corporation an d the right, title and interest of the Metal Corporation in 
relation to such undertaking shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in the 
Government company either on the date of publication of the direction or on such earlier or  later date (not 
being a date earlier than the appointed day ), as may be specified in the direction.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Metal Corporation  in relation to its undertaking vest in a 
Government company under sub -section ( 1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee in relation to the mines of which the Metal 
Corporation  was the lessee as if a mining lease in respect of such mines had been granted to the 
Governme nt company, and the period of such lease shall be the entire period for which such lease could 
have been granted under the Mineral Concession Rules; and all the rights and liabilities of the Central 
Government in relation to such mines shall, on and from t he date of such vesting, be deemed to have 
become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 shall apply to a lease which vests in a Government 
company as they apply to a lease wh ich has vested in the Central Government and any reference therein 
to the Central Government shall be construed as a reference to the Government company.  7 
 (4) Any reference hereafter in this Act to the Government company shall be construed as a reference 
to the Government company which is appointed as the Administrator under sub -section ( 1) of section 5, 
or, as the case may be, the Government company referred to in the direction made under sub -section ( 1). 
CHAPTER IV  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
10. Payment of amount for deprivation of management .—For the deprivation of the Metal 
Corporation  of the management of its undertaking, there shall be given, in cash, to the Metal Corporation  
by the Central Government, an amount, calculated at the rate of rupees eleven lakhs and thirty -nine 
thousand per annum, for the period commencing on the 22nd day of October, 1965, and ending on the 
appointed day.  
11. Payment of amount for acquisition of the undertaking .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the 
Central Government, under se ction 7, of the right, title and interest of the Metal Corporation in relation to 
its undertaking, there shall be given, in cash, by the Central Government to the Metal Corporation, an 
amount of rupees one crore and ninety -eight lakhs.  
12. Time of payment .—(1) The amount determined under section 10, and the amount payable under 
section 11, shall be given by the Central Government to the Metal Corporation before the expiry of a 
period of three months from the appointed day (hereafter referred to as the speci fied period).  
(2) The amount referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, if not paid before the expiry of the specified 
period, carry simple interest at the rate of four per  cent. per annum, for the period commencing on the 
date of expiry of the specified period  and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is made 
by the Central Government to the  Metal Corporation : 
Provided that no interest shall run from the date on which the amount is tendered to the Metal 
Corporation if the amount so tendered is not accepted by it.  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKING OF THE METAL CORPORATION  
13. Management, etc., of the undertaking .—The general superintendence, direction, control and 
management of the affairs and business of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, the right, title and 
interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Government under section 7, shall vest in the 
Government company specified in the direction made under sub -section ( 1) of section  9, and, thereupon 
the Government co mpany shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as the Metal 
Corporation is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its undertaking.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE METAL CORPORATION  
14. Provisions relatin g to employees .—(1) Every officer or other employee of the Metal 
Corporation (except a director or any managerial personnel specified in section 197A of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or any other person entitled to manage the whole or a substantial part of the 
business of the Metal Corporation under a special agreement) in the employment of the Metal 
Corporation immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, in so far as such employee is 
employed in connection with the affairs of the undertak ing of the Metal Corporation, become, as from 
such commencement, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the Central Government or the 
Government company and shall hold office by the same tenure and at the same remuneration and upon 
the same t erms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other 
matters as he would have held under the Metal Corporation if this Act had not been enacted and shall 
continue to do so until his employment under the Central Gove rnment or the Government company is 
duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions are duly altered by the Central 
Government or the Government company:  8 
 Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to any such officer or other  employee, his 
employment shall be terminated by the Central Government or the Government company on paym ent of 
an amount equivalent to — 
(a) three months’  remuneration, in the case of permanent employees, and  
(b) one month’ s remuneration, in the case of other employees:  
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to any officer or other employee who has, 
within thirty days next following the commencement of this Act, by notice in writing to the Central 
Government or the Government company, a s the case may be, intimated his intention of not becoming an 
officer or other employee of the Central Government or the Government company.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for t he time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of the 
Metal Corporation to the Central Government or the Government company shall not entitle such officer 
or other employee to any compensation under that Act or other law, and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authorities.  
15. Provident and other funds .—(1) Where the Metal Corporation has established a provident, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employ ed in its undertaking, the 
monies relatable to the officers or other employees whose services have become transferred by or under 
this Act to the Central Government or the Government company, shall, out of the monies standing , on the 
appointed day, to the credit of such provident, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, 
and vested in, the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred, under sub -section ( 1), to the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or Government 
company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of thi s Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or  
other authority.  
17. Contracts in bad faith may be cancelled or varied .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied 
after such inquiry as it may think fit that any contract or agreement entered into at any time within three 
years immediately preceding the commencement of this Act between the Metal Corporation or the 
managing agents of Metal Corporation and any other person, in so far as su ch contract or agreement 
relates  to the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, has been entered into in bad faith or is d etrimental to 
the interests of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation, it may make an order cancelling (either 
unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose) or varying the contract or 
agreement, and thereafter the contract or agreement shall have effect accordingly:  
Provided that no such contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied except after giving to the 
parties to the contract or agreement a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an ord er made under sub -section ( 1) may make an application to the 
High Court at Delhi for the variation or reversal of such order and thereupon such court may confirm, 
modify or reverse such order.  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, pros ecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Administrator or the 
Government company or any officer or other person authorised by that Government or Government 
company for anything whic h is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
  9 
 (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or 
other employees or the Government company or any officer or other person authorised by  that company 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act.  
19. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the power conferred by section 22, may also be 
exercised by such person or persons, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the persons to who m such 
power has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central 
Government.  
20. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Metal Cor poration, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or 
Government company; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of the undertaking  of 
the Metal Corporation or wi lfully withholds or fails to fur nish to the Central Government or the 
Government company or any person or body of persons specified by that Government or Government 
company, any document relating in such undertaking which may be in his possession, custody or 
control or fails to deliver t o the Central Government or the Government company or any person or 
body of persons specified by that Government or Government company, any assets, books of 
accounts, registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control, relating to the 
under taking of the Metal Corporation; or  
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to 
be false or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
21. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro ceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence  to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
  10 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the monies in any provident or other fund referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 15 shall be dealt with;  
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, befo re the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
23. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty a rises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from th e date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
24. Abolition of Tribunal, etc .—(1) On the commencement of this Act, the Tribunal constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 of the Metal Corporation of India (Acquisition of Undertaking)      
Act, 1966  (36 of 1966) , shall be stand abolished and every proceeding pending before it, every order 
made by it and every appeal or application against any such order, shall stand abated, and, on such 
abatement, the Central Government shall take charg e of all records of proceedings, applications, 
memoranda, registers and other documents maintained by, or in connection with any proceeding before, 
the Tribunal.  
(2) On the commencement o f this Act, — 
(a) every suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to the affairs or business 
of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation instituted before such commencement, and pending on 
such commencement shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by 
reason of anything  contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, 
prosecuted and enforced by or against the Metal Corporation and not against the Central Government 
or the Government company;  
(b) every suit, appeal or other proceeding of w hatever nature instituted after such commencement 
but before the appointed day, in relation to the affairs or business of the undertaking of the Metal 
Corporation, and pending on the appointed day, shall not abate, be discontinued or, in any way, be 
prejud icially affected by reason of anything contained in this Act, but such suit, appeal or other 
proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Central Government or the 
Government company.  
(3) Anything done, any action taken or any con tract entered into by the Central Government, 
Administrator or the Government company at any time during the period commencing on the 22nd day of 
October, 1965, and ending on the appointed day shall be deemed to have been done, taken or entered into 
by the  Central Government or, as the case may be, the Government company in the due course of 
management of the undertaking of the Metal Corporation.  
25. Repeal of Ordinance and saving .—(1) The Metal Corporation (Nationalisation and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Ord inance, 1976 (12 of 1976) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corre sponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The National Library of India Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
  
THE  NATIONAL LIBRARY OF INDIA  ACT, 1976                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY BOARD  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Board.  
4. Composition of the Board.  
5. Disqualification for office of member.  
6. Term of office, etc., of members.  
7. Vacation of office of member.  
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts.  
9. Members to disclose their financial or other interest in the Board.  
10. Meetings of Board.  
11. Executive Council.  
12. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes.  
13. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board and Executive Council.  
14. Visitor.  
15. Director of Library.  
16. Staff of Board.  
17. Transfer of service of existing employees to Board.  
18. Library to be known as “National Library of India” and location of Library.  
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY, LIABILITIES AND FUNCTIONS OF TH E BOARD  
19. Property and liabilities of Board.  
20. Duties of Board.  
21. Powers of Board.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT  AND REPORT  
22. Grants by Central Government to Board.  
23. Fund of Board.  
24. Budget.  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Accounts and audit.  
26. Returns and report.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Delegation of powers and duties.  
28. Officers and employees of Board to be public servants.  
29. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
30. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
31. Power of Board to make regulations.  
  3 
 THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF INDIA ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 76 OF 1976  
[11th June, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the administration of the National Library and certain other connected 
matters.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Library of India      
Act, 1976.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date  as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Board established under section 3;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Board;  
(c) “Fund ” means the Fund referred to in section 23;  
(d) “Library ” means the institution located at Calcutta and known at the commencement of the 
Constitution as the National Library;  
(e) “member ” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairman;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY BOARD  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act, a Board to be known as the National Library Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions  of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of  property 
and contract and may by the name , sue and be sued.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Board shall not, except with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, sell or o therwise dispose of any manuscripts, books, 
articles or things belonging to the Library, other than articles of furniture, stationary and dead stock of 
like nature:  
Provided that where any such manuscripts, books, articles or things donated by any person t o the 
Library are proposed to be sold or otherwise disposed of, no approval under this sub -section shall be 
accorded unless the donor or his successor -in-interest , as the case may be, has permitted in writing to do 
so. 
4. Composition of the Board .—The Boar d shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) a Chairman, being a person of academic distinction, to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(ii) three persons to be elected by Parliament, two from the House of the People by the members 
of the House of the People and one from the Council of States by the members of the Council of 
States;  4 
 (iii) three persons to be nominated by the Government s of the States by rotation in the 
alphabetical order;  
(iv) four persons to represent the Universities in I ndia, to be nominated in the prescribed manner.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this clause “University ” has the meaning assigned to it in the 
University Grants Commission Act, 1956  (3 of 1958)  and includes an educational institution declared 
by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance;  
(v) the Chairman of the University Grants Commission or a member of that Commission to be 
nominated by the Chairman thereof;  
(vi) the Chief Librarian, by whatever name called, of one of the public libraries within the  
meaning of clause ( b) of section 2 of the Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries)                    
Act, 1954  (27 of 1954) , but not including the National Library, Calcutta, to be nominated by the 
Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical order;  
(vii) the Chief Librarian by whatever name called, of one of the public libraries in India [not 
being a library referred to in clause ( vi)] containing important coll ections of manuscripts of historical, 
literary or aesthetic importance, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(viii) one person to be nominated by the Indian Library Association, a society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1 860); 
(ix) the Director, National Archives of India;  
(x) eight scholars of repute in different disciplines covering humanities, science, social science, 
medicine, engineering and technology and law, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xi) two  persons to be elected by the officers and other employees serving in the Library from 
amongst themselves in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that at least one such person shall be a member of the technical staff of the Library.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause “member of the technical staff ” means the 
Librarian, Deputy Librarian, Assistant Librarian, Technical Assistant, Junior  Technical Assistant, 
Lecturer, Microphotographer, Chemist and such other like categories of persons as may b e 
prescribed;  
(xii) two persons, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be 
nominated by the Central Government, to represent respectively the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government dealing with matters relating to th e Library and the Ministry of the Central 
Government dealing with Finance;  
(xiii) one person to be nominated by the Government of West Bengal to represent that 
Government;  
(xiv) the Director of the Library, who shall be the Member -Secretary.  
5. Disqualification for office of member .—A person shall be disqualified for being nominated, or, 
as the case may be, elected , as and for being , a member of the Board or the Executive Coun cil referred to 
in section 11, — 
(a) if he has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(b) if he is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) if he is of unsound mind and  is so declared by a competent c ourt; or  
(d) if he has such financial or other  interest in the Board as is likely to affect prejudicially the 
discharge by him of his function as a member.  
6. Term of office, etc., of members .—(1) Every nomination or election, as the case may be, of the 
Chairman and the other members under section 4 shall be notified by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette and their term of office shall be three years fro m the date of such notification:  5 
 Provided that the term of office of a member elected under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 
or under clause ( xi) of that sub -section shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the 
House from which he was elected or, as the case may be, he ceases to be in the employment of the Board.  
(2) Any nominated or elected member may resign his  office by giving notice in writing to the Central 
Government and, on such resignation being notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette, 
he shall be deemed to have vacated his office.  
(3) A casual vacancy created by the resignation of a nom inated or elected member under                
sub-section ( 2) or by any other reason may be filled by fresh nomination by the authority which 
nominated the member or, as the case may be, by fresh election by the House or body which elected the 
member and such nomination or election shall be notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette and a member so nominated or elected shall hold office for the remaining period for which the 
member in whose place he is nominated or elected would have held o ffice.  
(4) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(5) If any nominated member is by infirmity or otherwise rendered temporarily incapable of carrying 
out his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances not inv olving the vacation of his office, 
the authority which nominated the member may nominate another person to act in his place during his 
absence.  
7. Vacation of office of member .—The Central Government shall remove a member of the Board or 
the Executive Coun cil referred to in section 11 if he — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 5:  
Provided that no member shall be removed on the ground that he has become subject to the 
disqualification mentioned in clause ( d) of that section unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter; or  
(b) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Board, absent from three consecutive meetings 
of the Board or the Executive Council, as the case may be.  
8. Vacan cies, etc., not to invalidate acts .—No act of the Board shall  be invalid merely by        
reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the Board, or  
(b) any defect in the nomination of the person acting as a member thereof, or  
(c) any  irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
9. Members to disclose their financial or other interest in the Board .—Any member who is in any 
way directly or indirectly interested in a contract made or proposed to be made by the Boar d shall, as soon 
as possible, after the relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his 
interest at a meeting of the Board and the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board and the 
member shall not take part aft er the disclosure in any deliberation or decision of the Board with respect to 
that contract.  
10. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at least twice a year, ordinarily at the premises of 
the Library, and shall, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including the quorum at meetings, as 
may be provided by regulations made under this Act.  
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, any member chosen by the members present from among 
themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the Board.  
(3) If any member, being an officer of the Government, is unable to attend any meeting of the Board, 
he may, with the previous approval of the Chairman, authorise, an officer of the Ministry or Department 
not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India, in writing to do so.  6 
 (4) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members 
present and voting and in t he case of an equality of votes, the Chairman or, in his absence, the member 
presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.  
11. Executive Council .—(1) There shall be an Executive Council of the Board consisting of nine 
members.  
(2) The Director of the Library shall be the Chairman of the Executive Council and the other 
members thereof shall be appointed by the Board partly from among the members of the Board and partly 
from outside:  
Provided that a representative each from the Min istry of the Central Go vernment dealing with 
Finance and the Ministry or Department of the Central Government dealing with the Library and a 
representative of the Government of West Bengal shall be members of the Executive Council:  
Provided further that without prejudice to the provisions of the preceding proviso not more than three 
persons shall be appointed from outside.  
(3) The Executive Council shall assist the Board in the exercise of its powers and the performance of 
its duties under this Act , and shall exercise such of the  powers and perform such of the duties of the 
Board as may be prescribed or as the Board may delegate to it subject to such conditions as the Board 
may deem fit.  
(4) With the previous approval of the Board, it shall be competent for the Executive Council t o 
entertain and adjudicate upon any grievance of the officers and other employees of the Board.  
(5) The term of office of those members of the Executive Council who are not m embers of the Board 
shall be co -terminous with the term of office of the members o f the Board.  
12. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes .—(1) The Board may 
associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes as may be provided by regulations made under 
this Act, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in performing any of its functions under this 
Act. 
(2) A person associated with it by the Board under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall have the right 
to take part in the discussion s of the Board relating to that purpose, but shall not, by virtue of this section, 
be entitled to vote.  
13. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board and Executive Council .—(1) All 
orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by th e signature of the Chairman or any other 
member authorised by the Board in this behalf and all other instruments issued by the Board shall be 
authenticated by the signature of an officer of the Board authorised in like manner in this behalf.  
(2) All orders  and decisions of the Executive Council shall be authenticated by the signature of the 
Director of the Library.  
14. Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Library.  
(2) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection of the Library to be made or to cause an 
inquiry to be made in respect of any matter connected with the Library by such person or persons as he 
may direct.  
(3) The Visitor shall in every case give notice to the Board of his intention to cause an inspection or 
inquiry to be made and the Board shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to 
be present and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.  
(4) The Visitor may address the Chairman with reference to the result of such inspection and inquiry, 
and the Chairman shall communicate to the Board the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor 
may offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(5) The Board shall communicate through the Chairman to the Visitor such action, if any, as it is 
proposed to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  7 
 (6) Where the Board does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, 
the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or rep resentation made by the Board, issue 
such direction as he may think fit and the Board shall be bound to comply with such direction.  
(7) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in writing, 
annual or stay any proceedings of the Board which are not in conformity with the provisions of this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder:  
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the Board has been given a reasonable opportunity 
of making a representation in the matter.  
15. Director of Library .—(1) The V isitor shall appoint, in such manner as may be prescribed, a 
person who is a scholar of distinction or is a distinguished librarian possessing high academic status, as 
the Director of the Library.  
(2) The te rm of office of the Director shall be for a period of five years from the date on which he 
assumes office or up to the age of sixty years, whichever is later:  
Provided that no person shall hold the office of Director after he attains the age of sixty -five years.  
(3) The Director shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such other 
conditions of service as may be prescribed.  
(4) The person appointed as the D irector and holding office as such at the commencement of this Act 
shall  be deemed to have been appointed under this section and the provisions thereof shall apply to him 
accordingly.  
16. Staff of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Board may, for the purpose of 
enabling it efficiently to perform its func tions under this Act, appoint such number of officers and other 
employees as it may deem fit and in making such appointments the Board shall act in conformity with the 
orders of the Central Government for the time being in force regarding reservation for t he Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the services of the Union.  
(2) The recruitment and conditions of service of such officers and other employees shall be such as 
may be provided by regulations made under this Act.  
(3) Every officer or other em ployee of the Board, not being an officer or other employee appointed on 
deputation , shall be appointed on a written contract which shall be lodged with the Board and a copy of 
which shall be furnished to the employee concerned.  
(4) Any dispute arising out  of a contract between the Board and any of its officers or other employees , 
not being an officer or other employee appointed on deputation, shall, at the request of the employee 
concerned or at the instance of the Board, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbit ration consisting of one 
member appointed by the Board , one member nominated by the employee, and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(5) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final and shall not be questioned in any c ourt. 
(6) No suit or other proceeding shall lie in any c ourt in respect of any matter which is required by 
sub-section ( 4) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(7) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(8) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations 
under this section.  
17. Transfer of service of existing employees to Board .—(1) On the establishment of the Board it 
shall be lawful for the Central Government to transfer by order  and with effect from such date or dates as 
may be specified in the order to the Board any of the officers or other employees serving in the Library:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made in relation to an officer or other employee 
who has in respect of the proposal of the Central Government to transfer such officer or employee to the 
Board intimated within such time as may be specified in this behalf by that Government, his intention of 
not becoming an employee of the Board.  8 
 (2) An of ficer or other employee transferred by an order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, on and 
from such date, cease to be an employee of the Central Government, and shall become an employee of the 
Board with such designation as the Board may determine and shall , subject to the provisions of             
sub-sections ( 3), (4) and ( 5) be governed by the regulations made by the Board under this Act as respects 
remuneration and other conditions of service including pension, leave and provident fund and shall 
continue  to be an employee of the Board unless and until his employment is terminated by the Board.  
(3) Every officer or other employee transferred by an order made under sub -section ( 1), shall, within 
six months from such date, exercise his op tion in writing to b e governed — 
(a) by the scale of pay applicable to the post held by him under the Government immediately 
before the date of establishment of the Board or by the scale of pay applicable to the post under the 
Board to which he is transferred,  
(b) by the leave , provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits admissible to employees of 
the Central Government in accordance with the rules and orders of the Central Government as 
amended from time to time or the leave, provident fund or other terminal benefits  admissible to the 
employees of the Board under the regulations made by the Board under this Act, and such option 
once exercised shall be final:  
Provided that the option exercised under clause ( a) shall be applicable only in respect of the post 
to which su ch person is transferred to the Board and on appointment to a higher post under the Board, 
he shall be eligible only for the scale of pay applicable to such higher post:  
Provided further that if immediately before the date of his transfer any such person is officiating 
in a higher post under the Government either in a leave vacancy or in any other vacancy of a specified 
duration, his pay, on transfer, shall be protected for the unexpired period of such vacancy and 
thereafter he shall be entitled to the sca le of pay applicable to the post under the Government to which 
he would have reverted or to the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Board to which he is 
transferred, whichever he may opt.  
(4) No officer or other employee transferred by an or der m ade under sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that competent to make a similar 
or equivalent appointment under the Board as may be specified in the regulations made by the Board 
under this Act;  
(b) shall be dis missed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been 
informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of 
those charges and where it is proposed, after such inquiry, to impose on h im any such penalty, until 
he has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation on the penalty proposed, but 
only on the basis of the evide nce adduced during such inquiry:  
Provided tha t this clause shall not apply, — 
(i) where any officer or other employee is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the 
ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or  
(ii) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove any officer or other employee or to 
reduce him in rank is  satisfied that for som e reason, to be recorded by that  authority in writing, it 
is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or  
(iii) to any officer or other employee who, after transfer to the Board, is appointed to a higher 
post under the Board in response to an open advertisement and in competition with outsiders.  
(5) If, in respect of any such officer or other employee as aforesaid , a question arises whether it is 
reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in sub -section (4) the decision thereon of the 
authority empowered to dismiss or remove him or to reduce him in rank shall be final.  
  9 
 18. Library to be known as “National Library of India ” and location of Library .—(1) On and 
after the commencement of this Act, the Library shall be known as “the National Library of India ”, and 
any reference to the National Library in any law for the time being in force or in any ind enture, 
instrument or other document shall be construed as a reference to the National Library of India.  
(2) The Library shall continue to be located at Calcutta.  
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY, LIABILITIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD  
19. Property and liabilities of Board .—(1) On the establishment of the Board — 
(i) all properties, funds and dues which   are vested in, or realisable by, the Central Government 
for the purposes of the Library shall vest  in, and be realisable by, the Board; and  
(ii) all liabilities in rela tion to the Library, which are enforceable against the Central Government , 
shall be enf orceable only against the Board.  
(2) All properties, which may, after the establishment of the Board, be given, bequeathed or otherwise 
transferred to the Library or acquired by the Board shall vest in the Board.  
20. Duties of Board .—(1) It shall be the general duty of the Board to manage the Library and to 
implement programmes for the development of the Library on modern scientific lines, to advise the 
Central and Sta te Governments on matters relating to libraries and  the working thereof, including the 
preparation of bibliographies, descriptive catalogues and other matters and perform such other functions 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, assign to the Board.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing provision , the Board may 
take such steps as it thinks fit, — 
(a) to render service to the public for using the Library and to conserve the existing collection of 
manuscripts, books and other articles in the Library, on modern scientific lines;  
(b) to acquire and conserve all significant production of material printed in I ndia, all printed 
material concerning India irrespective of the place from where it is published, and manuscripts of 
national importance;  
(c) to render technical advice to the other public libraries within the meaning of clause ( b) of 
section 2 of the Deli very of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954  (27 of 1954) ; 
(d) to undertake publication of bibliographies and assist institutions and scholars in the 
publication of bibliographies;  
(e) to provide facilities for, or to promote symposia and semi nars on matters relating to history, 
literature, science and the like;  
(f) to arrange for the exhibition of such manuscripts, books, articles or things of the Library as, in 
the opinion of the Board, would b e of interest to the public;  
(g) to undertake and promote exchange of books and periodicals with libraries and other 
institutions in countries outside India;  
(h) to undertake duplication (including photo -duplication), preservation of manuscripts, books, 
articles or things on behalf of any p erson or institution on such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon between the Board and such person or institution; and  
(i) to do all such other things as may be commensurate with the role of a national library.  
21. Powers of Board .—(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Central Government 
may think fit to impose, the Board may exercise all such powers as may be necessa ry or expedient for the 
purpose  of carrying out its duties under this Act.  10 
 (2) Subject to such regulations as may be  made by the Board in this behalf, the Board may, from time 
to time, purchase or otherwise acquire such manuscripts, books, articles or things as may, in the opinion 
of the Board, be worthy of preservation in the Library.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT  AND REPORT  
22. Grants by Central Government to Board .—For the purpose of enabling the Board to perform 
its functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board in each financial year such sums of money as that 
Government considers necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise.  
23. Fund of Board .—(1) The Board shall maintain a F und to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys paid by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges levied under this Act;  
(c) all moneys received by the Board by way of grant, gift, donation, benefaction, bequest, 
subscri ption, contribution or transfer;  
(d) all other moneys received by the Board in any other manner or from a ny other source.  
(2) The Board may expend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act and 
such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund.  
(3) A sum of money not exceeding such amount as may be provided by regul ations made under this 
Act may  be kept in current account with any scheduled bank as defined in section 2 of the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) , or any other bank approved by the Central Government in this behalf but 
any moneys in excess of th at sum shall be deposited in the Reserve Bank of India or with the agents of the 
Reserve Bank of India or invested in such manner as may be approved by the Central Government.  
24. Budget .—(1) The Board shall by such date in each year as may be specified by  the Central 
Government, submit to it for approval a budget for the next financial year in the form specified by it, 
showing the estimated receipts and expenditure, and the sums which would be required from the Central 
Government during that financial year . 
(2) If any sum granted by the Central Government remains wholly or partly unspent in any financial 
year, the unspent sum may be carried forward to the next financial year and taken into account in 
determining the sum to be provided by the Central Governm ent for that year.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), no sum shall be expended by or on behalf of the 
Board, unless the expenditure is covered by provision in the budget approved by the Central Government.  
(4) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Central Government may think fit to impose, the 
Board may sanction any reappropriation from one head of expenditure to another or from a provision 
made for one purpose to that for another purpose.  
25. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of account including the balance sheet in such form as may be specified, 
and in accordance with such general directions as may be issued, by the Central Government in  
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by t he Board to 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents an d papers and to inspect the office of the Board and 
the Library.  11 
 (4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf , together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded by 
the Board annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
26. Returns and report .—(1) The Board shall furnish to the Centr al Government at such time and in 
such form and in such manner as the Central Government may direct such returns, statements and 
particulars as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall, as soon as possible after 
the commencement of each financial year, submit to the Central Government with in such time as may be 
specified by the Central Government a report giving true and full account of the activities of the Board 
during the previous financial year and an account of activities likely to be undertaken during the current 
financial year and the Central Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Delegation of powers and duties .—The Board may, by a general or special order in writing, 
direct that all or any of the powers or duties which may b e exercised or discharged by it  shall, in such 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the  order, be exercised or 
discharged also by any member, or any officer or other employee of the Board, specified in this behalf in 
the order.  
28. Officers and employees of Board to be public servants .—All officers and other employees of 
the Board (including  the Director of the Library) shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
29. Protection of action taken under the Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Board or any member, or any officer or other employee of the Board (including the 
Director of the Library), for anything which is in g ood faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder.  
30. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rule s to give effect to the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that when the Board has been established no such rule shall be made without consulting the 
Board.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the travelling and other allowances payable to a member (including a member of the 
Executive Council appointed under section 11) and to a person associated with the Board under 
section 12;  
(b) the manner of appointment to the post of, and the salary and allowances , and other ter ms and 
conditions of service of , the Director of the Library under section 15;  
(c) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, contracts may be entered in to by o r on 
behalf of the Board;  
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every  rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of th irty days, which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rul e or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the ru le shall thereafter have effect  only 12 
 in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validit y of anything previously done under that rule.  
31. Power of Board to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations, not inconsistent with this 
Act and the rules made thereunder , for enabling it to perform its functions under this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , such regulations may 
provide for all, or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to which manuscripts and books in the Library may be 
used;  
(b) the manner in which and the purposes for which persons may be associated with the Board;  
(c) the time and place of meetings of the Board, the procedure to be followed in regard to the 
transaction of business at such meetings and the quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a 
meeting;  
(d) the maintenance of minutes of meetings of the Board and the transmission of copies thereof to 
the Central Gover nment;  
(e) the recruitment and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Board;  
(f) the person by whom and the manner in which, payments, deposits and investments may be 
made on behalf of the Board;  
(g) the maximum amount that may be kep t in the current account;  
(h) the maintenance of registers and accounts;  
(i) the compilation of catalogues and inventories of the manuscripts, books, articles and things in 
the Library;  
(j) the steps to be taken for the preservation of the manuscripts, boo ks, articles and things in the 
Library;  
(k) the general management of the Library;  
(l) the fees and other charges to be levied for the facilities that may be afforded for photo copying 
of manuscripts and books in the Library;  
(m) the charges that may be le vied by way of rent for the use of rooms in the readers’  hostel in the 
Library;  
(n) any other matter in respect of which provision is, in the opinion of the Board, necessary for 
the performance of its functions under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government ma y, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend, vary or rescind any regulation which it has approved and thereupon the regulation shall 
have effect accordingly but without prejudice to the exercise of the powers of the  Board under              
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2). 
 
--------------------------The Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS (PROTECTION OF PUBLICATION)  
REPEAL ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1976  
[11th February, 1976 .] 
An Act to repeal the Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act, 1956.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The Parliamentary Proceedings 
(Protection of Publication) Repeal Act, 1976.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force o n the 8th day of December, 1975.  
2. Repeal of Act 24 of 1956 and saving .—The Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of 
Publication) Act, 1956, shall stand repealed:  
Provided that such repeal shall not affect any proceedings, civil or c riminal (whether pending 
immediately before the commencement of this Act or instituted or taken after su ch commencement) in 
respect of — 
(a) any publication referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the said Act made before such 
commencement; or  
(b) any report or matter broadcast before such commencement, by the means referred to in   
section 4 of the said Act,  
and accordingly any such proceedings shall be disposed of as if the said Act had continued in force and 
this Act had not been passed.  
3. [Repe al.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending  Act, 1988  (19 of 1988 ), s. 2 and the First    
Schedule (w.e.f. 31-3-1988).  
 
 
--------------------------The Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
INCORPORATION AND CAPITAL OF REGIONAL  RURAL  BANKS  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Regional Rural Banks.  
4. Offices and agencies.  
5. Authorised capital.  
6. Issued capital.  
7. Shares to be approved securities.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT  
8. Management.  
9. Board of directors.  
10. Term of office of director.  
11. Chairman.  
12. Disqualifications.  
13. Vacation of the seat of directors.  
14. Meetings of Board.  
15. Committees of Board.  
16. Fees and allowances of directors and members of committees.  
17. Staff of Reg ional Rural Banks.  
CHAPTER IV  
BUSINESS OF A REGIONAL RURAL  BANK 
18. Business which a Regional Rural Bank may transact.  
CHAPTER V  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
19. Closure of accounts.  
20. Annual report to be furnished to the shareholders.  
21. Disposal of profits.  
22. Regional Rural Bank to be deemed to be a co -operative society for purpose of the Income -tax 
Act, 1961.  
23. Interest -tax not payable.  
CHAPTER VA  
AMALGAMATION  OF REGIONAL  RURAL  BANKS  
23A. Amalgamation of Regional Rural Banks.  
23B. Notification under section  23A to be sufficient notice to concerned parties.  
23C. Cessation of business of transferor Regional Rural Banks.  2 SECTIONS  
23D. Liquidation of Regional Rural Banks.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
24A. Inspection, audit and scrutiny by the Sponsor Bank.  
25. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy.  
26. Bar to liquidation of Regional Rural Bank.  
27. Defects in appointment or constitution not to invalidate acts or proceedings.  
28. Indemnity of directors, etc . 
29. Power to make rules.  
30. Power to make regulations.  
31. Removal of difficulties.  
32. Act to override the provisions of other laws.  
CHAPTER VII . (Repealed)  
THE SCHEDULE.3 THE  REGIONAL RURAL BANKS ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 21 OF 1976  
[9th February , 1976.]  
An Act to provide for the incorporation, regulation and winding up of Regional Rural Banks 
with a view to developing the rural economy by providing, for the purpose of development of 
agriculture, trade, commerce, in dustry and other productive activities in the rural areas, credit 
and other facilities, particularly to the small and marginal farmers, agricultural labourers, 
artisans and small entrepreneurs, and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Regional Rural Banks 
Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of September, 1975.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ”, in relation to a Regional Rural Bank, means the Board of directors of that Regional 
Rural Bank;  
(b) “Chairman ”, in relation to a Regional Rural Bank, means the individual appoi nted or                     
re-appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 as the Chairman of that bank;  
(c) “director ”, in relation to a Regional Rural Bank, means a member of the Board of that bank;  
1[(ca) “National Bank ” means the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
established under section 3 of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Devel opment Act, 1981 
(61 of 1981);]  
(d) “notified area ” means  the local limits, specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, within 
which a Reg ional Rural Bank shall operate;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “Regional Rural Bank ” means a Regional Rural Bank established under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(g) “Sponsor Bank ”, in relation to a Regional Rural Bank, means a bank by which such Regional 
Rural Bank has been sponsored;  
(h) “State Government ” means,— 
(i) in relation to a Regional Rural Bank established in a Union territory, the Central 
Government;  
(ii) in relation to a Regional Rural Bank established in a State, the Government of that State;  
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), shall have the mea nings respectively assigned to them in that Act;  
(j) words and expressions used herein and not defined either in this Act or in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), but defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), shall have 
the me anings respectively assigned to them in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  4 CHAPTER II  
INCORPORATION AND CAPITAL OF REGIONAL  RURAL  BANKS  
3. Establishment and incorpo ration of Regional Rural Banks. —(1) The Central Government may, 
if requested so to do by a Sponsor Bank, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish in a State or 
Union territory, one or more Regional Rural Banks with such name as may be specified in the notification 
and may, by the said or subsequent notification, specify the local limits within which each Regional Rural 
Bank shall operate.  
(2) Every Regional Rural Bank shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common 
seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of propert y and to 
contract and may sue and be sued in its name.  
1[(3) It shall be the duty of the Sponsor Bank to aid and assist the Regional Rural Ban k, sponsored by 
it, by— 
(a) subscribing to the share capital of such Regional Rural Bank;  
(b) training personnel o f such Regional Rural Bank; and  
(c) providing such managerial and financial assistance to such Regional Rural Bank  2***, as may 
be mutually agreed upon between the Sponsor Bank and the Regional Rural Bank:  
3*   *   *   *   *] 
4. Offices and agencies. —(1) A Regional Rural Bank shall have its head office at such place in the 
notified area as the Central Government may, after consultation wit h the 4[National Bank] and the 
Sponsor Bank, specify by notifi cation in the Official Gazette.  
(2) A Regional Rural Bank may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, establish its branches 
or agencies at any place in the notified area.  
5. Authorised capital. —The authorised capital of eac h Regional Rural Bank shall be 5[two thousand 
crore of rupees, divided into tw o hundred crore of fully paid -up shares of ten rupees each] : 
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the 6[National  Bank]  and the 
Sponsor Bank, increase or reduce such authorised capital; so, however, that the authorised capital shall 
not be reduced below 7[one crore  of rupees, and the shares shall be, in all cases, fully paid -up shares of 
ten rupees each ]. 
6. Issued capital .—8[(1) The issued capital of each Regional Rural Bank shall, in the first instance, 
be such as may be fixed by the Central Government in this behalf, but it shall in no case be less than 9[one 
9[one crore of rupees ].] 
(2) Of the capital issued by a  Regional Rural Bank under sub -section ( 1), fifty per cent. shall                        
be subscribed by the Central Government; fifteen per cent. by the concerned State Government and     
thirty -five per cent. by the Sponsor Bank.  
10[Provided that in case the Regional Rural Bank raises its capital from sources other than the Central 
Government or the State Government or the Sponsor Bank, the shareholding of the Central Government 
and the Sponsor Bank shall not be less than fifty -one per cent.:  
Provided furt her that the Central Government shall consult the concerned State Government if the 
level of shareholding in the Regional Rural Bank of such State Government is reduced below fifteen      
per cent.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
2. The words “during the first five years of its functioning” omitted by Act 14 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).  
3. The proviso o mitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -2-12016).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 4, for “Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
5. Subs. by Act 14 of 2015, s. 3, for “five crores of rupees divided into five lakhs of fully paid -up shares of one hundred 
rupees each”  (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).  
6. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 5, for “Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
7. Subs. by Act 14 of 2015, s. 3, for “twenty -five lakhs of rupees, and the shares shall be, in all cases, fully paid -up shares of 
one hundred rupees each”  (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).  
8. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 6, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
9. Subs. by Act 14 of 2015, s. 4, for “twenty -five lakhs of rupees or exceed one crore of rupees” (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).   
10. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).   5 1[(2A) The Central Government may, in consultation with t he Sponsor Bank and the State 
Government, by notification, either raise or reduce the limit of shareholding of the Central Government, 
the State Government or the Sponsor Bank specified in sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that the Central Government shall consult  the concerned State Government before reducing 
the limit of shareholding of such State Government.]  
(3) The Board may , after consultation with the 2[National Bank] , the concerned State Government 
and the Sponsor Bank and with the prior approval of the Central Government, from time to time, increase 
the issued capital of the Regional Rural Bank; and, where additional capital is issued, such capital shall 
also be subscribe d in the same proportion as is specified in sub -section  (2) 1[or, as the case may be, 
notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2A)]. 
7. Shares to be approved securities. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts hereinafter 
mentioned in t his section, the shares of a Regional Rural Bank shall be deemed to be included among the 
securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), and shall also be  deemed 
to be approved securities for the purposes of the Banking Reg ulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949).  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT  
8. Management. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the general superintendence, direction 
and management of the affairs and business of a Regional Rural Bank shall vest in a Board of directors 
who may exercise all the powers and discharge all the functions which may be exercised or discharged by 
the Regional Rural Bank.  
(2) In discharging its functions, the Board shall act on business principles and shall have due regard to 
public interest.  
9. Board of directors. —(1) The Board of directors shall consist of the Chairman appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11, and the fol lowing other members, namely: — 
 3[(a) two directors, who are not officers of the Central Government, State Government, Reserve 
Bank, National Bank, Sponsor Bank or any other bank, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
4[Provided that no person shall be nominated as a director, if he is already a director on the Board 
Board o f any other Regional Rural Bank; ] 
(b) one director , who is an officer of the Reserve Bank , to be nominated by that Bank;  
(c) one director, who is an officer of the National Bank, to be nominated by that Bank;  
(d) two directors, who are officers of the Sponsor Bank, to be nominated by that Bank; and  
(e) two directors, who are officers of the concerned State Government, to be nominated by that 
Government :] 
4[(f) such number of directors elected by the shareholders other than the directors nominated by 
the Central Government, the State Government, the Spons or Bank and other institutions owned or 
controlled by the Central Government or the State Government, whose names are entered in the 
register of shareholders of the Regional Rural Bank at least ninety days before the date of the meeting 
in which the electi on of directors takes place on the following basis, namely: — 
(i) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such shareholders is ten per cent. 
or less of the total issued equity capital, one director shall be elected from such shareholders;  
(ii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such shareholders is more than ten 
per cent. but less than twenty -five per cent. of the total issued equity capital, two directors shall 
be elected from the shareholders inc luding the shareholder s referred to in sub -clause ( i); 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 14 of 2015, s. 4 (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 6, for “Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 7,  ibid., for clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
4. Ins. by Act 14 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).   6 (iii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such shareholders is twenty -five 
per cent. or more of the total issued equity capital, three directors shall be elected from the 
shareholders including sharehol ders referred to in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii).] 
 (2) The Central Government may increase the number of members of the Board; so, however, that 
the number of directors does not exceed fifteen in the aggregate and also prescribe the manner in which 
the additional number may be filled in.  
1[(3) The Central Government may appoint an officer of the Central Government on the Board of 
Regional Rural Banks, if it considers necessary for the purposes of effective functioning of the Regional 
Rural Banks.]  
2[10. Term of office of director. —A director nominated under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 9 shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government and for such term, not 
exceeding three years, from the date on which he assumes his office, as  the Central Government may 
specify at the time of his nomination and shall be eligible for renomination:  
Provided that no such director shall hold office either continuously or intermittently for a period 
exceeding six years. ] 
11. Chairman. —(1) 3[The Spon sor Bank] shall appoint an individual to be the Chairman of a 
Regional Rural Bank and specify the period, not exceeding five years, for which such individual shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), hold office as the Chairman:  
4[Provided that no appointment of such an individual shall be made, — 
(a) if such an individual is an officer of the Sponsor Bank, except after consul tation with the 
National Bank;  
(b) in any other case, except with the prior approv al of the Central G overnment .] 
5[(1A) Notwithstanding anythin g contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the Sponsor Bank shall have the right to terminate the term of office of the Chairman at any 
time before the expiry of the perio d specified in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that no s uch termination shall be made, — 
(a) if the Chairman is an officer of the Sponsor Bank, except after consultation with the 
National Bank; and  
(b) in any other case, except with the prior approval of the Central Government:  
Provided further that where the Chairman is not an  officer of the Central Government, State 
Government, Reserve Bank, National Bank, Sponsor Bank or any other bank, he shall be given notice 
of not less than three months in writing or three months ’ salary and allowances in lieu of such notice; 
and 
(b) the Chairman shall have the right to resign his office at any time before the expiry of the 
period specified in sub -section ( 1) by giving to the Sponsor Bank, notice of not less than three months 
in writing.]  
(2) The individual, appointed as a Chairman under s ub-section ( 1), shall, on the expiry of the period 
specified under that sub -section, be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The Chairman shall devote his whole time to the affairs of the Regional Rural Bank and shall 
have, subject to the superintendence, cont rol and direction of the Board, the management of the whole of 
the affairs of the Regional Rural Bank.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for section 10 (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 8, for “The Central Government” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
4. Proviso ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
5. Subs. by  s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 1A) (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  7 1[(4) 2[The Sponsor Bank] may, at any time, r emove the Chairman from office:  
3[Provided that  no such removal shall be made, — 
(a) if the Chairman is an officer of the Sponsor Bank, except after consultation with the National 
Bank; and  
(b) in any other case, except with the prior approval of the Central Government:  
Provided further that] no person shall be removed from his office, under this sub -section, u nless he 
has been given an opportunity of showing cause against his removal .] 
(5) The Chairman shall receive such salary and allowances and be governed by such terms and 
conditions of servic e as may be determined by the 4[the Sponsor Bank in consul tation with the National 
Bank].  
(6) If the Chairman is, by infirmity or otherwise, rendered incapable of carrying out his duties                 
or is absent, on leave or otherwise, in circumstances not involving the vacation of office, the                    
Central Government may appoint another individual to act as the Chairman during the absence of the 
first-mentioned Chairman.  
12. Disqualifications. —A person shall be disqualified for being appointed or, as the case may be, 
nominated as, a nd for being, a direc tor, if he— 
(a) is, or, at any time has been, adjudged insolvent or has suspended payment of his debt or has 
compounded with his creditors, or  
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so dec lared by a competent court, or  
(c) is, or has been, convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude.  
13. Vacation of the seat of directors. —(1) If a director — 
(a) becomes subject to any disqualificat ion specified in section 12, or  
(b) is absent  without leave of the Board for more than three consecutive meetings thereof,  
his seat  shall thereupon become vacant.  
5[(2) A director may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the authority by which he 
was nominated; and, on such resignation being accepted, the director shall be deemed to have vacated his 
office.]  
14. Meetings of Board. —(1) The Board of directors of a Regional Rural Bank shall meet at such 
time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the tr ansaction of business at its 
meetings as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chairman of the Regional Rural Bank shall preside over every meeting of the Board, and, in 
his absence, such director as the Chairman may generally, or in relation to any particular meetin g, 
authorise in this behalf shall preside; and, in the absence of both the Chairman and the director so 
authorised, the directors present at the meeting shall elect one from among themselves to preside over the 
meeting.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “absence ” from a meeting means non -attendance 
for any reason whatsoever at the meeting, or any part of the meeting during which any business is 
transacted.  
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decided b y a majority of the votes of the directors 
present and voting; and, in case of equality of votes, the person presiding shall have a second or casting 
vote.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 73 of 1976, s. 6, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 8, for “The Central Government” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “the Central Government” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  8 (4) No director shall, as a director, take part in the discussion of, or vote on, any contract , loan , 
arrangement or proposal  entered into or to be entered into, by or on beh alf of the Regional Rural Bank , if 
he is, in any way, whether directly or indirectly, interested in the contract, loan, arrangement or proposal 
and, where a director is interested in  any such matter, he shall, at the earliest possible opportunity, 
disclose to the Board the nature of his interest in such contract, loan, arrangement or proposal, and where 
he does so, his presence at the meeting shall not count for the purpose of forming  any quorum at the time 
of any such discussion or vote, and if he does vote, his vote shall be void:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to such directo r by reason only of his 
being— 
(i) a shareholder (other than a director) hol ding not more than two per cent . of the paid -up capital 
in any public company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any 
corporation established by or under any law for the time being in force in India or any co -operative 
society, wi th which the Regional Rural Bank has entered into, or proposes to enter into, any contract, 
loan, arrangement or proposal; or  
(ii) a director of the Regional Rural Bank as such.  
15. Committees of Board. —The Board may constitute such committees, whether con sisting wholly 
of directors or wholly of other persons or partly of directors and partly of other persons, as it may think 
fit, for such purposes as it may decide.  
16. Fees and allowances of direc tors and members of committees. —(1) Every director and every 
member of a committee (other than the Chairman) shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be 
determined by the Central Government:  
Provided that no fees shall be paid to any director, or member of a committee, if he is an of ficer of the 
Central Government, State Government, the Reserve Bank, 1[National Bank ,] Sponsor Bank or any other 
bank.  
(2) The allowances payable to a director or a member of a committee, who is an officer of the Central 
Government , State Government, Reser ve Bank , 1[National Bank ,] Sponsor Bank or any other bank, shall 
be paid by the Government or bank by which such officer is employed; and the allowances and fees 
payable to any other director or member of a committee shall be payable by the  concerned Regio nal Rural 
Bank.  
17. Staff of Regional Rural banks. —(1) A Regional Rural Bank may appoint such number of 
officers and other employees as it may co nsider necessary or desirable 2[in such manner as may be 
prescribed] for the efficient performance of its functions and may determine the terms and conditions of 
their appointment and service:  
Provided that it shall be lawful for a Sponsor Bank, if requested so to do by a Regional Rural Bank 
sponsored by it, to send, 3*** such number of officers or other emplo yees on deputation to the Regional 
Rural Bank as may be necessary or desirable for the efficient performance of its functions:  
Provided further that the remuneration of officers and other employees appointed by a Regional Rural 
Bank shall be such as may be  determined by the Central Government, and, in determining such 
remuneration, the Central Government shall have due regard to the salary structure of the employees of 
the State Government and the local authorities of comparable level and status in the noti fied area.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or any 
other law for the time being in force, no award, judgment, decree, decision or order of any industrial 
tribunal, court or other authority, made befo re the commencement of this Act, shall apply to the terms and 
conditions in relation to the persons appointed by a Regional Rural Bank.  
(3) The officers and other employees of a Regional Rural Bank shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be entrusted or delegated to them by the Board.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 10 (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
3. The words “, during the first five years of the functioning of a Regional Rural Bank,” omitted by  s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  9 CHAPTER IV  
BUSINESS OF A REGIONAL RURAL  BANK 
18. Business which a Re gional Rural Bank may transact. —(1) Every Regional Rural Bank shall 
carry on and transact the business of banking as defined in clause ( b) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), and may engage in one or more forms of business specified in                
sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), every Regional Rural 
Bank may, in particular, undertake the following types of business, namel y:— 
(a) the granting of loans and advances, particularly to small and marginal farm ers and agricultural 
labourers, whether individually or in groups, and to co -operative societies, including agricultural 
marketing societies, agricultural processing societies, co -operative farming societies, primary 
agricultural credit societies or farmers ’ service societies, for agricultural purposes or agricultural 
operations o r for othe r purposes connected therewith;  
(b) the granting of loans and advances, particularly to artisans, small entrepreneurs and persons of 
small means engaged in trade, commerce or industry or other productive activities, within the notified 
area in re lation to the Regional Rural Bank.  
CHAPTER V  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
19. Closure of accounts. —(1) Every Regional Rural Bank shall cause its books to be closed and 
balanced as on the 1[31st day of March]  2[or such other date in each year as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify] and shall appoint with the approval of the Central 
Government auditor s for the audit of its accounts:  
3[Provided that with a view to facilitat ing the transition from one period of accounting to another 
period of accounting under this sub -section, the Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary or expedient for the closing and  
balancing of, or for other matters relating to, the books in respect of the concerned years.]  
(2) Every auditor of a Regional Rural Bank shall be a person who is qualified to act as an auditor of a 
company under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 o f 1956), and shall receive such remuneration 
as the Regional Rural Bank may fix with the approval of the Central Government.  
(3) Every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance -sheet and profit and loss 
account of the Regional Rural Bank,  and a list of all books kept by the Regional Rural Bank, and it shall 
be the duty of the auditor to examine the balance -sheet and vouchers relating thereto, and, in the 
performa nce of his duties, the auditor — 
(a) shall have, at all reasonable times, acces s to the books, accounts and other documents of the 
Regional Rural Bank;  
(b) may, at the expense of the Regional Rural Bank, employ accountants or other persons to assist 
him in investigating such accounts; and  
(c) may, in relation to such accounts, examin e the Chairman or any officer or emplo yee of the 
Regional Rural Bank.  
(4) Every auditor of a Regional Rural Bank shall make a report to that bank upon the annual                    
balance -sheet and accounts and in  every such report shall state, — 
(a) whether, in his opinion, the balance -sheet is a full and fair balance -sheet containing all 
necessary particulars and is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the affairs of the 
Regional Rural Bank, and, in case he had called for any ex planation or information, whether it has 
been given and whether it is satisfactory;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2015, s. 7, for “31st day of December” (w.e.f. 4 -2-2016).  
2. Subs. by Act  66 of 1988, s. 33, for “of each year” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
3. Ins. by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  10 (b) whether or not, the transactions of the Regional Rural Bank, which have come to his notice, 
have been within the powers of that bank;  
(c) whether or not, the returns re ceived from the offices and branches of the Regional Rural Bank 
have been found adequate for the purpose of his audit;  
(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance of profit or loss for the period 
covered by such accounts; and  
(e) any other  matter which he considers should be brought to the notice of the Regional Rural 
Bank.  
20. Annual report to be furnished to the shareholders .—1[(1)] Every Regi onal Rural Bank shall, 
within 2[three months from the date of the closure of its accounting year,  or such further period, not 
exceeding three months, as may be permitted by the Reserve Bank], send to each of its shareholders a 
report as to its working and activities during the accounting year immediately preceding together with a 
copy of its balance -sheet, profit a nd loss account and the auditor’ s report in relation to the accounts of the 
said accounting year.  
3[(2) The Central Gover nment shall cause every auditor’ s report and report on the working and 
activities of each Regional Rural Bank to be laid,  as soon as may be after they are received, before each 
House of Parliament.]  
21. Disposal of profits. —After making provisions for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets, 
contributions to staff and superannuation funds and all other matters for which provision is, under law, 
necessary or which are usually provided for by banking companies, a Regional Rural Bank may, out of its 
net profits, declare a dividend.  
22. Regional Rural Bank to be deemed to be a co -operative society for purpose of the                 
Income -tax Act, 1961. —For the purpose of the I ncome -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 ), or any other 
enactment for the time being in force relating to any tax on income, profits or gains, a Regional Rural 
Bank shall be deemed to be a co -operative soci ety. 
23. Interest -tax not payable. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Interest -tax                   
Act, 1974 (45 of 1974), no Regional Rural Bank shall be liable to pay any tax under that Act.  
4[CHAPTER VA  
AMALGAMATION  OF REGIONAL  RURAL  BANKS  
23A.  Amalga mation of Regional Rural Banks. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, if the Central Government, after consultation with the National Bank, the concerned State 
Government and the Sponsor Bank, is of the opinion that it is necessary in the public interest or in the 
interest of  the development of the area served by any Regional Rural Bank or in the interest of the 
Regional Rural Banks themselves, that two or more Regional Rural Banks should be amalgamated, that 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, provide for  the amalgamation of such Regional 
Rural Banks (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the transferor Regional Rural Banks) into a single 
Regional Rural Bank (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the transferee Regional Rural Bank) with 
such constitu tion, property, powers, rights, interests, authorities and privileges; and with such liabilities, 
duties and obligations, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall indicate the date with effect from which the 
amalgamation shall become effective.  
                                                           
1. S. 20 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 81 of 1985, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 12, for “sixty days from the d ate of closure of its accounting year” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).   
3.  Ins. by Act 81 of 1985, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1986).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 13 (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  11 (3) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) may also provide for all or any of  the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the continuance in service of all the employees of the transferor Regional Rural Banks  
(excepting such of  them as not being workmen with  the meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(14 of 1947) are specifically mentioned in the notification) in the transferee Regional Rural Bank at 
the same remuneration and on the same terms and condit ions of service, which they were getting or, 
as the case may be, by which they were being governed, immediately before the date on which  the 
amalgamation takes effect;  
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( a), where any of the employees of the 
transferor Regional Rural Banks, not being workmen within the meaning of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) are specifically mentioned in the notification, or where any employee of the 
transferor Regional Rural Banks has by notice in writing gi ven to the transferee Regional Rural Bank 
at any time before the expiry of a period of three months next following the date on which the 
amalgamation takes effect, intimated his intention of not becoming an employee of the transferee 
Regional Rural Bank, t he payment to such employee of compensation, if any, to which he is entitled 
under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and such gratuity, provident fund and other retirement 
benefits ordinarily admissible to him u nder the rules or authorisation s of the conc erned transferor 
Regional Rural Bank s immediately before that date;  
(c) the other terms and conditions for the amalgamati on of Regional Rural Banks; and  
(d) the continuance by or against the transferee Regional Rural Bank of any pending legal 
proceeding by  or against any transferor Regional Rural Banks and such consequential, incidental and 
supplemental provisions, as may, in the opinion of the Central Government, be necessary to give 
effect to the amalgamation.  
(4) Every notification issued under sub -section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it has been made, be 
laid before each House of Parliament.  
23B. Notification under section 23A to be sufficient notice to concerned parties. —(1) A 
notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 23A, shall constitute sufficient notice of the provisions 
thereof to all the parties concerned and shall be binding on the transferor Regional Rural Banks and the 
transferee Regional Rural Bank and to the depositors, creditors, employees and all other persons having 
dealings with such banks.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882) or the 
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 23A shall be 
sufficient conveyance, in a ccordance with the provisions of the notification, of the business, properties, 
assets and liabilities, rights, interests, powers, privileges, benefits and obligations of whatever nature of 
the transferor Regional Rural Banks to the transferee Regional Rur al Bank.  
(3) On and from the date on which the amalgamation takes effect under section 23A, any reference to 
the transferor Regional Rural Banks in any agreement, conveyance, assurance, power of attorney or any 
other document of whatsoever nature, shall be  deemed to be a reference to the transferee Regional Rural 
Bank and the rights and obligations of the transferor Regional Rural Banks shall be deemed to be the 
rights and obligations of the transferee Regional Rural Bank to the extent specified in the said  
amalgamation.  
23C. Cessation of business of transferor Regional Rural Banks. —On and from the date on which 
the amalgamation takes effect under section 23A, the transferor Regional Rural Banks shall cease to carry 
on business, including that of making of a ny payment to any depositors or discharge any liability or 
obligation to the creditors except to the extent as may be necessary for the implementation of the 
provisions of the said amalgamation.  
23D. Liqui dation of Regional Rural Banks. —Where a notificatio n is issued for the amalgamation 
of Regional Rural Banks under sub -section ( 1) of section 23A, the Central Government may, by a further 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that on such date, as may be specified therein, the transferor 
Regional Rur al Banks, which by reason of amalgamation will cease to function, shall stand dissolved and 
such direction shall take effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 26.]  12 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Power of Central  Government to give directions. —(1) A Regional Rural Bank shall, in the 
discharge of its functions, be guided by such directions in regard to matters of policy involving public 
interest as the Central Government may, after consultati on with the Reserve Ban k, give.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction relates to a matter of policy involving 
public interest, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
1[24A. Inspection, audit and  scrutiny by the Sponsor Bank. —Notwithstanding anything               
contained in section 19 and without prejudice to the provisions of section 35 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) , the Sponsor Bank shall, from time to time, monitor the progress of the Regional 
Rural Ban ks sponsored by it and cause inspection, internal audit and scrutiny to be made by one or more 
of its officers and suggest corrective measures to be taken by such Regional Rural Bank.]  
25. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy. —(1) A Regional Rural Bank s hall observe, except as 
otherwise required by law, the practices and usages customary among bankers and, in particular, it shall 
not divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, its constituents except in circumstances in 
which it is, in acco rdance with the law or practice and usage customary among bankers, necessary or 
appropriate for the Regional Rural Bank to divulge.  
(2) Every director, member of a committee or auditor, officer or other employee of a Regional Rural 
Bank shall, before enter ing upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out 
in the Schedule to this Act;  
2[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act , 2005  (30 of 2005) .] 
26. Bar to liquidation of Regional Rural Bank. —No provision of law relating to the winding up of 
companies shall apply to a Regional Rural Bank and a Regional Rural Bank shall not be placed in 
liquidation save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as it may direct.  
27. Defects in appointment or constitution not to i nvalidate acts or proceedings. —(1) No act of a 
Chairman, acting in good faith, shall be invalid merely by reason of any defect in his a ppointment or in 
the p rocedure.  
(2) No act or proceeding of any Board of directors or of any committee of a Regional Rural Bank 
shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, 
such Board or commit tee, as the case may b e. 
(3) Acts done by a person, acting in good faith, as a director or member of a committee of a Regional 
Rural Bank shall be valid, notwithstanding that it may afterwards be discovered that his appointment was 
invalid by reason of any defect or disqualific ation or had terminated by virtue of any provision contained 
in any law for the time being in force:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to give validity to any act done by a director or a 
member of any committee of a Regional Rural Bank after his appointment has been shown to the 
Regional Rural Bank to be invalid or to have terminated.  
28. Indemnity of directors, etc. —(1) A director or a member of a committee of a Regional Rural 
Bank shall not be responsible for any loss or expense caused  to such bank by insufficiency or deficiency 
of the value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of a Regional Rural Bank 
or by the insolvency or wrongful act of any customer or debtor or anything done in, or in relation to, the 
execution of the duties of his office, unless such loss, expense, insufficiency or deficiency was due to any 
wilful act or default on the p art of such director or member.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 14 (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
2. Ins. by Act 30 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -6-2005).  13 (2) The Chairman of a Regional Rural Bank and every officer of the Central Govern ment or State 
Government or an officer of the Reserve Bank 1[or the National Bank] or the Sponsor Bank and every 
officer or other employee of a Regional Rural Bank shall be indemnified by such bank against all losses 
and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties except such as have been 
caused by his own wilful act or default.  
29. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may , after consultation with the 2[National 
Bank] and the Sponsor Bank, by notification in the Of ficial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of  this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the additional number of members of the Board may be filled in, under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 9;  
(b) the time and place at which the Board of directors of a Regional Rural Bank shall meet and 
the rules of procedure which shall be observed by the Board in re gard to the transaction of business at 
its meetings, under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
3[(ba) the manner in which the officers and other employees of the Regional Rural Banks shall be 
appointed;]  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be m ade, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
30. P ower to make regulations. —4[(1)] The Board of directors of a Regional Rural Bank may, after 
consultation  with the Sponsor Bank and the 5[National Bank] , and with the previous sanctio n of the 
Central Government , 6[by notification in the Official Gazette,] make regulations, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
7[(2) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made under this Act by the Board of 
directors, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to 
be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for  a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment sha ll be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that  regulation. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 15 (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
4. Section 30 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 1 of 1984, s. 70 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 1 of 1988, s. 17, for “Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1988).  
6. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 34 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
7. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 70 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  14 31. Removal of difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order, not inconsistent w ith the provisions of this Act, as may appear 
to it to be necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of five years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
32. Act to overrid e the provisions of other laws. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect  
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
contract, express or implied, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of a ny law other than this Act,  
and notwithstanding any custom or usage to the contrary.  
CHAPTER VII  [Amendments of certain enactments .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending                         
Act, 1988 (19 of 1988), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  15 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 25 ( 2)] 
I,...................., do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability 
execute and perform the duties required of me as a director, member of a committe e, officer, employee or 
auditor (as the case may be) of the Regional Rural Bank and which properly relate to any office or 
position in the said Bank held by me.  
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not leg ally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the Regional Rural Bank or to the affairs of any 
person having any dealings with the Regional Rural Bank, nor will I allow any such person to inspect or 
have access to, any books or documents  belonging to, or in the possession of the Regional Rural Bank 
and relating to the business of the Regional Rural Bank, or to the business of any person having any 
dealing s with the Regional Rural Bank.  
 
Signature.  
Signed before me.  
Dated  
--------------------------The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power of Central Government to declare certain industries to be notified industries . 
4. Leave . 
5. Issue of appointment letter . 
6. Application of certain Acts to sales promotion employees . 
7. Maintenance of registers.  
8. Inspectors . 
9. Penalty . 
10. Offences by companies . 
11. Cognizance of offence . 
11A. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act . 
12. Power to make rules . 
  2 THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 11 OF 1976  
[25th January , 1976.]  
An Act to regulate certain conditions of service of sales promotion employees in  certain 
establishments.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent , commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the Sales 
Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States.  
(4) It shall apply in the first instance to every establishment enga ged in pharmaceutical industry.  
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this 
Act, with effect from such date as may be spec ified in the notification, to any other establishment engaged 
in any notified industry.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “establishment ” means an establishment engaged in pharmaceutical indust ry or in any notified 
industry;  
(b) “notified industry ” means an industry declared as such under section 3;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
2[(d) “sales promotion employee s” means any person by whatever name called (including an 
apprentice) employed or engaged in any establishment for hire or reward to do any work relating to 
promotion of sales or business, or both, but do es not include any such person — 
(i) who, being employe d or engaged in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding 
sixtee n hundred rupees per mensem; or  
(ii) who is employed or engaged mainly in a manager ial or administrative capacity.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the wages per mensem of a p erson shall be 
deemed to be the amount equal to thirty times his total wages (whether or not including, or 
comprising only of, commission) in respect of the continuous period of his service falling within the 
period of twelve months immediately preceding t he date with reference to which the calculation is to 
be made, divided by the number of days comprising th at period of service;]  
(e) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Power of Central Government to declare certain indust ries to be notified industries. —The 
Central Government may, having regard to the nature of any industry (not being pharmaceutical 
industry), the number of employees employed in such industry to do any work relating to promotion of 
sales or business or both, the conditions of service of such employees and such other factors which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, are relevant, d eclare such industry to be a notified industry for the 
purposes of this Act.  
                                                           
1. 6th March , 1976, vide notification No. S.O. 176(E), dated 6th March , 1976, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,Part I I,  
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 48 of 1986, s. 2, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 6 -5-1987).  3 4. Leave. —1[(1)] In addition to such holidays, casual leave or other kinds of leave as may be 
prescribed, every sales promotion employee 2*** shall be granted, if so requested for — 
(a) earned leave on full wages for not less than one - eleventh of the period spent on duty;  
(b) leave on medical certificate on one -half of the wages for not less than one -eight eenth of the 
period of service.  
3[(2) The maximum limit up to which a sales promotion employee may accumulate earned leave shal l 
be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The limit up to which the earned leave may be availed of at a time by a sales promotion employee 
and the reasons for which such limit may be exceeded shall be such as ma y be prescribed.  
(4) A s ales promotion employee shall, — 
(a) when he voluntarily relinquishes his p ost or retires from service, or  
(b) when his services are terminated for any reason whatsoever (not be ing termination as 
punishment),  
be entitled to cash comp ensation, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed 
(including conditions by way of specifying the maximum period for which such cash compensation shall 
be payable), in respect of the earned leave ea rned by him and not availed of.  
(5) Where a sales promotion employee dies while in service, his heirs shall be entitled to cash 
compensation for the earned l eave earned by him and not availed of.  
(6) The cash compensation which will be payable to a sales promotion employee or, as the case may 
be, his heirs in respect of any period of earned leave for which he or his heirs, as the case may be, is or are 
entitled to cash compensation under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5), as the case may be, shall be an 
amount equal to the wages due to suc h sales promotion employee for such period.]  
5. Issue of appointment letter. —Every employer in relation to a sales promotion employee shall 
furnish to such employee a letter of appointment, in s uch form as may be prescribed, — 
(a) in a case where he holds a ppointment as such at the commencement of this Act, within three 
months of such commencement; and  
(b) in any other case, on his appointment as such.  
6. Application of certain Acts to sales promotion employees. —(1) The provisions of the 
Workmen’ s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), as in force for the time being, shall apply to, or in 
relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, workmen within the  meaning of 
that Act.  
4[(2) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes Ac t, 1947 (14 of 1947), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, workmen 
within the meaning of that Act and for the purposes of any proceeding under that Act in relation  to an 
industrial dispute, a sales promotion employee shall be deemed to include a sales promotion employee 
who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute 
or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchm ent had led to that dispute. ] 
(3) The provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, employees 
within the meaning of that Act.  
                                                           
1.  Section  4 renumbered as s ub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 48 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8 -3-1976).  
2. The words  and brackets “drawing wages (being wages, not including any commission)” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -3-
1976).   
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -3-1976).  
4. Sub -section ( 2) shall stand omitted ( date to be notified) by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2.  4 (4) The provisions of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees, being women, as they apply to, or in relation 
to, women employed, whether directly o r through any agency, for wages in any establishment within the 
meaning of that Act.  
(5) The provisions of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they app ly to, or in relation to, employees 
within the meaning of that Act.  
(6) The provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in r elation to, employees 
within the meaning of that Act.  
1[(7) Notwithstanding anything contained i n the foregoing sub -sections,— 
(a) in the application of any Act referred to in any of the said sub -section s to sales promotion 
employees, the wages of a sales promotion employee for the purposes of such Act, shall be deemed to 
be his wages as computed in accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
(b) where an Act referred to in any of the said sub -sections pro vides for a ceiling limit as to 
wages so as to exclude from the purview of the application of such Act persons whose wages exceed 
such ceiling limit, such Act shall not apply to any sales promotion employee whose wages as 
computed in accordance with the pr ovisions of this Act exceed such ceiling limit.]  
7. Maintenance of registers. —Every employer in relation to an establishment shall keep and 
maintain such registers and other documents and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
8. Inspectors. —(1) The State Go vernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such 
persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define the local limits within 
which they shall exercise their functions.  
(2) Any Inspector appointed under s ub-section ( 1) may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether any 
of the provisions of this Act have been complied with in respect of an establishment, — 
(a) require an employer to furnish such informatio n as he may consider necessary;  
(b) at any reasonable time enter the establishment or any premises connected therewith and 
require any one found in charge thereof to produce before him for examination any registers and other 
documents relating to the employment of sales promotion employees ; 
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes aforesaid, the employer, 
his agent or servant or any other person found in charge of the establishment or any premises 
connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has reasona ble cause to believe to be or to 
have been a sales promotion employee in the establishment;  
(d) make copies of or take extracts from any register or other documents maintained in relation to 
the establishment under this Act;  
(e) exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860)  
(4) Any person required to produce any register or other document or to give information by an 
Inspector under sub -section ( 2) shall be legally bound to do so.  
9. Penalty. —If any employer contravenes the provisions of section 4 or section 5 or section 7 or any 
rules made under this Act, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousa nd rupees.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 6 -5-1987).  5 10. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the  company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment pr ovided in this section, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under th is Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director , manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
(3) For t he purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
11. Cognizance of offence. —(1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act, unless the complaint thereof is made 
within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.  
1[11A. Effect of laws and agreements inco nsistent with this Act. —(1) The provisions of this Act or 
of any rule made thereunder shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained 
in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement, settlement or contract of service, whether made 
before or after the  coming into force of this Act:  
Provided that where under any such law, award, agreement, settlement or contract of service, a sales 
promotion employee is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourab le to him than 
those to which he would be entitled under this Act, the sales promotion employee shall continue to be 
entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he is entitled to 
receive benefits in respect o f other matters under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a sales promotion employee from 
entering into an agreement with his employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any matter 
which are more favoura ble to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act.]  
12. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice  to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the kinds of leave that may be granted to a sales promotion employee 2[, the limit up to which 
he may accumulate earned leave, the limit up to which he may avail of earned leave at a time and the 
reasons for which such limit may be exceeded, the conditions and restrictions subject to which he 
may be entitled to cash compensation] under section 4;  
(b) the form of the letter of appointment to be furnished under section 5;  
(c) the regis ters and other documents to be kept and maintained under section 7 and the manner in 
which such registers and other documents may be kept and maintained;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 69 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Ins. by Act 48 of 1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 8 -3-1976).  6 (d) any other matter which has to be, or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Governm ent under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such  modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously done under 
that rule.  
--------------------------The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES  ORDERS  
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 108 OF 1976  
[18th September, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the inclusion in, and the exclusion from, the lists of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, of certain castes and tribes, for the re -adjustment of representation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies in so far as such re -adjustment is necessitated by 
such inclusion of exclusion and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seven th Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and Commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “census authority ” means the Registrar General and ex officio  Census Commissioner for 
India;  
(b) “Com mission” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under article 324 
of the Constitution;  
(c) “Delimitation Act ” means the Delimitation Act, 1972 (76 of 1972);  
(d) “last census ” means t he census held in India in 1971;  
(e) “Scheduled Castes Order” means the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, made by 
the President under article 341 of the Constitution;  
(f) “Scheduled Tribes Orders ” means the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 and the 
Constitution (Andaman and Nicobar Islands ) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1959, made by the President 
under article 342 of the Constitution;  
(g) “State” means a State included in the Scheduled Castes Order and the Scheduled Tribes 
Orders, and includes the Union territory of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  
3. [Amendment of Scheduled Castes Order .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending                     
Act, 1988  (19 of 1988 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31-3-1988).  
4. [Amendment of Scheduled Tr ibes Orders .] Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid.            
(w.e.f. 31-3-1988).  
5. Determination of population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes .—(1) As soon as may 
be after the commencement of this Act, the population as at the last census of the Scheduled Castes or, as 
the case may be, of  the Scheduled Tribes, in each State shall be ascertained or estimated by the census 
authority.  
(2) Where by reason of the amendments made by section 3 or section 4 — 
(a) any locality in a State specified in relation to any caste or tribe in any of the parts of the 
Schedules to the Orders referred to in the said sections is varied so as to specify a larger area in 
relation to such caste or tribe, the census authority shal l take into account the population figures of the 
caste or tribe as ascertained in the last census and in any previous census wherein the population 
figures of the caste or tribe in respect of the increased area had been ascertained and determine the 
popul ation of that caste or tribe as on the 1st day of April, 1971 by increasing or decreasing such 
figures by the proportion in which the general population of the State or, as the case may be, the 
                                                           
1. 27th July, 1997, vide notification No. S.O. 589(E), dated 27th July, 1997, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 2 
 division, district, taluk, tahsil, police station, development  block or other territorial division in relation 
to which such caste or tribe has been specified by the said amendments has increased or decreased 
between the previous census aforesaid and the last census;  
(b) any caste or tribe which is deemed to be both a Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe in 
relation to a State or part thereof is varied so as to specify such caste or tribe only as a Scheduled 
Caste or Scheduled Tribe in relation to that State or part, the census authority shall take into account 
the pop ulation figures of such Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe as ascertained in the last census:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary for the census authority to determine the population of any 
Scheduled Caste or Tribe as on the 1st day of April, 1971, if  the population of that caste or tribe was not 
ascertained at the last census and in any of the previous censuses and is, in the opinion of that authority, 
numerically small.  
Explanation. —Where the population figures of any caste or tribe in respect of any  increased area 
referred to in clause ( a) had been ascertained in more than one previous census, the census authority shall 
take into account, for the purposes of that clause, the population figures of such caste or tribe as 
ascertained in the previous cen sus which is nearest in point of time to the last census.  
(3) The population figures ascertained or determined under sub -section ( 2) shall be notified by the 
census authority in the Gazette of India.  
(4) The population figures so notified shall be taken to  be the relevant population figures as 
ascertained at the last census and shall supersede any figures previously published; and the figures so 
notified shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court.  
6. Re-adjustment of constituencies by t he Election Commission .—(1) After the population figures 
have been notified for any State under section 5, it shall be the duty of the Commission to make such 
amendments as may be necessary in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
Order, 1976, (without altering the extent of any constituency as given in such Order) having regard to the 
provisions of articles 81, 170, 330 and 332 of the Constitution, of section 8 of the Delimitation Act, and 
of this Act, for the purpose of giving prop er representation to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, 
to the Scheduled Tribes of that State on the basis of the number of reserved seats as specified in that 
Order as hereunder amended by the Commission, and the First Schedule and Second Schedu le to the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
(2) In making any amendments under sub -section ( 1), the Commission shall, as far as may be 
necessary, have regard to the provisions of clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9 of the 
Delimitation Act.  
(3) The Commission shall — 
(a) publish  its proposals for the amendments in the Gazette of India and the Official Gazette of 
the State concerned and also in such other manner as it thinks fit;  
(b) specify a date on or after which such proposals will be further considered by it;  
(c) consider all  objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified; and  
(d) thereafter make the necessary amendments in the order.  
7. Procedure and powers of the Commission .—(1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, 
the Commission shall determine its own procedure and shall have all the powers of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance o f witnesses;  
(b) requiring the production of any document; and  
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office.  3 
 (2) The Commission shall have the power to require any person to furnish any information on such 
points or matters as, in the opin ion of the Commission, may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter , 
under the consideration of the Commission.  
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1 974).  
Explanation. —For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Commission shall be the limits of the territory of India.  
8. Publication of amendments and their dates of operation .—(1) The Commission  shall cause the 
amendments made by it in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976 to 
be published  in the Gazette of India and in  the Official Gazettes of the States concerned.  
(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such amendment shall have the force of law and 
shall not be called in question in any court.  
(3) As soon as may be after such publication in the Gazette of India, every such amendment shall be 
laid before the House of the People and the Legislative A ssemblies of the States concerned.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), the readjustment of representation of any territorial 
constituencies in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State necessitated by any 
amendments ma de by the Commission in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
Order, 1976 and provided for in that Order as so amended shall apply in relation to every election to the 
House or, as the cas e may be, to the Assembly, here after the pub lication in the Gazette of India under      
sub-section ( 1) of such amendments and shall so apply in supersession of the provisions relating to 
representation contained in the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950).  
(5) Nothing contained in th e foregoing sub -sections shall affect the representation in the House of the 
People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State, existing on the date of publication in the Gazette of 
India under sub -section ( 1) of the amendments made by the Commission under this Act.  
9. Certain other powers of Election Commission .—(1) The Commission may, from time  to time, 
by notification in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State concerned — 
(a) correct any printing mistake in the Delimitation of Parliamentar y and Assembly 
Constituencies Order, 1976 as amended under this Act, or any error occurring therein from any 
inadvertent slip or omission; and  
(b) where the boundaries or the name of any district or any territorial division mentioned in the 
said Order are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
bringing the Order up -to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the 
House of the People an d the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.  
10. Validation of acts done previous to the commencement of the Act .—All things done, and all 
steps taken, before the commencement of this Act by the census authority for the determination of 
population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, or by the Commission for the purpose of             
re-adjustment of constituenc ies shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to have been done or taken under these provisions as if such provisions were in force at the time 
such things were done or such steps were taken.  
[The First Schedule .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending  Act, 1988  (19 of 1988 ), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 31-3-1988).  
[The Second Schedule .] Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 31-3-1988).  
 
--------------------------The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976--------------------------
1 
 THE SMUGGLERS AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANIPULATORS  
(FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY) ACT, 1976                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Application.  
2A. [Omitted .] 
3. Definitions.  
4. Prohibition of holding illegally acquired property.  
5. Competent authority.  
6. Notice of forfeiture.  
7. Forfeiture of property in certain cases.  
8. Burden of proof.  
9. Fine in lieu of forfeiture.  
10. Procedure in relation to certain trust properties.  
11. Certain transfer s to be null and void.  
12. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal.  
12A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, and Member.  
13. Notice or order not to be invalid for error in description.  
14. Bar of jurisdiction.  
15. Competent authority  and Appellate Tribunal to have powers of civil court.  
16. Information to competent authority.  
17. Certain officers to assist competent authority and Appellate Tribunal.  
18. Power of competent authority to require certain offic ers to exercise certain powe rs. 
19. Power to take possession.  
20. Rectification of mistakes.  
21. Findings under other laws not conclusive for proceedings under this Act.  
22. Service of notices and orders.  
23. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
24. Act to have overriding effect.  
25. Provisions of the Act not to apply to certain properties held in trust.  
26. Power to make rules.  
27. Repeal and saving.  
  2 
 THE SMUGGLERS AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANIPULATORS (FORFEITURE  
OF PROPERTY) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 13 OF 1976  
[25th January, 1976.]  
An Act to provide for the forfeiture of illegally acquired properties  of smugglers and foreign 
exchange manipulators and for matters  connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  for the effective prevention of smuggling activities and  foreign exchange manipulations which 
are having a deleterious effect on the national economy it is necessary to deprive persons engaged in  such 
activities and manipulations of their ill -gotten gains;  
AND WHEREAS such persons have been augmenting such gains  by violations of wealth -tax, income -tax 
or other laws or by other  means and have thereby been increasing their resources for operating in a 
clandestine manner;  
AND WHEREAS such persons have in many cases been holding  the properties acquired by them through such 
gains in the names of their relatives, associates and confidants;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may  be called the Smugglers and Foreign 
Exchange Manipulators (Forfei ture of Property) Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of November, 1975.  
2. Application .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall apply only to the persons specified in             
sub-section ( 2). 
(2) The persons referred to in sub -section (1) are the following , namely: — 
(a) every person — 
(i) who has been convicted under the Sea Customs Act, 1878 ( 8 of 1878), or the Customs 
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), of an offence in relation to goods of a value exceeding one lakh of 
rupees; or  
(ii) who has been convicted under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (7 of 1947), or 
the Foreign Ex change Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973), of an offence, the amount or value 
involved in which exceeds one lakh of rupees; or  
(iii) who having been convicted under the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878), or the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), has been convi cted subsequently under either of those Acts; or  
(iv) who having been convicted under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (7 of 
1947), or the Foreign Ex change Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973), has been convicted 
subsequently under either of those A cts; 
(b) every person in respect of whom an order of detention has been made under the Conservation 
of Foreign Exchange and Pre vention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 (52 of 1974) : 
Provided that — 
(i) such order of detention, being an order to which the provisions of section 9 or section 12A 
of the said Act do not apply, has not been revoked on the report of the Advisory Board under 
section 8 of the said Act or before the receipt of the report of the Advisory Board or before 
making a reference to the Advi sory Board; or  
(ii) such order of detention, being an order to which the provisions of section 9 of the said Act 
apply, has not been revoked before the expiry of the time for, or on the basis of , the review under 3 
 sub-section ( 3) of section 9, or on the rep ort of the Advisory Board under section 8, read with 
sub-section ( 2) of section 9, of the said Act; or  
(iii) such order of detention, being an order to which the provision  of section 12A of the said 
Act apply, has not been revoked before the expiry of the time for, or on the basis of, the first 
review under sub -section ( 3) of that section, or on the basis of the report of the Advisory Board 
under section 8, read with sub -section ( 6) of section 12A, of that Act; or  
(iv) such order of detention has not been set aside by a court of competent jurisdiction;  
(c) every person who is a relative of a person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b); 
(d) every  associate of a person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b); 
(e) any holder (hereafter in this clause referred to as the present holder) of any property which 
was at any time previously held by a person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) unless the  present 
holder or, as the case may be, any one who held such property after such person and before the 
present holder, is or was a transferee in good faith for adequate consideration.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a), the va lue of any goods in relation to 
which a person has been convicted of an offence shall be the wholesale price of the goods in the ordinary 
course of trade in India as on the date of the commission of the offence.  
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of clause ( c), “relative ”, in relation to a person, means — 
(i) spouse of the person;  
(ii) brother or sister of the person;  
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the person;  
(iv) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the person;  
(v) any  lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the person;  
(vi) spouse of a person referred to in clause ( ii), clause ( iii) clause ( iv) or clause ( v); 
(vii) any lineal descendant of a person referred to in clause ( ii) or clause ( iii). 
Explanation 3.—For the purposes of clause ( d), “associate ”, in relation to a person, means — 
(i) any individual who had been or is residing in the residential premises (including outhouses) of 
such person;  
(ii) any individual who had been or is managing the affairs or keeping  the accounts of such 
person;  
(iii) any association of persons, body of individuals, partnership firm, or private company within 
the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), of which such person had been or is a member, 
partner or director;  
(iv) any  individual who had been or is a member, partner or director of an association of persons, 
body o f individuals, partnership firm  or private company referred to in clause ( iii) at any time  when 
such person had been or is a member, partner or director of suc h association , body, partnership firm 
or private company;  
(v) any person who had been or is managing the affairs, or keeping the accounts, of an association 
of persons, body of individuals, partnership firm or private company referred to in clause ( iii); 
(vi) the trustee of any trust, where, — 
(a) the trust has been created by such person; or  
(b) the value of the assets contributed by such person (including the value of the assets , if 
any, contributed by  him earlier) to the trust amounts, on the date on which the contribution is 
made, to  not less than tw enty per cent.  of the value of the assets of the trust on that date;  4 
 (vii) where the competent authority, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers  that any 
properties of such person are held on his behalf by any other person, such other person.  
Explanation 4.—For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby provided that the question whether any 
person is a person to whom the provisions of this Act apply ma y be determined with reference to any 
facts, circum stances or events (including any conviction or detention) which occurred or took place 
before the commencement of this Act.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
3. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise  requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal  2*** constituted under section 12;  
(b) “competent authority ” means an  officer of the Central Govern ment authoris ed by it under   
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 to perform the functions of a competent authority under this Act;  
(c) “illegally acquired property ”, in relation to any person to whom this Act applies, means — 
(i) any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act, wholly or partly out of or by means of any income, earnings or assets derived or obtained 
from or attributable to any activity prohibited by or under any law for the time being in force 
relating to any matter in respect of which Parliament has power to make laws; or  
(ii) any property a cquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act, wholly or partly out of or by means of any income, earning or assets in respect of which an y 
such law has been contravened ; or 
(iii) any property acquired by such person, whether  before or after the commencement of this 
Act, wholly or partly out of or by means of any income, earnings or assets the source of which 
cannot be proved and which cannot be shown to be attributable to any act or thing done in respect 
of any matter in rela tion to which Parliament has no power to make laws; or  
(iv) any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act, for a consideration, or by any means, wholly or partly traceable to any property referred to in 
sub-clauses (i) to ( iii) or the income  or earnings from such property;  
and includes — 
(A) any property held by such person which would have been, in relation to any previous 
holder thereof, illegally acquired property under this clause if such previ ous holder had not 
ceased to hold it, unless such person or any other person who held the property at any time after 
such previous holder or, where there are two or more such previous holders , the last of such 
previous holders is or was a transferee in good faith for ade quate consideration;  
(B) any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act, for a consideration, or by any means, wholly or partly traceable to any property falling under 
item ( A), or the income or earnings therefro m; 
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “property ” includes any interest in property, movable or immovable;  
(f) “trust” includes any other legal obligation.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law wh ich is not in force in any area  shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
                                                           
1. Section 2A, omitted by Act 28 of 2016 , s. 226 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).  
2.  The words “for Forfeited Property”, omitted by s. 226 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).  5 
 (3) Any reference in this Act to any officer or authority shall, in relation to any area in which there is 
no officer or authorit y with the same designation, be construed as a reference to such officer or authority 
as may be specified by the Central Government by notifica tion in the Official Gazette.  
4. Prohibition of holding illegally acquired property .—(1) As from the commencemen t of this Act, 
it shall not be lawful for any person to whom this Act applies to hold any illegally acquired property 
either by himself or through any other person on his behalf.  
(2) Where any person holds any illegally acquired property in contravention o f the provision s of      
sub-section ( 1), such property shall be liable to be forfeited to the Central Government in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act.  
5. Competent authority .—(1) The Central Government may, by order published i n the Official 
Gazette, authoris e as many officers of the Central Government (not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to 
the Government), as it thinks fit, to perform the functions of the competent authority under this Act.  
(2) The competent authorities sh all perform their functions in respect of such persons or classes of 
persons as the Central Government may, by order, direct.  
6. Notice of forfeiture .—(1) If, having regard to the value of the properties held by any person to 
whom this act applies, either by himself or through any other person on his behalf, his known sources of 
income, earnings or assets,  and any other information or material available to it as a result of action taken 
under section 18 or otherwise, the competent authority has reason to be lieve (the reasons for such belief to 
be recorded in writing) that all or any of such properties are illegally acquired properties, it may serve a 
notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to as the person affected) calling upon him within such time 
as may be specified in the notice, which shall not be ordinarily less than thirty days, to indicate the 
sources of his income, earnings or assets, out of which or by means of which he has acquired such 
property, the evidence on which he relies and other rele vant information and particulars, and to show 
cause why all or any of such properties , as the case may be , should not be declared to be illegally acquired 
properties and forfeited to the Central Government under this Act.  
(2) Where a  notice under sub -section ( 1) to any person specifies any property as being held on behalf 
of such person by any other person, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such other person.  
7. Forfeiture of property in certain cases .—(1) The competent a uthority may, after considering the 
explanation, if any, to the show -cause notice issued under section 6, and the materials available before it 
and after giving to the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property 
specified in  the notice through any other person, to such other person also) a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question are illegally 
acquired properties.  
(2) Where the competent authority is sa tisfied that some of the properties referred to in the show -
cause notice are illegally acquired properties but is not able to identity specifically such properties, then , it 
shall be lawful for the competent authority to specify the properties which, to th e best of its judgment, are 
illegally acquired properties and record a finding accordingly under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Where the competent authority records a finding under this section to the effect that any property 
is illegally acquired property, it shal l declare that such property shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, 
stand forfeited to the Central Government free from all encumbrances.  
(4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government under this Act , then, 
the company s hall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or the 
articles of association of the company, forthwith register the Central Government as the transferee of such 
shares.  
8. Burden of proof .—In any proceedings under this Act, the burden of proving that any property 
specified in the notice served under section 6 is not illegally acquired property shall be on the person 
affected.  6 
 9. Fine in lieu of forfeiture .—(1) Where the competent authority makes a declaration that any pr operty stands 
forfeited to the Central Government under section 7 and it is a case where the source of only a part, being less than 
one-half, of the income, earnings or assets with which such property was acquired has not been proved to the 
satisfac tion o f the competent authority, it shall make an order giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu 
of forfeitu re, a fine equal to one and one -fifth times the value of such part.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the value of any part of income, earnings or  assets, with 
which any property has been acquired, shall be ,— 
(a) in the case of any part of income or earnings, the amount of such part of income or earnings;  
(b) in the case of any part of assets, the proportionate part of the  full value of the consideration for the 
acquisition of such assets.  
(2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub -section ( 1), the person affected shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Where the person affected pays the fine d ue under sub -section ( 1), within such time as may be allowed in 
that behalf, the competent authority  may, by order, revoke the declaration of forfeiture under section 7 and 
thereupon such property shall stand released.  
10. Procedure in relation to certain trust properties .—In the case of any person referred to in clause ( vi) of 
Explanation 3 to sub -section ( 2) of section 2, if the competent authority, on the basis of the information and 
materials available to it, has reason to believe (the reasons for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any 
property held in trust is illegally acquired property, it may serve a notice upon the author of the trust or, as the case 
may be, the contributor of the assets out of or by means of which such property was acquire d by the trust and the 
trustees, calling upon them within such time as may be specified in the notice which shall not ordinarily be less than 
thirty days, to explain the source of the money or other assets out of or by means of which such property was 
acqu ired or, as the case may be, the source of the money or other assets which were contributed to the trust for 
acquiring such property and thereupon such notice shall be deemed to be a notice served under section 6 and all the 
other provisions of this Act sh all apply accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section “illegally acquired property ”, in relation to any property held in 
trust, includes — 
(i) any  property which if it had continued to be held by the author of the trust or the contributor of such 
property to the trust would have been illegally acquired property in rela tion to such author or contributor;  
(ii) any property acquired by the trust out o f any contributions made by any person which would have been 
illegally acquired property in relation to such person had such person acquired such property out of such 
contributions.  
11. Certain transfers to be null and void .—Where after the issue of a notice under section 6 or under        
section 10, any property referred to in the said notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfer shall, for 
the purposes of the proceedings under this Act, be ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited to the 
Central Government under section 7, then, the transfer of such property shall be deemed to be null and void.  
12. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, co nstitute an Appellate Tribunal  1*** consisting of a Chairman and such number of other members (being 
officers of the Central Government not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government) as the Central 
Government thinks fit, to be appoint ed by the Government for  2[hearing appeals  against  the orders made — 
(a) under section 7, sub -section ( 1)   of section 9 or section 10;  
(b) under section 68F, section 68 -I, sub -section ( 1) of section 68K or section 68L, of the Narcotic Drugs 
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985  (61 of 1985) ; 
(c) by the Adjudicating Authority or any other authority under the Prevention of Money -laundering         
Act, 2002 , (15 of 2003) ;] 
3[(d) by the Adjudicating Authorities, Competent Authorities and the Qualifi cations, Special 
Director (Appeals) under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999).]  
                                                           
1. The words “to be called the Appellate Tribunal for Forfeited Property” omitted by Act 28 of 2016 , s. 226 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).  
2. Subs . by s. 226, ibid., for “hearing appeals against the orde rs made under section 7, sub -section ( 1) of section 9 or section 10” 
(w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).   
3. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 164 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  7 
 (2) The Chairman of the Appellate  Tribunal shall be a person who is or has been  1*** a Judge of the 
Supreme Court or of a High Court.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the competent authority made under section 7, sub -section ( 1) of 
section 9 or section 10, may, within forty -five days from t he date on which the order is served on him, prefer 
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the said period of forty -five days, but 
not after sixty days, from the date aforesaid if it is sati sfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal in time.  
(5) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 4), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving an opportunity 
to the appellant to be heard, if he so desires, and after making such further enquiry  as it deems fit, confirm, 
modify or set aside the order appealed against.  
(6) The powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised and discharged by Benches 
consisting of three members and constituted by the Chair man of the Appellate Tribunal.  
2[(6A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), where the C hairman considers it necessary 
so to do for the expeditious disposal of appeals under this section, he may constitute a  3[Bench with one or two 
members]  and a Bench so constituted may exercise and discharge the powers and functions of the Appellate 
Tribunal:  
Provided that if the members of a Bench so constituted differ on any point or points, they shall state the 
point or points on which they differ and r efer the same to a third member (to be specified by the Chairman) for 
hearing on such point or points and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of that 
member.]  
4[(6B) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman by reason of his death, 
resignation or otherwise, the senior -most member, shall act as the Chairman until the date on which a new 
Chairman, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.  
(6C) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, 
the senior -most member shall discharge the functions of the Chairman until the date on which the Chairman 
resumes his duties.]  
 (7) The Appellate Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.  
 2[(8) On application to the Appellate Tribunal and on payment of the prescribed fee, the Tribunal may 
allow a party to any appeal  or any person authoris ed in this behalf by such party to inspect at any time during 
office hours, any relevant records and registers of the Tribunal and obtain a certified copy of any part thereof.]  
5[12A. Qualifications,  terms  and conditions  of service of Chairperson, and Member .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualif ications, appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
other members of the Appellate Tribunal appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of 
the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the Chairperson and other members appointed before the commencement of Part XIV 
of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall continue to be governed by the provisions of 
this Act, and the rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had 
not come into force.]  
13. Notice or order not to be invalid for error in description .—No notice is sued or served, no 
declaration made, and no order passed, under this Act shall be deemed to be invalid by reason of any error in 
the description of the property or person mentioned therein if such property or person is identifiable from the 
description so mentioned.  
                                                           
1. The word s “or is qualified to be” omitted by  Act 28 of 2016 , s. 226 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).  
2. Ins. by Act 55 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1981).  
3. Subs . by Act 28 of 2016, s. 226 , for “Bench of two members” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016)  
4. Ins. by s. 226 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).  
5. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 164 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  8 
 14. Bar of jurisdiction .—No order passed or declaration made under this Act shall be appea lable except 
as provided therein and no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Appellate 
Tribunal or any competent authori ty is empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall 
be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any 
power conferred by or under this Act.  
15. Competent authority and Appell ate Tribunal to have powers of civil court .—The competent 
authority  and the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence or affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or offic e; 
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or docu ments;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
16. Information to competent authority .—(1) Notwithstand ing anything contained in any other 
law, the competent authority shall have power to require any officer or authority of the Central 
Government or a State Government or a local authority to furnish information in relation to such persons, 
points or matters as in the opinion of the competent authority will be useful for, or relevant to, the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) Any officer of the Income -tax Department, the Customs Department or the Central Excise 
Department or any officer of enforcement appointed under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 
(46 of 1973) , may furnish suo motu  any i nformation available with him to the competent authority if in 
the opinion of the officer such informa tion will be useful to the competent authority for the purposes of 
this Act.  
17. Certain officers to assist competent authority and Appellate Tribunal .—For the purposes of 
any proceedings under this Act, the following officers are hereby empowered and required to assist the 
competent authority and t he Appellate Tribunal, namely: — 
(a) officers of the Customs Department;  
(b) officers of the Central Excise D epartment;  
(c) officers of the Income -tax Department;  
(d) officers of enforcement appointed under the F oreign Exchange Regulation                           
Act, 1973  (46 of 1973);  
(e) officers of police;  
(f) such other officers of the Central or State Gover nment as are specified by the Central 
Government in this behalf by notifica tion in the Official Gazette.  
18. Power of competent authority to require certain offic ers to exercise certain powers .—(1) For 
the purposes of any proceedings under this Act or the initiation of any such proceedings, the competent 
authority shall have power to cause to be conducted any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect of any 
person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account or any other relevant matters.  
(2) For the purposes referred to in sub -section ( 1), the competent authority may, having regard to the 
nature of the inquiry, investiga tion or survey, require an officer of the Income -tax Department to conduct 
or cause to be conducted such inquiry, investiga tion or survey.  
(3) Any officer of the Income -tax Department who is conducting or is causing to be conducted any 
inquiry, investigation or survey required to be conducted under sub -section ( 2), may, for the purpose of 9 
 such inquiry, investigation or survey, exercise any power (including the power to authoris e the exercise of 
any power) which may be exercised by him for any purpose under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), 
and the provisions of the said Act shall, so f ar as may be, apply accordingly.  
19. Power to take possession .—(1) Where any property has been declared to be forfeited to the 
Central Government under this Act, or where the person affected has failed to pay the fine due under         
sub-section ( 1) of s ection 9 w ithin the time allowed there  for under sub -section ( 3) of that section, the 
competent authority may order the person affected as well as any other person who may be in possession 
of the property to surrender or deliver possession thereof to the competent authority or to any person duly 
authorised by it in th is behalf within thirty days of the service of the order.  
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with an order made under sub -section ( 1), the competent 
authority may take possession of the property and may for that purpose use such force as may be 
necessary.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the competent authority may, for the 
purpose of taking possession of any property referred to in sub -section ( 1), requisition the service of any 
police officer to assist the competent aut hority and it shall be the duty of such officer to comply with such 
requisition.  
20. Rectification of mistakes .—With a view to rectifying any mistakes apparent from record, the 
competent authority or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, may amend any order made by it 
within a period of one year from the date of the order:  
Provided that if any such amendment is likely to affect any person prejudicially, it shall not be made 
without giving to such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
21. Finding s under other laws not conclusive for proceedings under this Act .—No finding of any 
officer or authority under any other law shall be conclusive for the purposes of any proceeding under this 
Act. 
22. Service of notices and orders .—Any notice or order  issued or made under this Act shall be 
served — 
(a) by tendering the notice or order or sending it by registered post to the person for whom it is 
intended or to his agent;  
(b) if the notice or order cannot be served in the manner provided in clause ( a), by affixing it on a 
conspicuous place in the property in relation to which the notice or order is issued or made, or on 
some conspicuous part of the premises in which the person for whom it is intended is known to have 
last resided or carried on business or  personally worked for gain.  
23. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecut ion or other proceeding shall lie  
against the Central Government or any officer of the Central or State Government for anything which is 
done, or intended to be done, in good faith, in pursuance of t his Act or the rules made there under.  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of  this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
25. Provisions of the Act not to apply to certain properties held in trust .—Nothing contained in 
this Act shall apply in rel ation to any property held by a trust or an institution created or established 
wholly for public , religious or charitable purposes if — 
(i) such property has been so held by such trust or institution from a date prior to the 
commencement of this Act ; or 
(ii) such property is wholly traceable to any property held by such trust or institution prior to the 
commencement of this Act.  
26. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provi sions of this Act.  10 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members of the Appellate 
Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
1[(aa) the fees which shall be paid for the inspection of the records and registers of the Appellate 
Tribunal or for obtaining  a certified copy of any part thereof under sub -section ( 8) of section 12;]  
(b) the powers of a civil court that may be exercised by the competent authority and the Appellate 
Tribunal under clause ( f) of section 15;  
(c) any other matter which has to be, or  may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more su ccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following th e session or  the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule sh all thereafter have effect only 
in such modified from or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without p rejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under that rule.  
27. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Smugglers and Foreign  Exchange  Manipulators (Forfeiture of 
Property) Ordinance, 1975 (20 of 1975) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been  done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 1980, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-1981).  
--------------------------The Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976--------------------------
1 THE TERRITORIAL WATERS, CONTINENTAL SHELF, EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC  ZONE 
AND OTHER MARITIME ZONES ACT, 1976  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definition.  
3. Sovereignty over, and limits of, territorial waters . 
4. Use of  territorial waters by foreign ships.  
5. Contiguous zone of India . 
6. Continental shelf.  
7. Exclusive economic zone.  
8. Historic waters.  
9. Maritime boundaries between India and States having coasts opposite or adjacent to those of 
India.  
10. Publication of charts.  
11. Offences.  
12. Offences by companies . 
13. Place of trial . 
14. Previous sanction of the Central Government for prosecution . 
15. Power to make rules.  
16. Removal of difficulties . 
 
 
  2 THE TERRITORIAL WATERS, CONTINENTAL SHELF, EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC  ZONE 
AND OTHER MARITIME ZONES ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 80 OF 1976  
[25th August , 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for certain matters relating to the territorial waters continental shelf, exclusive 
economic zone and other maritime zones of India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Territorial Waters, Continental 
Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976.  
(2) Sections 5 and 7 shall come into force on such date1 or on such different dates as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and the remaining provisions of this 
Act shall come into force at once.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “limit”, in relation to the territorial waters,  the continental shelf, the 
exclusive economic zone or any other maritime zone of India, means the limit of such waters, shelf or 
zone with reference to the mainland of India as well as the individual or composite group or groups of 
islands constituting pa rt of the territory of India.  
3. Sovereignty over,  and limits of, territorial waters .—(1) The sovereignty of India extends and 
has always extended to the territorial waters of India (hereinafter referred to as t he territorial waters) and 
to the  seabed and subsoil underlying, and the air space over, such waters.  
(2) The limit of the territorial waters is the line every point of which is at a distance of twelve nautical 
miles from the nearest point of the appropriate baseline.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may, whenever it 
considers necessary so to do having regard to International Law and State practice, alter, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, the limit of the territorial waters.  
(4) No notification shall be issued under sub -section ( 3) unless resolutions approving the issue of 
such notification are passed by both Houses of Parliament.  
4. Use of territorial waters by foreign ships .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of any other 
law for the time being in force, all foreign ships (other than warships including sub -marines and other 
underwater vehicles) shall enjoy the right of innocent passage through the territorial waters.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, passage is inn ocent so long as it is not prejudicial to 
the peace, good order or security of India.  
(2) Foreign warships including submarines and other underwater vehicles may enter or pass through 
the territor ial waters after giving prior  notice to the Central Government:  
Provided that submarines and other underwater vehicles shall navigate on the surface and show their 
flag while passing through such waters.  
(3) The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the  interests of the peace, 
good order or security of India or any part thereof, suspend, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
whether absolutely or subject to such exceptions and qualifications as may be specified in the notification, 
the entry of all or  any class of foreign ships into such area of the territorial waters as may be specified in 
the notification.  
                                                           
1. 15th January , 197 7, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1 6(E), dated 1 5th January , 197 7, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,   
Part II, sec. 3( i). 3 5. Contiguous zone of India .—(1) The contiguous zone of India (hereinafter referred to as the 
contiguous zone) is an area beyond and adjacent to t he territorial waters and the limit of the contiguous 
zone is the line every point of which is at a distance of twenty -four nautical miles from the nearest point 
of the baseline referred to in sub -section (2) of section 3.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, whenever it 
considers necessary so to do having regard to International Law and State practice, alter, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, the limit of the contiguous zone.  
(3) No notification shall be issued under sub -section ( 2) unless resolutions approving the issue of 
such notification are passed by both Houses of Parliament.  
(4) The Central Government may exercise such powers and take such measures in or in relation to the 
contiguous zone a s it may cons ider necessary with respect to, — 
(a) the security of India, and  
(b) immigration, sanitation, customs and other fiscal matters.  
(5) The Central Government may, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) extend with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, any enactment, relating to any 
matter referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4), for the time being in force in India or 
any part thereof, to the contiguous zone, and  
(b) make such provisions as it may consi der necessary in such notification for facilitating th e 
enforcement of such enactment,  
and any enactment so extended shall have effect as if the contiguous zone is a part of the territory of 
India.  
6. Continental shelf .—(1) The continental shelf of India (hereinafter referred to as the continental 
shelf) comprises the seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond the limit of its 
territorial waters throughout the natural prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the 
continental  margin or to a distance of two hundred nautical miles from the baseline referred to in sub -
section ( 2) of section 3 where the outer edge of the continental margin does not extend up to that distance.  
(2) India has, and always had, full and exclusive sover eign rights in respect of its continental shelf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Unio n has in the 
continental shelf, — 
(a) sovereign  rights for the purposes of exploration, exploitation, conservation and management 
of all resources;  
(b) exclusive rights and jurisdiction for the construction, maintenance or operation of artificial 
islands, off -shore terminals, installations and other st ructure s and devices necessary for the 
exploration and exploitation of the resources of the continental shelf or for the convenience of 
shipping or for any other purpose;  
(c) exclusive jurisdiction to authorise, regulate and control scientific research; an d 
(d) exclusive jurisdiction to preserve and protect the marine environment and to prevent and 
control marine pollution.  
(4) No person (including a foreign Government) shall, except under, and in accordance with, the 
terms of a licence or a letter of autho rity granted by the Central Government, explore the continental shelf 
or exploit its resources or carry out any search or excavation or conduct any research within the 
continental shelf or drill therein or construct, maintain or operate any artificial isla nd, off -shore terminal, 
installation or other structure or device therein for any purpose whatsoever.  
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, — 4 (a) declare any area of the continental shelf and its superjacent  waters to be a designated area; and  
(b) make such provisions as it may deem necessary with respect to, — 
(i) the exploration, exploitation and protection of the resources of the continental shelf within 
such designated area; or  
(ii) the safety and protecti on of artificial islands, off -shore terminals, installations and other 
structures and devices in such designated area; or  
(iii) the protection of marine environment of such designated area; or  
(iv) customs  and other fiscal matters in relation to such designated area.  
Explanation .—A notification issued under this sub -section may provide for the regulation of entry 
into and passage through the designated area of foreign ships by the establishment of fairways, sealanes, 
traffic separation schemes or any other mode of ensuring freedom of navigation which is not prejudicia l 
to the interests of India.  
(6) The Central Government may, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) extend with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, any enactment for the time 
being in force in India or any part thereof to the conti nental shelf or any part [including any 
designated area under sub -section ( 5)] thereof; and  
(b) make such provisions as it may consider necessary for facilitating the enforcement of such 
enactment,  
and any enactment so extended shall have effect as if the continental shelf or the part [including, as the 
case may be, any designated area under sub -section ( 5)] thereof to which it has been extended is a part of 
the territory of India.  
(7) Without prejudice  to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) and subject to any measures that may be 
necessary for protecting the interests of India, the Central Government may not impede the laying or 
maintenance of submarine cables or pipelines on the continental shelf by fore ign States:  
Provided that the consent of the Central Government shall be necessary for the delineation of the 
course for the laying of such cables or pipelines.  
7. Exclusive economic  zone .—(1) The exclusive economic zone of India (hereinafter referred to a s 
the exclusive economic zone) is an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial waters, and the limit of such 
zone is two hundred nautical miles from the baseline referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 3.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, whenever it 
considers  necessary so to do having regard to International Law and State practice, alter, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, the Limit of the exclusive economic zone.  
(3) No notification shall be issued under sub -section ( 2) unless resolutions approving the issue of 
such notification are passed by both Houses of Parliament.  
(4) In the exclusiv e economic zone, the Union has, — 
(a) sovereign rights for the purpose of exploration, exploitation, conserv ation and management of 
the natural resources, both living and non -living as well as for producing energy from tides, winds 
and currents;  
(b) exclusive rights and jurisdiction for the construction, maintenance or operation of artificial 
islands, off -shore terminals, installations and other structures and devices necessary for the 
exploration and exploitation of the resources of the zone or for the convenience of shipping or for any 
other purpose;  
(c) exclusive jurisdiction to authorise, regulate and control  scientific research;  
(d) exclusive jurisdiction to preserve and protect the marine environment and to prevent and 
control marine pollution; and  5 (e) such other rights as are recognised by International Law.  
(5) No person (including a foreign Government) shall, except under, and in accordance with, the 
terms of any agreement with the Central Government or of a licence or a letter of authority granted by the 
Central Government, explore or exploit any resources of the exclusive economic zone or carry out any  
search or excavation or conduct any research within the exclusive economic zone or drill therein or 
construct, maintain or operate any artificial island, off -shore terminal, installation or other structure or 
device therein for any purpose whatsoever:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply in relation to fishing by a citizen of India.  
(6) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) declare any area of the exclusive economic zone to be a designated area; and  
(b) make such provisions as it may deem necessary with respect to, — 
(i) the exploration, exploitation and protection of the resources of such designated area; or  
(ii) other activities for the economic exploitation and exploration of such designated area such 
as the production of energy from tides, winds and currents; or  
(iii) the safety and protection of artificial islands, off -shore terminals, installations and other 
structures and devices in such designated area; or  
(iv) the protection of marine environment o f such designated area; or  
(v) customs and other fiscal matters in relation to such designated area.  
Explanation .—A notification issued under this sub -section may provide for the regulation of entry 
into and passage through the designated area of foreign s hips by the establishment of fairways, sealanes, 
traffic separation schemes or any other mode of ensuring freedom of navigation which is not prejudicial 
to the interests of India . 
(7) The Central Government may, by notifi cation in the official Gazette, — 
(a) extend, with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, any enactment for the time 
being in force in India or any part thereof to the exclusive economic zone or any part thereof; and  
(b) make such provisions as it may consider necessary for fa cilitating the enforcement of such 
enactment,  
and any enactment so extended shall have effect as if the exclusive economic zone or the part thereof to 
which it has been extended is a part of the territory of India . 
(8) The provisions of sub -section ( 7) of section 6 shall apply in relation to the laying or maintenance 
of submarine cables or pipelines on the seabed of the exclusive economic zone as they apply in relation to 
the laying or maintenance of submarine cables or pipelines on the seabed of the contin ental shelf.  
(9) In the exclusive economic zone and the air space over the zone, ships and aircraft of all States 
shall, subject to the exercise by India of its rights within the zone, enjoy freedom of navigation and over  
flight.  
8. Historic waters .—(1) Th e Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify the limits of such waters adjacent to its land territory as are the historic waters of India.  
(2) The sovereignty of India extends, and has always extended, to the historic waters o f India and to 
the seabed and subsoil underlying, and the air space over, such waters.  
9. Maritime boundaries between India and States having coasts opposite or adjacent to those of 
India .—(1) The maritime boundaries between India and any State whose coast is opposite or adjacent to 
that of India in regard to their respective territorial waters, contiguous zones, continental shelves, 6 exclusive economic zone s and other maritime zones shall be a s determined by agreement (whether 
entered into before or after the commencement of this sectio n) between India and such State  and pending 
such agreement between India and any such State, and unless any other provisional arrangements are 
agreed to between them, the maritime boundaries between India and such State shall not extend beyond 
the line every point of which is equidistant from the nearest point from which the breadth of the territorial 
waters of India and of such State are measured.  
(2) Every agree ment referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be after it is entered into, be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other provision of this Act.  
10. Publication of charts .—The Central Government may cause the baseline referred to in sub -
section ( 2) of section 3, the limits of the territorial waters, the contiguous zone, the continental shelf, the 
exclusive economic zone and the historic waters of India  and the maritime boundaries as settled by 
agreements referred to in section 9 to be published in charts.  
11. Offences .—Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any notification thereunder shall 
(without prejudice to any other action which may b e taken against such person under any other provision 
of this or  of any other enactment) be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or 
with fine, or with both.  
12. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act or the rule s made thereunder has 
been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, 
and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the 
company shall be deemed to be guil ty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where an offence under this Act or the 
rules made thereunder has been committed by a  company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or the connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or ot her 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other associat ion of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
13. Place of trial .—Any person committing an offence under this Act or any rules made thereunder 
or under any of the enactments extended under this Act or under the  rules made thereunder may be tried 
for the offence in any place in which he may be found or in such other place as the Central Government 
may, by general or special order, published in the Official Gazette, direct in this behalf.  
14. Previous sanction of the Central Government for prosecution .—No prosecution shall be 
instituted against any person in respect of any offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder without 
the previous sanction of the Central Government or such officer or authority as may be authorised by that 
Government by order in writing in this behalf.  
15. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  7 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) regulation of the conduct of any person in the territorial waters, the contiguous zone, the 
continental shelf, the exclusive ec onomic zone or any other maritime zone of India;  
(b) regulation of the exploration and exploitation, conservation and management of the resources 
of the continental shelf;  
(c) regulation of the exploration, exploitation, conservation and management of the resources of 
the exclusive economic zone;  
(d) regulation of the construction, maintenance and operation of artificial islands, off -shore 
terminals, installations and other structures and devices referred to in sections 6 and 7;  
(e) preservation  and protection of the marine environment and prevention and control of marine 
pollution for the purposes of this Act;  
(f) authorisation, regulation and control of the conduct of scientific research for the purposes of 
this Act;  
(g) fees in relation to lic ences and letters of authority referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 6 
and sub -section ( 5) of section 7 or for any other purpose; or  
(h) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in clauses ( a) to ( g). 
(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Government may provide that a contravention 
thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine which may 
extend to any amount, or with both.  
(4) Every rule made under this Act and every notifica tion issued under sub -section ( 5) of section 6 or 
sub-section ( 6) of section 7 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in o ne session 
or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
the notification or both Houses agr ee that the rule or notification should not be issued, the rule or 
notification shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudic e to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or notification.  
16. Removal of difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act 
or of any of the enactments extended under this Act, the Central Governm ent may, by order published in 
the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or, as the case 
may be, of such enactment, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section — 
(a) in the case of any difficulty arising in giving effect to any provision of this Act, after the 
expiry of three years from the commencement of such provision;  
(b) in the case of any difficulty arising in g iving effect to the provisions of any enactment 
extended under this Act, after the expiry of three years from the extension of such enactment.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of P arliament.  
