--------------------------The Disputed Elections (Prime Minister and Speaker) Act, 1977--------------------------
1 THE DISPUTED ELECTIONS (PRIME MINISTER AND  SPEAKER) ACT, 1977  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES FOR DISPUTED ELECTIONS  
3. Petitions in respect of disputed elections.  
4. Authority to try a petition.  
CHAPTER III  
PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS IN RESPECT OF DISPUTED ELECTIONS  
5. Presentation of petition.  
6. Parties to the petition.  
7. Contents of petition.  
8. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner.  
9. Procedure on receiving petitions.  
CHAPTER IV  
TRIAL OF PETITIONS  
10. Trial of petitions.  
11. Procedure before the Authority.  
12. Secrecy of voting not to be infringed.  
13. Answering of criminating questions and certificate of indemnity.  
14. E xpenses of witnesses.  
15. Recrimination when seat claimed.  
16. Decision of the Authority.  
17. Other orders to be made by the Authority.  
18. Grounds for declaring election to be void.  
19. Grounds for which a candidate other than the returned candidate may b e declared to have been 
elected.  
20. Communication of orders of the Authority.  
21. Costs.  
22. Orders of Authority to be final.  
23. Effect of orders of Authority.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Withdrawal and abatement of petitions.  
25. Payment of costs out of  security deposits and return of such deposits.  
26. Execution of orders as to costs.  
27. Power to make rule s. 
28. Repeal and saving.  2 THE DISPUTED ELECTIONS (PRIME  MINISTER AND  SPEAKER) ACT, 1977  
ACT NO. 16 OF 1977  
[18th April , 1977.]  
An Act to provide for Authorities to deal with disputed elections to Parliament in the case of 
Prime Minister and Speaker of the House of the People and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -eighth Year of the R epublic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Disputed Elections                    
(Prime Minister and Speaker) Act, 1977.  
(2) It shall be deemed  to have come into force on the  3rd day of February,  1977.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Authority ” means an Authority constituted under section 4 for the trial of a petition;  
(b) “candidate ” means a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a 
candidate a t any election;  
(c) “costs” means all costs, charges and expenses of, or incident al to, tria l of a petition under this 
Act; 
(d) “election” means an election in the case of Prime Minister or in the case of Speaker;  
(e) “election in the case of Prime Minister ” means an election to either House of Parliament of a 
person who holds the offi ce of Prime Minister at the time of such election or is appointed as Prim e 
Minister after such election;  
(f) “election in the case of Speaker ” means an election to the House of the People of a person who 
holds the office of Speaker at the time of such elec tion or is chosen as the Speaker for that House 
after such election;  
(g) “petition” means a petition calling in question an election;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “returned candidate ” means a candidate whose name has been published under section 67 of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) , as duly elected at an election in the case of  
Prime Minister or, as the case may be, an e lection in the case of Speaker;  
(j) each of the expressions defined in the Represe ntation of the People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951 ), but 
not defined in this Act shall have the same meaning as in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES FOR DISPUTED ELECTIONS  
3. Petitions i n respect of disputed elections. —No election shall be called in question except by a 
petition presented in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
4. Authority to try a petition. —(1) Every petition shall be tried by an Authority, constituted for the 
purpose by the Central Government by n otification in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The Authority shall consist of a single member, who is a Judge of the Supreme Court, to be 
nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India.  3 (3) If for any reason a vacancy occurs in the office of member aforesaid, the Chief Justice shall, as 
soon as practicable, nominate a person to fill the vacancy, and thereupon the trial of the petition shall be 
continued as if that member had been the Authority from the commencement of the trial of such petition:  
Prov ided that the Authority may, i f it thinks fit, recall and re -examine any of the witnesses already 
examined.  
CHAPTER III  
PRESENTATION OF  PETITIONS IN RESPECT OF DISPUTED ELECTIONS  
5. Presentation of petition. —(1) A petition c alling in question any election may be presented on one 
or more of the grounds specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 100 and section 101 of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) , to the Election Commission by any candidate at such election or 
any elector within forty -five days from, but not earlier than, the date of election of the returned candidate, 
or if there are more returned candidates than one at the election and the dates of their election are 
different, th e last of those dates:  
Provided that a petition calling  in question the election of a person who does not hold the office of 
Prime Minister or, as the case may be, Speaker of the House of the People at the time of such election and 
who is appointed or chosen to that office after such election but before the ex piry of the time for 
presenting such election petition,  may be presented within forty -five days from the date on which such 
person was appointed as the Prime Minister or chosen as the Speaker of the House of the People.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, “elector” means a person who was entitled to vote at the election 
to which the petition relates, whether he has  voted at such election or not.  
(2) A petition shall be deemed to have been presented to the Election Commission when it is 
delivered to the Elect ion Commission or to such other officer as may be appointed by it in this behalf — 
(a) by the  person making the petition, or  
(b) by a person authorised in writing in this behalf by the person making  the petition.  
(3) Every petition shall be accompanied by a s many copies thereof as there are respondents 
mentioned in the petition and one more copy for the use of the Election Commission, and every such copy 
shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition.  
(4) At the  time of presenting a petition, the petitioner shall deposit with the Election Commission in 
such manner as may be prescribed a sum of two thousan d rupees as security for costs.  
(5) The Authority trying a petition may at any time during the course of the t rial of the petition call 
upon the petitioner to give such further secur ity for costs as it may direct.  
(6) No person shall be entitled to be joined as a respondent to a petition under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 10 unless he has given such security for cos ts as the Authority may direct.  
6. Parties to the petition. —A petitioner shall join  as respondents to his petition — 
(a) where the petitioner, in addition to claiming a declaration that the election of all or any of the 
returned candidates is void, claims a  further declaration that he himself or any other candidate has 
been duly elected, all the contesting candidates other than the petitioner, and where no such further 
declaration is claimed, all the returned candidates; and  
(b) any other candidate against w hom allegations of any corrupt practice are made in the petition.  
7. Contents of petition. —(1) A petition — 
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies;  
(b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges, including as 
full a statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt 
practice and the date and place of the commission of e ach such practice ; and  4 (c) shall be signed by the petit ioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , for the verification of pleadings : 
Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, the petition shall also be accompanied 
by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt practi ce and the 
particulars thereof.  
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and verified in the 
same manner as the petition.  
8. Relief that ma y be claimed by the petitioner. —A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a 
declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidates is void, claim a further declaration 
that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected . 
9. Procedure on  receiving petitions. —(1) The Election Commission shall, as soon as may be after 
the receipt of a petition under section 5, forward it to the Authority for trying the petition.  
(2) Where more petitions than one have been received under section 5 in respect  of the same election, 
the Election Commission shall forward them to the Authority and such Authority may, in its discretion, 
try them separately or in one or more groups.  
CHAPTER IV  
TRIAL OF PETITIONS  
10. Trial of petitions. —(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Authority for the trial of any 
petition shall hold the trial at New Delhi.  
(2) The Autho rity shall dismiss the petition — 
(a) if the petition has not been presented within the period specified in sub -section ( 1) of                 
sectio n 5; 
(b) if the petition does not comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of 
section 5 or section 6.  
Explanation .—An order dismis sing a petition under this sub -section shall be deemed to be an order 
made under clause ( a) of section  16. 
(3) Any candidate not already a respondent to a petition shall, upon application made by him to the 
Authority within fourteen days from the date of commencement of the trial and subject to any order as to 
security for costs which may be made by the Au thority, be entitle d to be joined as a respondent.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section and of section 15 the trial of a petition shall be 
deemed to commence on the date fixed for the respondents to appear before the Authority and answer the 
claim or claims made in the petition.  
(4) The Authority may, upon  such terms as to costs and otherwise as it may deem fit, allow the 
particulars of any corrupt practice alleged in the petition to be amended or amplified in such manner as 
may in its opinion be necessary for ensuring a fair and effective trial of the peti tion, but shall not allow 
any amendment of the petition which will have the effect of introducing particulars of a corrupt practice 
not previously alleged in the petition.  
(5) The trial of a petition shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the in terests of justice in 
respect of the trial, be continued from day to day until its conclusion, unless the Authority finds the 
adjournment of the trial beyond the following day to be necess ary for reasons to be recorded.  
(6) Every petition shall be tried as  expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude 
the trial within six months from the date of commencement of the trial.  5 11. Procedure before the Authority. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules 
made thereunder, every  petition shall be tried by the Authority, as nearly as may be, in accordance with 
the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) to the trial of suits:  
Provided that the Authority shall have the discretion to refuse, for reas ons to be recorded in writing, 
to examine any witness or witnesses, if it is of the opinion that the evidence of such witness or witnesses 
is not material for the decision of the petition or that the party tendering such witness or witnesses is 
doing so on  frivolous grounds or with a  view to delay the proceedings.  
(2) For the purposes of any such trial, the Authority shall have all the powers of a Civil Court while 
trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , in respect o f the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy t hereof from any court or office ; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examinat ion of witnesses or documents;  
(f) such othe r matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) , shall, subject to the provisions of 
this A ct, be deemed to apply in all respects to the trial of a petition.  
(4) Any proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
12. Secrecy of voting not to be infringed. —No witness or other person shall be required to state for 
whom he has voted at an election.  
13. Answering of criminating questions and certificate of indemnity. —(1) No witness shall be 
excused from answering any question as to any matter relevan t to a matter in issue in the trial of a petition 
upon the ground that the answer to such question may criminate or may tend to criminate him, or that it 
may expose or may tend to expose him to any penalty or forfeiture:  
Provided that — 
(a) a witness, who a nswers truly all questions which he is required to answer shall be entitled to 
receive a certificate of indemnity from the Authority; and  
(b) an answer given by a witness to a question put by or before the Authority shall not, except in 
the case of any cri minal proceeding for perjury in respect of the evidence, be admissible in evidence 
against him in an y civil or criminal proceeding.  
(2) When a certificate of indemnity has been granted to any witness, it may be pleaded by him in any 
court and shall be a full and complete defence to or upon any charge under Chapter IXA of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860)  or Part VII of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) , arising 
out of the matter to which such certificate relates, but it shall not be  deemed to relieve him from any 
disqualification in connection with an election imposed by this Act or any other law.  
14. Expenses of witnesses. —The reasonable expenses incurred by any person in attending to give 
evidence before the Authority may be allowe d by it to such person, and shall, unless the Authority 
otherwise directs, be deemed to be part of the costs.  
15. R ecrimination when seat claimed. —(1) When in a petition a declaration that any candidate 
other than the returned candidate has been duly elect ed is claimed, the returned candidate or any other 
party may give evidence to prove that the election of such candidate would have been void if he had been 
the returned candidate and a petition had been presented c alling in question his election:  
Provided that the returned candidate or such other party, as aforesaid shall not be entitled to  give such 
evidence unless he ha s, within fourteen days from the date of commencement of the trial, given notice to 
the Authority of his intention to do so and has also g iven the security and the further security referred to 
in sub -sections ( 4), (5) and  (6) respectively of section 5.  6 (2) Every notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be accompan ied by the statement and particulars 
required by section 7 in the case of a petition and shall be signed and verified in like manner.  
16. Decision of the Authority. —At the conclusion of the trial of a petition the Authority shall make 
an ord er— 
(a) dismissing the petition ; or 
(b) declaring the election of all or any of the  returned candidates to be void ; or 
(c) declaring the election of all or any of the returned candidates to be void and the petitioner or 
any other candidate to have been duly elected.  
17. Other orders to be made by the Authority. —(1) At the time of making an order under section 
16, the Aut hority shall also make an order — 
(a) where any charge is made in the petition of any corrupt practice having been committed  at the 
election, recording — 
(i) a finding whether any corrupt practice has or has not been proved to have been committed 
at the election, and the nature of that corrupt practice ; and  
(ii) the names of all persons, if any, who have been proved at the trial to have been guilty of 
any cor rupt practice and the nature of that practice; and  
(b) fixing the total amount of costs payable and specifying the persons by and to whom costs shall 
be paid:  
Provided that a person who is not a party to the petition shall not be named in the order under                  
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( a) unless— 
(a) he has been given notice to appear before the Authority and to show cause why he should not 
be so named; and  
(b) if he appears in pursuance of the notice, he has been given an opportunity of cross -examining 
any witness who has already been examined by the Authority and has given evidence against him, of 
calling evidence in his defence and of being heard.  
(2) In this section and in section 18, the expression “agent” has the same meaning as in section 123 of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) . 
18. Grounds for  declaring election to be void. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), if 
the Authority is of opinion — 
(a) that on the date of his election a returned candidate was not qualified, or was disqualified,                  
to be chosen to fill the seat under the Constitution or the Representation of the People                     
Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) or this Act or the Government  of Union Territories Act, 1963  (20 of 1963 ); or 
(b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his election agent or 
by any other person with the consent of a returned cand idate or his election agent; or  
(c) that any nomination has been improperly rejected; or  
(d) that  the result of the election, in so far as it concerns the returned candidat e, has been 
materially affected — 
(i) by the improper acceptance of any nomination,  or 
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned candidate by an agent 
other than his election agent,  or 
(iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the receptio n of any vote 
which is void, or  
(iv) by any non -compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any 
rules or orders ma de under this Act,  
the Authority shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void.  7 (2) If in the opinion of the Authority a returned candidate has been guilty by an agent, other than his 
election agent, of any corrupt practice but the Author ity is satisfied — 
(a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the election by the candidate or his election 
agent, and every such corrupt practice was committed contrary to the orders, and without the consent, 
of the c andidate or his election agent;  
(b) that the candidate and his election agent took all reasonable means for preventing the 
commission of corrupt  practices at the election; and  
(c) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt practice on the part of the 
candidate or any of his agents,  
then the Authority may decide that the election of the returned candidate is not void.  
19. Grounds for which a candidate other than the returned candidate may be  declared to have 
been elected. —If any person who has lodged a petition has,  in addition to calling in question the election 
of the returned candidate, claimed a declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly 
elected a nd the Authority is of opinion — 
(a) that in fact the petitioner or such other candidate received  a majority of the valid votes; or  
(b) that but for the votes obtained by the returned candidate by corrupt practices the petitioner or 
such other candidate would have obtained a majority of the valid votes,  
the Authority shall after declaring the election  of the returned candidate to be void declare the petitioner 
or such other candidate, as the case may be, to have been duly elected.  
20. Communication of orders of the Authority. —The Authority shall, as soon as may be after the 
conclusion of the trial of a  petition, intimate the substance of the decision to the Election Commission and 
the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, of the House of Parliament and, as soon as may be 
thereafter, shall send to the Election Commission an authenticated copy of t he decision.  
21. Costs.—Costs shall be in t he discretion of the Authority:  
Provided that where a petition is dismissed under clause ( a) of section 16, the returned candidate shall 
be entitled to the costs incurred by him in contesting the petition and acco rdingly the Authority shall 
make an order for costs in favour of the returned candidate.  
22. Orders of Authority to be final. —No order made by an Authority  under this Act shall be called 
in question in any court.  
23. Effect of orders of Authority. —(1) An order made by an Authority under this Act shall take 
effect as soon as it is pronounced by the Authority.  
(2) Where by an order under section 16 the election of a returned candidate is declared to be void, 
acts and proceedings in which that returned c andidate has, before the date thereof, participated as a 
member of Parliament or, as the Prime Minister or as the Speaker of the House of the People shall not be 
invalidated by reason of that order, nor shall such candidate be subjected to any liability or  penalty on the 
ground of such participation.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Withdrawal  and abatement of petitions. —The provisions of sections 109 to 116 (both 
inclusive) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) , relating to withdrawal and 
abatement of election petitions shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to withdrawal and abatement of 
petitions under this Act subject to the modifications that the references therein to an election petition, 
High Court and petitioner shall be construed as references to a petition under this Act, the Authority for 
hearing such petition and the petitioner in respect of such petition respectively.  8 25. Payment of costs out of security deposits and return of such deposits. —(1) If in any order as 
to costs under the provisions of this Act there is a direction for payment of costs by any party to any 
person, such costs shall, if they have not been already paid, be paid in full, or so far as possible, out of the 
security deposit and t he further security deposit, if any, made by such party under this Act on an 
application made in writing in that behalf within a period of one year, from the date of such order to the 
Election Commission by the person in whose favo ur the costs have been aw arded.  
(2) If there is any balance left of any of the said security deposits after payment under sub -section ( 1) 
of the costs referred to in that sub -section, such balance, or where no costs have been awarded or no 
application as aforesaid has been made wi thin the said period of one year, the whole of the said security 
deposits may, on an application made in that behalf in writing to the Election Commission by the person 
by whom the deposits have been made, or if such person dies after making such deposits,  by the legal 
representative of such person, be returned to the said person or to his legal representative, as the case may 
be. 
26. Execution of orders as to costs. —Any order as to costs under the provisions of this Act may be 
produced before the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction any person directed by such order to pay any sum of money has a place of residenc e or 
business or where such place is within a presidency -town before the court of small causes having 
jurisdiction there, and such court shall execute the order or cause the same to be executed in the same 
manner and by the same procedure as if it were a d ecree for the payment of money made by itself in a 
suit: 
Provided that where any such costs or any portion thereof may be recovered by an application made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 25, no application shall lie under this section within a period of one year 
from the date of such order unless it is for the recovery of the balance of any costs which has been left 
unrealised after an application has been made under that sub -section owing to the insufficiency of the 
amount of the security deposits referr ed to in that sub -section.  
27. Power to make rule s.—(1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying o ut the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any  of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the deposit or further deposit to be made by the petitioner as security for the costs;  
(b) the appointment of officers and other employees for assisting the Authorities in the discharge 
of their functions and the con ditions of service of suc h officers and other employees;  
(c) the custody of deposits made under this Act, the payment of costs out of such deposits on an 
application made under section 25 and other matters relating to the disposal of such application s; 
(d) the fees, if any, payable in respect of any petition or application under this Act;  
(e) any other matter which has to be prescribed by or provided fo r by rules made under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid , as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediatel y following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effe ct, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre viously done under 
that rule.  
28. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Disputed Elections (Prime Minister and Speaker) Ordinance,                
1977 (4 of 1977) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the said 
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1977--------------------------
1 
  
THE GRESHAM AND CRAVEN OF INDIA (PRIVATE) LIMITED  (ACQUISITION  
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS)  ACT, 1977                                                                                                                                         
______ _ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
_______ _ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer of and vesting in the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Central Government or the Braithwaite and Company Limited or the Government company not 
to be liable for prior liabilities.  
6. Vesting of the undertakings of the Company in the Braithwaite and Company Limited.  
7. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in a 
Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount.  
9. Payment of further amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings  of the Company.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Employment of certain employees to continue.  
13. Provident fund and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Braithwaite and Company Limited or 
Government company.  2 
 SECTIONS  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
18. Priority of claims.  
19. Examination of claims.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the Braithwaite 
and Company Limited or Government company.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
27. Delegation of powers.  
28. Penalties.  
29. Offences by companies.  
30. Power to make rules.  
31. Power to remove difficulties.  
32. Declaration as to the policy of the State.  
33. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE GRESHAM AND CRAVEN OF INDIA (PRIVATE) LIMITED  (ACQUISITION  
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1977  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1977  
[20th December, 1977 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of Messrs.  Gresham and 
Craven of India (Private) Limited for the purpose of ensuring the continuity of production of 
goods which are vital to the needs of the Railways and of the industries manufacturing 
engineering products and for matters connected therewit h or incidental thereto.  
WHERE AS M essrs . Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited were engaged in the manufacture 
and production of components of rolling stock like vacuum brake equipment, ejectors, steam brake valves 
and vacuum exhausters and the like needed by the Railways and the industries manufacturing engineering 
products;  
AND WHEREAS as a result of the losses suffered by the Company, there had been a closure of the 
works owned by the Company;  
AND WHEREAS for the purposes of speedily bringing the closed works of the Company into operation, 
the management of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by the Central Government for a 
limited period under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951);  
AND WHE REAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Company to ensure th e continuance 
of the production of goods which are vital to the needs of the Railways and of the industries 
manufacturing engineering products;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the T wenty -eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Gresham and Craven of India 
(Private) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1977.  
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of 
September, 1977 and the remaining provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 
1st day of August, 1977.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of August, 1977;  
(b) “Braithwaite and Company Limited ” means the Government company  known as the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited in which the undertakings of t he Brait hwaite and Company (India) 
Limited together with the right, title and interest of the said Company thereon vested with effect from 
the 1st day of December, 1976, in pursuance of the notification of the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Industry (Depar tment of Heavy Industry) No.  S. O. 771(E), dated the 3rd December, 
1976, issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of the Braithwaite and Company (India) Limite d 
(Acquisition and Transfer of U ndertakings) Act, 1976 (96 of 1976);  
(c) “Commissioner means the  Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 14;  
(d) “Company means the Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited, being a company as 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), and having its registered office at 22 -Gobra Road, 
Calcutta -14; 
(e) “Government company ” has the meaning assigned to it by section 617 of the Companies    
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  4 
 (g) “Ordinance ” means the Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1977 (14 of 1977);  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government  may, for the purpose of any 
provision of this Act, by notification, specify and different dates may be specified for different 
provisions of this Act;  
(j) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer of and vesting in the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company .—
On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company 
in relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorised and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable , 
including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash 
on hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such 
property as were immediately before the  appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of 
the Company, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have veste d in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other encumbrances affecting t hem, and any attachment, injunction or decree or order of any cour t 
restricting the use of such property in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the wh ole or 
any part of such properties  shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgage e of any property which has vested under this Act in the Centra l Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property , shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or oth er interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgage e of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to  claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount specified in section 8, and also out of the 
monies determi ned under section 9, but  no such mortgage, charge, lien or ot her interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(5) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
property which has vested in the Central Government,  under section 3,  instituted or preferred by or 
against the Company  is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudic ially 
affected by reason of transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of anything contained in this Ac t, 
but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the 
Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or, where the undertakings of the 
Company are directed, under section 7, to vest in a Governm ent company, against that Government 
company.  
5. Central Government or the Braithwaite and Company Limited or the Government company 
not to be liable for prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to 
the appointed day, shall be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and not aga inst 
the Central Government, or  the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or, where the undertakings of the 
Company are directed, under section 7, to vest in a Government company, against that Government 
company.  5 
 (2) For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability of the Company in respect of any 
period prior to the appointed day shall be enforceable  against the Central Government, or the  
Braithwaite and Company Limited, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under 
section 7, to vest in a Government company, against that Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under 
section 7, to vest in a Government company, against that Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or 
the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, 
under section 7, to vest in a Government company, against that Go vernment company.  
6. Vesting of the undertakings of the Company in the Braithwaite and Company Limited .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central Government shall, as soon as may be, 
after the promulgation of the Ordinance, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the Company, 
and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings , which have vested in the  
Central Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest 
in the Braithwaite and Company Limited either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later 
date (not being a date earlier than the appo inted day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings  vest in the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited under sub -section ( 1), the Braithwaite and Company Limited shall, on 
and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such undertakings, 
and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and 
from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have  become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited.  
7. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in a 
Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in sections 3, 4  and 6, the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with 
such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to impose , direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings, which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 and thereafter in the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited, under section 6, shall, instead of continuing to vest in th e Braithwaite 
and Company Limited, vest in the Government company either on the date of the notification or on such 
earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings vest in a 
Government company under sub -section ( 1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such undertakings, and all  the rights and 
liabilities of the Central Government or the Braithwaite and Company Limited in relation to such 
undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and 
liabilities, respectively, of the Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under     
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, and amount of rupees one hundred and seventy -six lakhs.  6 
 9. Payment of further amount .—(1) For the deprivation of the Company of  the management of its 
undertakings, there shall be given to the Company by the Central Government an amount calculated at the 
rate of rupees fifty thousand per annum for the period commencing on the date on which the management 
of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by the Central Government and ending on the 
appointed day.  
(2) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions of sections 3, 4 and 5, there shall 
also be given, in cash, by the Central Government to the Company, an  amount equal to an amount 
calculated at the rate of rupees fifty thousand per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day 
and ending on the date of promulgation of the Ordinance.  
(3) The amount specified in section 8 and the amount determined under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall 
carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum for the period commencing on the date of 
promulgation of the Ordinance and ending on the date on which payment of such amounts is made by the 
Central Governm ent to the Commissioner.  
(4) The amount s determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 8.  
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company, in relation to 
its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from 
the amounts referred to in section 8, and also from the amounts determined unde r sub -sections ( 1), (2)  
and ( 3) in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—(1) The Braithwaite and Company 
Limited in which the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings vested under section 6 shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all 
such things as t he Company is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its undertakings.  
(2) The general superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the 
undertakings of the Company, the right, title and interest in relation to whi ch have vested, under section 3, 
in the Central Government and, under section 6, in the Braithwaite and Company Limited shall, where a 
direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, vest in the 
Government company  specified in such direction, and thereupon the Government company  so specified 
shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as the Company is authorised to 
exercise and do in relation to its undertakings.  
11. Duty of persons in charge o f management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc .—(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to the Braithwaite and Company 
Limited all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in their custody relating to the 
undertakings of such Company.  
(2) The Central Government may  issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the cas e to the Braithwaite and Company Limited as to its  powers and duties and the Braithwaite and 
Compa ny Limited may also, if it so desires, apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions 
as to the manner in which the management of the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted by it 
or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such management.  
(3) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings  of the Company in a Government 
company, the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall apply to, or in relation to, the Government 
company as they apply to, or in relation to, the Braithwaite and Company Limited, subject to the 
modification that the ref erences to the Braithwaite and Company Limited shall be construed as references 
to the Government company.  
  7 
 CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Employment of certain employees to continue .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately 
before the appointed day, employed in any undertaking of the Company shall become , on and from the 
appointed day  or such later date, as the case may be, an employee of the Braithwaite and Company 
Limited, or, as the case may be, of the Governme nt company in which the right, title and interest of the 
Company in relation to its undertakings, have vested under this Act, and shall hold office or service under 
the Braithwaite and Company Lim ited, or the Government company , as the cash may be, with th e same 
rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if 
there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Gove rnment company, as the case may be, is duly terminated 
or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Braithwaite and Company 
Limited, or by the Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contain ed in the Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking of the Company to the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Gov ernment 
company, shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under 
any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
(3) Where, under the t erms of any contract  of service or otherwise, any person, whose services 
become transferred to the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company, by reason of 
the provisions of this Act, is entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any pay ments for any leave not 
availed of or any other payment, not being payment by way of gratuity or pension, such person may 
enforce his claim against the Company, but not against the Central Government, or the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Governme nt company.  
13. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of the 
undertakings of the Company, the monies relatable to the officers or other employees, whose services 
have become transferred by or under this Act to the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the 
Government company, shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such 
provident fund , superannuation fund, welfare fund and other fund, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, 
the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section  (1) to the Braithwaite  and Company 
Limited, or the Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Government company, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company under sections 8 and 9, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other pers ons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise diff erent powers.  
(3) Any person authorised  by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  8 
 15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thi rty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissio ner, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company under section 9.  
(2) A deposit account s hall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid und er this Act to the Commissioner  shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit accoun t shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) The interest accruing on the amount  standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the Company.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Braithwaite and Company Limited or 
Government company .—(1) The Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the 
Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive up to the specified date, to the 
exclusion of all other p ersons, any money due to the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have 
vested in the Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government 
company, realised after the appointed day notwithstanding th at the realisation  pertains to a period prior to 
the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company, 
as the case may be, may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after 
the appointed  day for discharging any liability of the Company in relation to any period prior to the 
appointed day; and every such claim shall have priority in accordance with the priorities attaching, under 
this Act, to the matter in relation to which such liability has been discharged by the Central Government, 
or the Braithwaite and Company Limited , or the Government company.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which hav e not been discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the 
liabilities of the Company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days fr om the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and  not thereafter.  
18. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with t he following principles, namely :— 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category  II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims spec ified in each of the categories  shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly;  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
19. Examination of c laims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2) If, on examination of the cla ims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  9 
 20. Admission or reject ion of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a  certain  date on or before which every 
claimant sh all file the proof of his claim  failing which he will be excluded from the benefit of the 
disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days’  notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of a daily newspaper in the English language and in  one issue of the daily newspaper in the regional 
language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant 
to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be neces sary and after 
giving the Company and opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of C ivil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ), while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of  any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of th e Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1 974). 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of who se 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situat ed: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
the appeal  shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of that High Court.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claims shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such sums are due, and, on such payment, the liabili ty of the Company in respect of 
such claim shall stand discharged.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company .—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to 
the undertakings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as sp ecified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property, has vested in the Central 
Government or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government com pany, under this Act, but 
such machinery, equipment or other property does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government , or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company to con tinue 
to possess such machinery or  equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which 
they were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day.  
  10 
 23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Co mmissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed for a period of three years 
from the last day on which the disbursement was made shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money s o transferred may be 
preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if 
such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for 
the refund of the reven ue. 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the 
Braithwaite and Company Limited or Government company .—(1) Every contract entered into by the 
Company in relation to its undertakings for any service, sale or supply, and in force immediately before 
the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from the date of  
promulgation of the Ordinance, cease to have effect  unless such contr act is, before the expiry of that  
period, ratified, in writing, by the Central Government , or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the 
Government company, and, in ratifying such contract, the Central Government , or the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Government company may make such alteration or modification therein as it 
may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government 
company shall not omit to ratify a contract, and shall not make any alteration or modification in a 
contract, unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onero us or has been entered into in b ad faith or 
is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited , or the 
Government company.  
(2) The Central Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited or the Government company 
shall not  omit to ratify a contract, and  shall not make any alteration or modification therein, except after 
giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and except after recording, in 
writing , its reason s for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any alteration or modification therein.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Gov ernment, or the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Government company, or any officer or other person authorised by that 
Government, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company, for anything which 
is in good faith done or intende d to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or 
other employees, or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company, or any officer or 
other person authorised by the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company, for any 
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
27. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government m ay, by notification, direct that a ll or any 
of the power exercisable  by it under this Act, other than the power conferred by section 30, may also be 
exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of  power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
  11 
 28. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any  undertaking of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government , or the Braithwaite 
and Company Limited, or the Government company; or  
(b) wrongfully  obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part  of any undertaking of 
the Company or wil fully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government, or the Braithwaite 
and Company Limited, or the Government company , or any person or body of  persons specified by 
that Government , or the Braithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government company, any 
document relating to such undertaking which may be in his possession, custody or control or fails to 
deliver to the Central Government , or the Bra ithwaite and Company Limited, or the Government 
company or any person or body of persons specified by that Government , or the Braithwaite and 
Company Limited, or the Government company, any assets, books of account, registers or other 
docum ents in his poss ession, custody  or control , relating to the undertaking of the Company; or  
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any undertaking of the Company 
or prefers any claim under this Act which he known or has reasonable cause to believe to be false or 
grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
29. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and sha ll be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exerc ised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent  or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary , or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary , or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular , and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or  any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and  the manner in which , an intimation shall be given to the 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other fund referred  to in section 13 
shall be dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, whi le it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses  agree in 12 
 making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulme nt shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
31. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent wit h the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
32. Declaration as to the policy of the State .—It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect 
to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause ( b) of article 39 of the 
Constitution.  
Explanation. —In this section , “State ” has the  same  meaning as in article 12 of the Constitution.  
33. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Gresham and Craven of India (Private) Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakin gs) Ordinance, 1977 (14 of 1977 ), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 18, 19, 20, and 22)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY  
 
PART A 
Post-take-over management period  
Category I  
Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company.  
Category II  
(i) Loans advanced by the Central Government.  
(ii) Loans adva nced by Banks.  
Category III  
Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
Category IV  
 Any other loans.  
Category V  
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Government or a  State Government.  
 
PART B 
Pre-take-over management period  
Category VI  
Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company to the provident fund, salaries, 
wages and other amounts due to the employees of the Company.  
Category VII  
Overdrafts from  Banks.  
Category VIII  
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Government, a State Government, a 
Local Authority or a State Electricity Board.  
Category IX  
(i) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any tra ding or 
manufacturing operations.  
(ii) Any other dues.  
 
 
--------------------------The Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital (Acquisition and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1977--------------------------
1 
 THE LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND  HOSPITAL (ACQUISITION)  AND 
MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS ACT, 1977  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1977  
[3rd December, 1977 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition of the Lady Hardinge  Medical College and Hospital and for 
the management of the Kalavati Saran Hospital, with a view to ensuring better facilities for 
higher medical education for women and medical facilities for women and children in the 
Union territory of Delhi and for matt ers connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Lady Harding e Medical College 
and Hospital  (Acquisition) and Miscellaneous  Provisions  Act, 1977.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central G overnment may, by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a)  “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b)  “Board  of Administration ” means the Board of Administration constituted by the Central 
Government under the Scheme;  
(c)  “Board of Management ” means the Board of Management of the Kalavati Saran Hospital, 
constituted by the Central Government;  
(d)  “Fund ” means the  Lady Hardinge Hospital  for Women and Chi ldren, Delhi, Fund 
established  by the Scheme;  
(e)  “Kalavati Saran Hospital ” means the insti tution   known  as the Kalavati Saran Children’ s 
Hospital, New Delhi, together with the dispensaries attached thereto and used in connection 
therewith, and includes all laboratories and libraries used in connection with, or as accessories to, or 
adjuncts of,  the said Hospital;  
(f)  “Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital ” means the institutions known as the Lady 
Hardinge M edical College for  Women, Ne w Delhi, and the Lady Hardinge  Hospital for Women and 
Children, New Delhi, together with the dispensaries attached thereto and used in connection 
therewith, and includes all lecture -rooms, museums, laboratories, libraries, hostels and           
boarding -houses used in connection with, o r as accessories to, or adjuncts of, the said College of 
Hospital;  
(g)  “Scheme ” means the Scheme for the administration of the Fund settled by the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 1)  of section 5 of the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890 (6 of 1890 ), 
and   published   with the notification of the Government of India, in the late Ministry   of Health,    
No. F. 4-3(1) /53 -MI, dated the 12th June, 1953,  as amended  by the notifications of the    Government 
of In dia, in the late Ministry  of Health, No.  F. 4-77/56 -MII, dated  the 14th March , 1957 and              
No. F. 4-77/56-MII, dated the 17th April, 1957;   
(h) “Treasurer ” means the Treasurer of  Charitable Endowments  for India, appointed  under the 
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890 (6 of 1890 ). 
  
                                                           
1. 1st February, 1978, vide notification No. S. O. 188 (E), dated 12th January, 1978, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , Part I I,         
sec. 3(ii). 
 2 
 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL  
3. Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital to vest in Central Government .—(1) On the 
appointed day, the Lady Hardinge Medical Colleg e and Hospital  together with — 
(a) all lands, on which the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital   stands, and all other 
lands appurtenant thereto and all buildings, erections and fixtures on such lands;  
(b) all furniture, equipments, stores, apparatuses and appliances, drugs, moneys and other assets 
of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital;  
(c) all other properties and assets,   movable and immovable including   leases pertaining to the 
Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, whether vested   in the Treasurer of the Board of 
Administration or in any oth er person; and all rights, powers, authorities and privileges, cash 
balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or in relation   to, or arising 
out of, such property as were, immediately before the appointed day, in the owner ship, possession, 
power or control of the Treasurer or the Board of Administration   or  any other person in charge of 
the management of the affairs of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital; and  
(d)  all borrowings made by, or on behalf of, and all  other liabilities and obligations of whatever 
kind, incurred in relation to, the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, and subsisting on the 
appointed day,  
shall stand transferred to, and   shall   vest absolutely in, the Central Government.  
(2)  Ever y deed of gift, endowment, bequ est or trust or other document  in relation to all or any of the 
properties, and assets, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall, as from the appointed  day, be construed as if it 
were made or executed in favour of the Central Go vernment.  
(3)  Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, any property,   referred to in                     
sub-section ( 1),  which, by virtue of the provisions of that sub -section, has vested in the Central 
Government, shall, by force of such vesting, be   freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, 
mortgage, charge, lien and other incumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction   or any decree 
or order of any court   or tribunal restricting the use  of such property in any manner sh all be deemed to 
have been withdrawn.  
(4) Subject to the other provisions contained   in this Act, any proceeding or cause of action, pending 
or existing   immediately before the appointed day, by or against the Treasurer or the Board of 
Administration   or any other person, in relation to the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, ma y, 
as from the appointed day, be  continued and enforced by or against the Central Government as it might 
have been enforced by or against the Treasurer or the Board of Admini stration   or such other person if 
this Act had not been enacted, and shall cease to be enforceable by or against the Treasurer or the Board 
of Administration or such other person.  
4. Payment of amount .—(1) The Central Government shall give, in cash, to the Treasurer an amount 
equivalent to the sum of rupees one lakh for the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under 
section 3, of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital.  
(2) The amoun t, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be paid with in three months from the appointed 
day (hereafter in this section referred to as the specified period).  
(3) The amount, referred to in sub -section ( 1), if not paid within the specifie d period, shall carry 
interest  at the rate of four per cent.  per annum from the date of expiry of the specified period until the 
payment thereof.  
5. Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital to be administered as Government 
institution .—On and from the appointed day, the  Lady Hardinge Medical  College and Hospital shall 
be administered by the Central Government as a Government institution, and, in administering the 
properties transferred to and vested in it under section 3, regard shall be had to the purposes specified in 
the Scheme.  3 
 6. Applicability of Act 2 of 1882 to Board of Administration .—For the removal of doubts, it is 
hereby declared that nothing in this Act shall be deemed to apply to any right accrued to, or any liability 
incurred by, the Board of Administration  or any member thereof under the provisions of the Indian Trusts 
Act, 1882, in  respect of anything done or omitted to be done by it or him during any period preceding the 
appoint ed day. 
7. Amount to be held for purposes of Scheme .—(1) The amount paid under section 4 shall vest in 
the Treasurer, and shall be held by him in the same m anner as the Fund vested in him was held by 
him  immediately before the appointed day.  
(2) The amount paid to the Treasurer under section  4 shall be administered by the Board of 
Administration  in the same manner in which the Fund was administered by it, as  if such amount were the 
Fund.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF THE KALAVATI SARAN HOSPITAL  
8. Kalavati Saran Hospital to be managed as Government institution .—(1) Notw ithstanding 
anything contained  in any contract or instrument  to the contrary, on and from the appointed day, the 
Kalavati Saran Hospital shall be managed by the Central Government as a Government institution.  
(2) In managing the Kalavati Saran Hospital as a Government institution, regard shall be had to the 
purposes  for which that Ho spital was set up in pursuance  of the indenture, dated the 8th day of           
June, 1954, executed by Shri Ashok Saran, and the indenture, dated the 8th day of June, 1954, executed 
by Shri Raghbir Saran, in favour  of the President of India.  
(3) On and from the appointed day, the Board of Management shall stand dissolved.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Act to override all other enactments .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsiste nt therewith contained   in any other law for the time being in force or 
any instrument   having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or any decree or order of any court, 
tribunal   or authority.  
10. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospital and Kalavati Saran Hospital .—(1) Every officer or other employee, who, immedi ately before 
the appointed day, is employed in, or in connection with the affairs  of, the Lady Hardinge Medical 
College and Hospital, or, as the case may be , the Kalavati Saran Hospital,  shall become, as from the 
appointed day ,  an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the Central Government, and shall 
hold his office by th e same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and 
with the same   rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as he would have held, if this 
Act had not been enacted, and shall continue to do so unless an d until his employment   under the Central 
Government is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions duly altered by the Central 
Government:  
Provided   that, if the alteration so made is not acceptable to any such officer or other employe e, his 
employment may be terminated by the Central Government on payment to him of an am ount equivalent 
to three months’  remuneration   in the case of pe rmanent employees and one month’ s remuneration in the 
case of other employees:  
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply t o any officer or other 
employee who has, by notice in writing given to the Central Government within thirty days next 
following the appointed day, intimated his intention of not becoming an officer or othe r employee of the 
Central Government.  
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee, 
employed in, or  in connection with the affairs of, the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or 4 
 the Kalavati Saran Hospital to the Central Government shall not entitle any such officer or other 
employee to any compensation under that Act, or any other law, and no su ch claim shall be entertained by 
any court, tribunal or other authority.  
(3)  For the persons who, immediately before the appo inted day, w ere the trustees for any person, 
provident or gratuity fund or any other like fund constituted for the officers or other employees of the 
Lady Hardin ge Medical College and Hospital and the Kalav ati Saran Hospital,  there shall be 
substituted  as trustees suc h persons as the Central Government may, by general or special order, specify.  
11. Effect of contracts, etc .—(1)  All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants 
of legal representation and other instruments of whatever nature, subsisti ng or having effect immediately 
before the appointed day, and to which the Board of Administration   or, as the case may be, the Board of 
Management, or any person on behalf of the Board of Administration or, as the case may be, the Board of 
Management, is a party, or which are in favour of the Board of Administration or, as the case may be, 
Board of Management, shall, in so far as they relate to any purpose, or affairs, of the Lady Hardinge 
Medical College and Hospital, or, as the case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospital, be of as full force and 
effect against, or in favour of, the Central Government, and may be enforced or acted upon as full and 
effectually as if in place of the Board of Administration   or, as the case may be, the Board of 
Management, the C entral Government had been a party   thereto or as if they had been issued in favour of 
the Central Government.  
(2) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to the 
Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospit al, or, as the case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospital, or any 
affair of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati Saran Hospital, is pending by, 
or against, the Board of Administration or , as the case may be, the Board of Management or the Treasurer 
or any other person, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by 
reason   of the transfer of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital   to the Central Government or 
by reason of the assumption  of management of the Kalavati Saran Hospital by the Central Government, or 
of anything contained in this Act; but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be contained, prosecuted 
and enforced by or against the Central Government.  
12. Contracts, in bad fa ith or detrimental to the interests of Lady Hardinge Medical College 
and Hospital and Kalavati Saran Hospital to be cancelled or varied .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 11, the Central Government may, if satisfied   after such inquiry as i t may think fit, 
that any contract or agreement entered into before the appointed day between the Board of 
Administration   or Board of Management or any member thereof, in relation to the Lady Hardinge 
Medical College and Hospital, or, as the case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospital, or any affairs 
connected with the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati Saran Hospital, has been 
entered into in bad faith, or is detrimental to the interests of the Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospit al, or, as the case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospital, it may make an order cancelling or varying 
(either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose for the purpose) such 
contract or agreement and thereafter the contract or agreement shall have effect accordingly:  
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied except after giving to the parties 
to the cont ract or agreement a reasonable  opportunity of being heard.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1), may make a n application to the 
principal  court of civil  jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Lady Hardinge 
Medical College and Hospital, or, as the case may be, the Kalavati Saran Hospital is situated, for the 
variation or reversal of such order and thereupon such court may confirm, modify or reverse such order.  
13. Duty to deliver possession of property, etc. —(1) On the transfer to, and the vesting in, the 
Central Government of the Lady Hardinge  Medical  College and Hospital,  and on the assumption of the 
management of the Kalavati Saran Hospit al by the Central Government, — 
(a) the Board of Administration, or, as the case may be, the Board of Management, and every 
person in whose possession, custody or con trol any property or asset specified in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3, or any property or asset pertaining to the Kalavati Saran Hospital may be, shall deliver the 
same to such officer or other person  as may be authorised  by the Central Government in this b ehalf;  5 
 (b) the Board of Administration or, as the case may be, the Board of Management, and every 
person who, immediately before such vesting or assumption, has in his possession, custody or control 
any books, documents or other papers relating to the Lady  Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, or 
the Kalavati Saran Hospital, shall be liable to account   for the said books, documents and papers to 
the Central Government and shall deliver them up to the Central Government or to such officer or 
other person as  may be authorised   by the Central Government   in this behalf.  
(2) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this section, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government to take all necessary steps for taking possession of all properties and assets which 
have been transferred to, and vested in, it under this Act, or in relation to which the management has been 
assumed by it under this Act.  
14. Penalty .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property held for the purposes of the Lady 
Hardinge   Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati Saran Hospital, wrongfully withholds such 
property from the Central Government; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property held for the purposes of the Lady 
Hardinge Medical College and Hospital, or the Kalavati Saran Hospital; or  
(c) willfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government any books, documents or 
other papers   relating to the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati  Saran 
Hospital; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government any assets, books or other documents in his 
possession, custody or control relating to the Lady Hardinge Medical College and Hospital or the 
Kalavati Saran Hospital; or  
(e) wrongfully remov es or destroys any property held for the purposes of the Lady Hardinge 
Medical College and Hospital or the Kalavati Saran Hospital; or  
(f) wrongfully uses any property held for the purposes of the   Lady Hardinge Medical College and 
Hospital or the Kalavati  Saran Hospital,  
shall by punishable   with imprisonment   for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
15. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was reasonable 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be dee med 
to be guilty of the offence  and shall be liable t o be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained  in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due d iligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
conniv ance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, man ager, secretary or other 
officer  of the company, such director,  manager, secretary  or other officer  shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
16. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or other employees for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  6 
 17. Cognizance of offences .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimi nal 
Procedure,   1973 (2 of 1974 ), no court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a 
complaint, in writing, made by the Central Government or any officer  authorised   in this behalf by that 
Government.  
18. Indemnity .—Every officer of the Central Government shall be indemnified by the Central 
Government against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge   of his 
duties under this Act except such as  have been caused by his own wi lful act or default.  
19. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every   rule made by the Cen tral Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect o nly in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
 
--------------------------The Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act, 1977--------------------------
1 THE PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS (PROTECTION OF  PUBLICATION) ACT, 1977  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definition . 
3. Publication of reports of Parliamentary proceedings privileged . 
4. Act also to apply to Parliamentary proceedings broadcast by wireless telegraphy.  
 
  2 THE PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS (PROTECTION OF  PUBLICATION)  ACT, 1977  
ACT NO. 15 OF 1977  
[18th April , 1977.]  
An Act to protect the publication of reports of proceedings of Parliament.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -eight h Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Parliamentary 
Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act, 1977.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 25th day of March, 1977.  
2. Definition. —In this Act, “ newspaper ” means any printed periodical work containing public news 
or comments on public news, and includes a news agency  supplying material for publication in a 
newspaper.  
3. Publication of reports of Parlia mentary proceedings privileged. —(1) Save as otherwise 
provided in sub -section ( 2), no person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or criminal,  in any court in 
respect of the publication in a newspaper of a substantially true report of any proceedings of either House 
of Parliament, unless the publication is proved to ha ve been made with malice.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed as  protecting the publication of any matter, the 
publication of which is not for the public good.  
4. Act also to apply to Parliamentary proceedings broadcast by wireless telegraphy. —This Act 
shall apply in relation to reports or matters broadcast by means of  wireless telegraphy as part of any 
programme or service provided by means of a broadcasting station situate within the territories to which 
this Act extends as it applies in relation to reports or matters published in a newspaper.  
--------------------------The Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977--------------------------
1 THE SALARY AND ALLOWANCES OF LEADERS OF  OPPOSITION IN                     
PARLIAMENT ACT, 1977  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1977  
[18th August, 1977.]  
An Act to provide for the salary and allowances of  Leaders of Opposition in Parliament.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Salary and Allow ances of 
Leaders of Oppo sition in Parliament A ct, 1977.  
(2) It sha ll come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition. —In this Act, “Leader of the Opposition ”, in relation to either House of Parliament, 
means that member of the Council of States or the House of the People, as the case may be, who is, for 
the time being, the Leader in that House of the party in opposition to the Government having the greatest 
numerical strength and recognised as such by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the 
House of the People, as the case may be.  
Explanation .—Where there are two or more parties in opposition to the Government, in the Council 
of States or in  the House of the People having the same numerical strength, the Chairman of the Council 
of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be, shall, having regard to the status 
of the parties, recognise any one of the Leaders of such pa rties as the Leader of the Opposition for the 
purposes of this section and such recognition shall be final and conclusive.  
2[3. Salary, and daily, constituency and sumptuary allowances. —(1) Each Leader of the 
Opposition shall, so long as he continues as such Leader, be entitled to receive a salary per mensem and 
allowance for each day at the same rates as are specified in section 3 of the Salary, Allowances and 
Pension of Members of Parliam ent Act, 1954 (30 of 1954) with re spect to members of Parliament.  
(2) Each Leader of the Opposition shall also be entitled to receive a constituency allowance at the 
same rate as is for the time being specified under section 8 of the said Act with respect to members of 
Parliament.  
(3) There shall be paid to each  Leader of the Opposition a sum ptuary allowance of  one thousand 
rupees per mensem: ] 
3[Provided that on and from the 17th day of September, 2001, the sumptuary allowance shall be paid 
to each Leader of the Oppos ition at the same rate at which the sumptuary allowance is payable, under 
section 5 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952 (58 of 1952), to every other Minister who 
is a member of the Cabinet. ] 
4. Residence for Leaders of Opposit ion.—(1) Each Leader of the Opposition shall, so long as he 
continues as such Leader and for a period of one month immediately thereafter, be entitled without 
payment of rent to t he use of a furnished residence and no charge shall fall on the Leader of the  
Opposition personally in respect of the  maintenance of such residence.  
(2) In the event of the death of a Leader of the Opposition, his family shall be entitled to the use of 
the furni shed residence occupied by him —  
(a) for a period of one month immediately after his death, without payment of rent and no charge 
shall fall on his family in respect of the mai ntenance of such residence; and  
                                                           
1. 1st November, 1977, vide notification No. G.S.R. 664  (E), dated 1st November, 1977, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,   
     Part II, sec. 3  (i).     
2. Subs. by Act 78 of 1985, s. 2, for section 3 (w.e.f. 26-12-1985).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17 -9-2001).   2 (b) for a further period of one month, on payment of rent at such rates as may be prescribed by 
rules made in t his behalf by the Central Government and also charges in respect of electricity and 
water consumed in that residence during such further period.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “residence ” includes the staff quarters and other 
buildings appu rtenant theret o, and the garden thereof, and “ maintenance ” in relation to a residence 
includes the payment of local rates and taxes and the provision of electricity and water.  
5. Travelling and daily allow ances to Leaders of Opposition. — 1[(1)] Subject to any rules made in 
this behalf by the Central Government, a Leader of the Opposition shall be entitled to — 
(a) travelling allowances for himself and the members of his family and for transport of his and 
his family ’s effects — 
(i) in respect of the journey to Delhi from his usual place of residence outside  Delhi for 
assuming office; and  
(ii) in respect of the journey from Delhi to his usual place of residence outside Del hi on 
relinquishing office; and  
(b) travelling and daily allowances in respect of tours u ndertaken by him in the discharge of his 
duties as Leader of the Opposition, whether by sea, land or air.  
2[(2) On and from the commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament                 
and Leaders of Opposition in Parliament (S econd Amendment) Act, 2002, a Leader of the Opposition and 
his family, whether travelling together or separately, shall be entitled to travelling allowance at the same 
rates and for the same number of return journeys as admissible to a Minister and his fam ily under                  
sub-section ( 1A) of section 6 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952  (58 of 1952) .] 
6. Medical treatment, etc., to Leaders of Opposition. —Subject to any rules made in this behalf by 
the Central Government, a Leader  of the Opposition and the members of his family shall be entitled free 
of charge to accommodation in hospitals maintained by the Government and also to medical treatment.  
7. Leaders of Opposition not to draw salary or allow ances as Members of Parliament. —No 
Leader of the Opposition in receipt of a salary or allowance under this Act shall be entitled to receive any 
sum out of funds provided by Parliament by way of salary or allo wance in respect of his member ship of 
either House of Parliament.  
8. Amenities t o Leaders of Opposition. —(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Centra l 
Government, each Leader of the Opposition shall be entitled to teleph one and secretarial facilities.  
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Central Government , each Leader of the 
Opposition shall be entitle d to a conveyance allowance of 3[three thousand rupees] per month:  
4[Provided that where a Leader of the Opposition is provided with conveyance facility with a driver 
for the purposes of security or otherwise  for any period, he shall not be entitled to the conveyance 
allowance for that period.]  
5[8A. Advance to Leader of Opposition for purchase of motor car. —There may be paid to a 
Leader of the Opposition, by way of a repayable advance, such sum of money as ma y be prescribed by 
rules made in this behalf by the Central Government for the purchase of a motor car in order that he may 
be able to discharge conveniently and efficiently the duties of his office.]  
                                                           
1. S. 5 renumbered as section ( 1) thereof by Act 78 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
2. Subs. by Act 56 of 2002, s. 3, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 17-9-2001 ).  
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 1991, s. 2, for “three hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1990).  
4. Proviso i ns. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1990).  
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1990).   3 9. Notification respecting the date on which persons be came or ceased to be Leaders of 
Opposition to be conclus ive evidence thereof. —The date on which any person became or ceased to be a 
Leader of the Opposition shall be published in the Official Gazette, and any such notification shall be  
conclusive evidence of the fact that he became, or ceased to be, a Leader of the Opposition on that date 
for all the purposes of this Act.  
1[9A. Exemption from liability to pay income -tax on certain perquisites received  by a Leader of 
the Opposition. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , the 
value of rent free furnished residence (including maintenance thereof) provided to a Leader of the 
Opposition under  sub-section ( 1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computation of his income 
chargeable under the heading “Salaries ” under section 15 of the Income -tax Act,  1961.]  
10. Power to make rule. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular,  and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the rates at which rent shall be payable by the family of a deceased Leader of the Opposition 
to the use of the fu rnished residence occupied by him under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 ; 
(b) the travelling and daily allowances admissible to a Leader of the Opposition under section 5;  
(c) the medical treatment admissible to a Leader of the Opposition and the  members  of his family 
under section 6;  
(d) the telephone and secretarial facilities admissible to a Leader of the Opposition and the 
conditions subject to which he shall be entitled to conveyance allowance under section 8 ; 
2[(e) the advance payable to a L eader of the Opposition under section 8A.]  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one se ssion or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should  not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that ru le. 
11. [Amendment of Act 33 of 1977 ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1988  (19 of 1988 )   
s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f  31-3-1988 ). 
12. [Amendment of Act 33 of 1977 ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid.  (w.e.f.  31-3-1988 ). 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 78 of 1985, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 1991, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1990).  
--------------------------The Smith, Stanistreet and Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1977--------------------------
1 THE SMITH, STANISTREET AND COMPANY LIMITED  
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1977  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to and vesting in Central Government of the undertakings of the Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Central Government or Gover nment company not to be liable for prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the u ndertakings of the Company in a 
Government company.  
CHAPTER  III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount.  
8. Payment of further amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
11. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
PROV ISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Employment of employees to continue.  
13. Provident and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner . 
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
18. Priority of claims.  
19. Examination of claims.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims.  
21. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company.  2 SECTIONS  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account.  
24. Assumption of liability.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Government 
company.  
27. Penalties.  
28. Offences by companies.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Delegation of powers.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to remove difficulties.  
33. Declaration as to policy of the State.  
34. Repeal and saving.  
      THE SCHEDULE . 
 
 3 THE SMITH, STANISTREET AND COMPANY LIMITED  
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1977  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1977  
[17th December, 1977.]  
An Act to provide for, in the public interest, the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and 
interest of the undertakings of Messrs.  Smith, Stanistreet and Company Limited, Calcutta and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Messrs . Smith, Stanistreet and Company Limited, Calcutta were engaged in the 
manufacture and distribution of pharmaceuticals and chemicals which are essential to meet the needs of 
the public;  
AND WHEREAS the management of the undertakings of the Company was in a manner highly 
detrimental to the public interest and had suffered heavy losses;  
AND WHEREAS the management of the Company was taken over by the Central Government under 
section 18A of the Industries (Development and Re gulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951 ); 
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of reconstructing and rehabilitating the undertakings of the Company 
so as to subserve the interest of the general public by the augmentation and distribution of the different  
varieties of essential pharmaceuticals and chemicals produced by the said Company, and to ensure the 
continued supply thereof, it is necessary to acquire the right, title and interest of the undertakings of 
Messrs.  Smith, Stanistreet and Company Limited, Calcutta;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINA RY 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Smith, Stanistreet and Company 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1977.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of October, 1977.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of October, 1977;  
(b) “Company" means the Smith, Stanistreet and Company Limited, being a company as defined 
in the  Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ) and having its registered office at 18, Convent Road, 
Calcutta -700014;  
(c) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appoin tment under section 14;  
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act;  
(f) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purposes of any of 
the provisions of this Act, by notification, specify and different dates may be specified for different 
provisions of this Act;  
(g) words and expressions used herein and not defined  but defined in the Companies                            
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to and vesting in Central Government of the undertakings of the Company .—On the 
appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, be tra nsferred to, and shall vest in, the Central 
Government.  4 4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash 
on hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such 
property a s were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of 
the Company, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other encumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction or decree or order of any court restricting 
the use of such property in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of 
such property shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgage e of any property which has vested und er this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortg age, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgage e of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
prope rty shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount specified in section 7, and also out of the 
monies determined under section 8, but, no such mor tgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(5) If on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding by or against the Company, of 
whatever nature in relation to any p roperty which has vested in the Central Government, under section 3, 
is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of 
the transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of anything contained in th is Act, but the suit, appeal 
or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the Company.  
5. Central Government or Government company not to be liable for prior liabilities .—(1) Every 
liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the 
Company and shall be enforceable against it and not against the Central Government, or, where the 
undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in a Government company, a gainst that 
Government company.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared t hat,— 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings in respect of any period prior to the appointed da y, shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest 
in a Government company, against that Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other  authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute , which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, where 
the undertakings of the Compa ny are directed, under section 6, to vest in a Government company, 
against that Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in a Government 
company, against that Government company.  5 6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of t he Company in a 
Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with 
such terms and conditions as that Governmen t may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in that Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in 
that Government, vest in the Government company either on the date of the notification or on such earlier 
or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and intere st of the Company in relation to its undertakings, vest in a 
Government company under sub -section ( 1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such undertakings, and all the righ ts and 
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company.  
CHAPTER  III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under                   
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, and amount o f three crores and seventy -four thousand rupees.  
8. Payment of further amount .—(1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 
undertakings, there shall be given to the Company by the Central Government an amount calculated at the 
rate of t en thousand rupees per annum for the period commencing on the date on which the management 
of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by the Central Government and ending on the 
appointed day.  
(2) The amount specified in section 7 and the amount det ermined under sub -section ( 1) shall carry 
simple interest at the rate of four per cent.  per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day 
and ending on the date on which the payment of the amount is made by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner . 
(3) The amount determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 7.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from the 
amount referred to in section 7, and also from the amounts determined under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), in 
accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—(1) The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company,                    
the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Gov ernment under section 3, 
shall,— 
(a) where a direction has been issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of               
section 6, vest in the Government company specified in such direction; or  
(b) where no such direction has been issued by the Central Government, vest in one or more 
Custodians appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2), 
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian so appointed, as the case may be, 
shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such thi ngs as the Company is authorised to 
exercise and do in relation to its undertakings.  6 (2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals or a Government company as the 
Custodian of the undertakings of the Company in relation to which no directio n has been issued by it 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 6.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc. —(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in a Government 
company or on the appointment of a Custodian, all persons in charge of the management of the 
undertakings of the Company immediately before such vesting or appointment, shall be bound to deliver 
to the Government company or the Custodian, as the case may be , all assets, books of account, registers 
or other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of the Company.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Government comp any or the Custodian as to its or his powers and duties and the 
Government company or Custodian may also, if it or he so desires, apply to the Central Government at 
any time for instruction s as to the manner in which the management of the undertakings of the Company 
shall be conducted by it or  him or  in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such 
management.  
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the undertakings of the Company such 
remuneration as the Central Government may fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Government.  
11. Accounts and audit .—The Custodian of the undertakings of the Company shall maintain the 
accounts of the undertakings of the Com pany in such form and in such manner and under such conditions 
as may be prescribed and the provisions of the  Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ), shall apply to the audit 
of the accounts so maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts of a company.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Employment of employees to continue .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately before 
the appointed day, employed by the Company in relation to its undertakings, shall become, on and from 
the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government or, as the case may be, of the Government 
company referred to in section 6, and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or 
Government company, as the case may be, with the same remunera tion and upon the same terms and 
conditions, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have 
been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment un der the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, is duly 
terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of service are duly altered by the Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed in 
the undertakings of the Company to the Central Go vernment or the Government company shall not entitle 
such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the time 
being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
13. Provident and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in the undertakings of the 
Company, the monies relatable to the employees, whose services have becom e transferred by or under 
this Act to the Central Government or Government company, shall, out of the monies standing, on the 
appointed day, to the credit of such provident, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, 
and shall vest in, th e Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the Government 
company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or the Government com pany in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  7 CHAPTER  VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company under sections 7 and 8, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defraye d out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissione r, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 7; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company under section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and eve ry amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner, shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said account and the said deposit account shall be operated by the 
Commissioner.  
(3) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the deposit ac count referred to in                   
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the said account.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government company .—(1) The Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive up to the 
specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Cent ral Government, or the Government company, realised after 
the appointed day notwithstanding that the realisations pertain  to a period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, may make a claim to 
the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for discharging any 
liability of the Company, in relation to any period prior to the appointed day; and every such claim shall 
have priority, in accordance with the priorities  attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which 
such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the Government company.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the 
liabilities of the Company.  
17. Claims  to be made to the Commissioner. —Every person having a claim against the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim with in a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
18. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with the following principles, namely: — 
(a) category I will have precedence over all other categories and category II will have precedence 
over category III, and so on;  8 (b) the claims specified in each of the categories, shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly;  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediate ly higher 
category.  
19. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of prioriti es. 
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of the opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the liabilities in respec t of such lower category.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the priority 
set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before which every claimant shall file the 
proof of his claim, failing which he shall be excluded from the benefit of the disbursements made by the 
Commissioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ‟ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of the daily newspaper in English language and in o ne issue of the daily newspaper in the regional 
language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant 
to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessa ry and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his  own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civ il 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial pr oceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crim inal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ). 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction  within the local limits of whos e 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situate d: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
the appeal shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta  and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of that High Court.  
21. Disbur sement of money by Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under this 
Act, the amount due in respect of such claims shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 
to whom such sums are due, and, on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of such claim 
shall stand discharged.  9 22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company .—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to 
the undertakings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in  the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where any machinery, equipment or other property has vested in the Central Government or a 
Government company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property do es not belong to 
the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the Government company to continue to 
possess such machinery, equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which they 
were possessed by the Company immedia tely before the 4th day of May, 1972.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed for a period of three years 
from the last day on which the  disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be 
preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall b e dealt with as if 
such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for 
the refund of the revenue.  
24. Assumption of liability .—(1) Where any liability of the Company arising out of al l or any of the 
items specified in category I, category II, category III or category IV of  the Schedule are not discharged 
fully by the Commissioner out of the amount paid to him under this Act, the Commissioner shall intimate 
in writing to the Central Gove rnment the extent of the liability which remains undischarged, and that 
liability shall be assumed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct the Government company to take over any liability 
assumed by that Government unde r sub -section ( 1), and on receipt of such direction, it shall be the duty 
of the Government company to discharge such liability.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Government 
company .—(1) Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its undertakings for any 
service, sale or supply, and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and  from the expiry 
of one hundred and eighty days from that day, cease to have effect, unless such contract is before the 
expiry of the period, ratified, in writing, by the Central Government or Government company, and, in 
ratifying such contract, the Centra l Government or Government company may make such alteration or 
modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or the Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract, 
and, shall not make any alteration or modification in a contract, unless it is satisfied that such contract is 
unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of the Central 
Government or Government company.  
(2) The Central Government or Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract, and, shall not 
make any alteration or modification therein, except after givin g to the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the 
contract or for making any alteration or modification therein.  
27. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the Government 
company or any person or body of persons authorised by that Government or G overnment company; 
or 10 (b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company or wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government, or the Government 
company or any person or body of per sons authorised by that Government or Government company 
any document relating to such undertakings which may be in his possession, custody or control or 
fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Government company or any person or body of 
persons authorised by that Government or Government company, any assets, books of account, 
registers or other documents in his possess ion, custody  or control relating to the undertakings of the 
Company; or  
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming pa rt of the undertakings of the 
Company or prefers any claim under this Act which he know s or has reasonable cause to believe to be 
false or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine whic h may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
28. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any s uch person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an y offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the comp any, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Custodian of the 
undertakings of the Company or the Government company or any officer or other person authorised by 
that Government or the Government company for anything which is in  good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act.  
30. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the power conferred by section 31, may also  be 
exercised by any person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of t he Central Government.  
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which and the manner in which an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the form and the manner in which, and the conditions under which, the Custodian shall 
maintain accounts as required by section 11;  11 (c) the manner in which monies in any provident or other fund referred to in section 13 shall be 
dealt with;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule ma de by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessi ons, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remov e the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
33. Declaration as to policy of the State .—It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to 
the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clau se (b) of article 39 of the 
Constitution.  
Explanation .—In this section “State ” has the meaning as in article 12 of the Constitution.  
34. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Smith, Stanistreet and Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Ordinance,  1977 (13 of 1977), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.12 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 18, 19, 20, 22 and 24)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY  
PART „A‟  
POST -TAKE -OVER MANAGEMENT PERIOD  
Category I . 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company.  
(b) Loans advanced by the Central Government.  
(c) Loans advanced by Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited.  
(d) Loans advanced by banks guaranteed by the Central Government.  
(e) Credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing operations.  
Category II.  
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central Government or a State Government.  
(b) Sales tax, rates and taxes, contributi ons to be made to the Employees‟  State Insurance Fund and 
Additional Dearness Allowances payable to employees.  
PART „B‟  
PRE-TAKE -OVER MANAGEMENT PERIOD  
Category III.  
Arrears in relation to provident fund, salaries and wages and other amounts due to employees of the 
Company.  
Category IV.  
Principal amount due in relation to all secured loans.  
Category V.  
Amounts due by way of interest due in relation to the secured loans referred to in category IV.  
Category VI.  
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Government, a State Government, a 
local authority or a State Electricity Board.  
Category VII.  
(a) Any credit availed of  for purposes of trade or manufacturing operations.  
(b) any other dues.  
 
--------------------------The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977--------------------------
1 THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) CESS ACT, 1977  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Levy and collection of cess . 
4. Affixing of meters . 
5. Furnishing of returns . 
6. Assessment of cess.  
7. Rebate.  
8. Crediting proceeds of cess to Consolidated Fund of India and application thereof . 
9. Power of entry . 
10. Interest payable for delay in payment of cess . 
11. Penalty for non -payment of cess within the specified time . 
12. Recovery of amount due under the Act . 
13. Appeals.  
14. Penalty.  
15. Offences by companies . 
16. Power of Central Government to exempt the levy of water cess . 
17. Power to make rules . 
SCHEDULE I  [OMITTED ]. 
SCHEDULE  II.  2 THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) CESS ACT, 1977  
ACT NO. 36 OF 1977  
[7th December , 1977.]  
An Act to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on water consumed by persons carrying 
on certain industries and by local authorities, with a vi ew to augment the resources of the 
Central Board and the State Boards for the prevention and control of water pollution 
constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Water 
(Prevention and Contro l of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977.  
(2) It extends to the  whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), it applies to all the States to which the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974)  applies and the Union territories.  
(4) It shall come into force on s uch date1 as the Central Govern ment may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “local authority ” means a municipal corporation or a municipal council (by whatever name 
called) or a cantonment board or any other body, entrusted with the duty of supplying water under the 
law by or  under which it is constituted;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rule s made under this Act;  
2[(c) “industry” includes any operation or process, or treatment and disposal system, which 
consumes water or gives rise to sewage effluent or trade effluent, but does not include any hydel 
power unit; ] 
(d) words and expressions used  but not defined in this Act and defined in the Water (Prevention 
and Control of Po llution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in that Act.  
3. Levy and collection of cess. —(1) There shall be levied and collected a c ess for the purposes of the 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1 974 (6 of 1974) and utilisation thereunder.  
(2) The cess under sub -section ( 1) shall be payable by — 
(a) every person carrying on any 3[industry ]; and 
(b) every local authority,  
and shall be calculated on the basis of the water consumed by such person or local authority, as the case 
may be, for any of the purposes specified in column ( 1) of Schedule II, at such rate, not exceeding the rate 
specified in the corresponding entry in c olumn ( 2) thereof, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in th e Official  Gazette, from time to time, specify . 
4[(2A) Where any person carrying on any 3[industry ] or any local authority consuming water for 
domestic purpose liable to pay cess  fails to comply with any of the provisions of  section 25 of the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution ) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974)  or any of the standards laid down by the 
Central Government under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986) , cess s hall be, 
notwithstanding anything contai ned in sub -section ( 2) of this section, calculated and payable at such rate, 
not exceeding the rate specified in column ( 3) of Schedule II, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette , from  time to time, specify.]  
                                                           
1. 1st April , 197 8, vide notification No. G.S.R. 189(E), dated 23rdMarch , 197 8, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,   
     Part II, sec. 3( i).      
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 2003, s. 2, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 6-5-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “specified industry” (w.e.f. 6 -5-2003).  
4. Ins. by Act 53 of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  3 (3) Where any local authority supplies water to any person carrying on any 1[industry ] or to any other 
local authority and such person or other local authority i s liable to pay cess 2[under sub -section ( 2) or sub -
section ( 2A)] in respect of the water so supplied, then, notwithstanding anything contained 3[in those sub -
sections ], the local authority first mentioned shall not be liable to pay such cess in respect of such water.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and section 4, “consumption of water ” includes supply 
of water.  
4. Affixing of meters. —(1) For the purpose of measuring and recording the quantity of water 
consumed, every person carrying on any 1[industry ] and every local aut hority shall affix meters of such 
standards and at such places as may be prescribed and it shall be presumed that the quantity indicated by 
the meter has been consumed by such person or local authority, as the case may be, until the contrary is 
proved.  
(2) Where any person or local authority fails to affix any meter as required by  sub-section ( 1), the 
Central Government shall, after notice to such person or l ocal authority,  as the case may be, cause such 
meter to be affixed and the cost of such meter togeth er with the cost for affixing the meter may be 
recovered from such person or local authority by the Central Government in the same manner as an arrear 
of land revenue.  
5. Furnishing of returns. —4[(1)] Every person carrying on any 1[industry ] and every loca l authority, 
liable to pay the cess under section 3, shall furnish such returns, in such form, at such intervals and 
containing such particulars to  such officer or authority, as may be prescribed.  
5[(2) If a person carrying on any 1[industry ] or a local authority, liable to pay the cess under section 3, 
fails to furnish any return under sub -section ( 1), the officer or the authority shall give a notice requiring 
such person or local authority to furnish such return before such date as  may be sp ecified in the notice. ] 
6. Assessment of cess. —(1) The officer or authority to whom or which the return has been furnished 
under section 5 shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit and aft er 
satisfying himself or itself  that the particulars stated in the return are correct, by order, assess the amount 
of cess payable by the concerned person carrying on any 1[industry ] or local authority, as the case may be.  
6[(1A) If the return has not been furnished to the officer or authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 
5, he or it shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit , by order, assess the 
amount of cess payable by the concerned person carrying on any 1[industry ] or local authority, as the  case 
may be.]  
(2) An order of assessment made under sub -section ( 1) 6[or sub -section ( 1A)] shall specify the date 
within which the cess shall b e paid to the State Government.  
(3) A copy each of the order of assessment made under sub -section ( 1) 6[or sub-section ( 1A)] shall be 
sent to the person or, as the case may be, to the local authority concerned and to the State Government.  
(4) The State Government shall, through such of its officers or authorities as may be specified by it in 
this behalf by noti fication in the Official Gazette, collect the cess from the person or local authority liable 
to pay the same and pay the amount so collected to the Central Government in such manner and within 
such time as may be prescribed.  
7. Rebate.—Where any person or local authority, liable to pay the cess under this Act, instal s any 
plant for the treatment of sewage or trade effluent, such person or local authority shall, from such date as 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 2003, s. 3, for “specified industry” (w.e.f. 6 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 53 of 1991, s. 2, for “under sub -section (2)”  (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “in that s ub-section” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  
4. S. 5 renumbered as section ( 1) thereof by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  
6. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  4 may be prescribed, be entitled to a rebate of 1[twenty -five per cent.] of the cess payable by such person or, 
as the case may be, local authority:  
2[Provided that a person or local authority shal l not be entitled to any rebate , if he or it — 
(a) consumes water in excess of the maximum quantity as may be prescribed in this behalf for 
any 3[industry ] or local authority; or  
(b) fails to  comply with any of the provisions of section 25 of the Water (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974)  or any of the standards laid down by the Central Government 
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986) .] 
8. Crediting proceeds of cess to Consolidated Fund of  India and application thereof. —The 
proceeds of the cess  levied under section 3 shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and 
the Central Government may, if Parliament, by appropriation made by law in this behalf, so provides, pay 
to the Central Board an d every State Board, from time to time, fr om out of such proceeds, after deducting 
the expenses on collection, such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilised under the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974) : 
Provided that while determining the sum of money to be paid to any State Board under this section, 
the Central Government shall have regard to the amount of cess collected by the State Government 
concerned under sub -section ( 4) of section 6.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “State Board ” inclu des a Joint Board, if any, 
constituted under section 13 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974) . 
9. Powe r of entry. —Any officer or authority of the State Government specially empowered in this  
behalf by that Government may, — 
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he or it may think fit, enter at any reasonable time any place 
which he or it considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act including the 
testing of the correctness of the meters affixed un der section 4;  
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his or its duties under this 
Act; and  
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
10. Interest payabl e for delay in payment of cess. —If any person carrying on a ny 3[industry ] or any 
local authority fails to pay any amount of cess payable under section 3 to the State Government within the 
date specified in the order of assessment made under section 6  such person or local authority, as the case 
may be, shall be liable to pay 4[interest on the amount to be paid at the rate of two per cent. for every 
month or part of a month comprised in the period from the date on which such payment is due till  such 
amount is actually paid] . 
11. Penalty  for non -payment of cess within the specified time. —If any amount of cess payable by 
any person carrying on any 3[industry ] or any local authority under section 3 is not paid to the State 
Government within the date  specified in the order of assessment made under section 6, it shall be deemed 
to be in arrears and the authority prescribed in this behalf may, after such inquiry as it deems fit, impose 
on such person or, as the case may be, local authority, a penalty no t exceeding the amount of cess in 
arrears:  
Provided that before imposing any such penalty, such person or, as the case may be, the local 
authority shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard and if after such hearing the said 
authority is satisfied that the default was for any good and sufficient reason, no penalty shall be imposed 
under this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1991, s. 5, for “seventy per cent.” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  
2. Proviso i ns. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  
3. Subs. by Act 19 of 2003, s. 3, for “specified industry” (w.e.f. 6 -5-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 26 -1-1992).  5 12. Recovery of amount due under the Act. —Any amount due under this Act (including any 
interest or penalty payable under section 10 or sectio n 11, as the case may be) from any person carrying 
on any 1[industry ] or from any local authority may be recovered by the Central Government in the same 
manner as an arrear of land revenue . 
13. Appeals.—(1) Any person or local authority aggrieved by an order of assessment made under 
section 6 or by an order imposing penalty made under secti on 11 may, within such time as may be 
prescribed, appeal to such authority in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be accom panied by such fees as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) After the receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard in the matter, dispose of the appeal as exp editiously as possible.  
(4) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall be final an d shall not be called in question in 
any court of law.  
14. Penalty.—(1) Whoever, being under an obligation to furnish a return under this Act, furnishes 
any return  knowing, or having reason to believe, the same to be false shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or 
with both.  
(2) Whoever, being liable to pay  cess under this Act, wilfully or in tentionally evades or attempts to 
evade the payment of such cess shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months 
or with fine which may extend to on e thousand rupees or with both.  
(3) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section save on a complaint 
made by or under the authority of the Central Government.  
15. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence wa s committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,  any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
2[16. Power of Central Government to exempt the levy of water cess .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 3, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt an y industry, consuming water below the quantity specified in the notif ication, from the levy of 
water cess.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 2003, s. 3, for “specified industry” (w.e.f. 6 -5-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 16 (w.e.f. 6 -5-2003).  6 (2) In exempting an industry under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall take into 
consideration — 
(a) the nature of raw material used;  
(b) the nature of manufacturing process employed;  
(c) the nature of effluent generated;  
(d) the source of water extraction;  
(e) the nature of effluent receiving bodies; and  
(f) the production data, including water consumption per unit production,  
in the industry and the location of the industry. ] 
17. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may make rules for carryin g out the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the followin g matters, namely: — 
(a) the standards of t he meters to be affixed and the places at which such mete rs are to be affixed 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(b) the returns to be furnished under section 5, the form in which and the intervals at which such 
returns are to be furnished, the particular s which such returns shall contain and the officer or authority 
to whom or which such returns shall be furnished;  
(c) the manner in which and the time within which the cess collected shall be paid to the Central 
Government under  sub-section ( 4) of section 6; 
(d) the date from which any person or local authority liable to pay cess shall be entitled to the 
rebate 1[and the maximum quantity of water in excess of consumption whereof any person or local 
authority shall not be entitled to the rebate]  under sectio n 7; 
(e) the powers which may be exercised by the office r or authority under section 9;  
(f) the authority which may i mpose penalty under section 11;  
(g)the authority to which an appeal may be filed under sub -section ( 1) of section 13 and the time 
within wh ich and the form and manner in which such appeal may be filed;  
(h) the fees which shall  accompany an appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 13; and  
(i) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session  for a total period of thirty d ays which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sess ions and if, before the expiry of the session immediat ely 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no eff ect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 53 of 1991, s. 7 (w.e.f. 26-1-1992 ).  7 [SCHEDULE I .] Omitted  by the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution ) Cess  (Amendment ) Act, 
2003 ( 19 of 2003 ), s. 5 (w.e.f . 6-5-2003). ] 
1[SCHEDULE II  
(See section 3)  
 
Purpose for which water is consumed  Maximum rate under 
sub-section ( 2) of 
section 3  Maximum rate under sub -section 
(2A) of section 3  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Industrial cooling, spraying in mine pits  
or boiler feeds  Five paise  
per kilolitr e Ten paise  
per kilolitre . 
2.Domestic purpose  Two paise  
per kilolitre  Three paise  
 per kilolitre . 
3.Processing whereby water gets polluted  
and the pollutants are — 
(i) easily biodegradable; or  
(ii) non -toxic; or  
(iii) both non -toxic and easily  
biodegradable  Ten paise  
 per kilolitre  Twenty paise  
per kilolitre . 
4. Processing whereby water gets polluted  
and the pollutants are — 
(i) not easily biodegradable; or  
(ii) toxic; or  
   (iii)both toxic and not  
easily biodegradable  Fifteen paise  
per kilolitre  Thirty paise  
per kilolitre .] 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 2003, s. 6, for Schedule II (w.e.f. 6 -5-2003).  
