--------------------------The Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Articles) Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF EXCISE (TE XTILES AND  
TEXTILE ARTICLES) ACT , 1978  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1978  
[6th December, 1978 .] 
An Act to provide for the levy a nd collection of additional duties of excise on certain textiles and 
textile articles.  
BE it enact ed by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Textiles and Textile Articles) Act, 1978 . 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 4th day of October, 1978.  
2. [Definitions .] Omitted by the Additional Duties of Excise  (Textiles and Textile Articles ) Amendment 
Act, 1985 (6 of 1986), s. 2 (w.e.f . 28-2-1986).  
3. Levy and collection of additional duties of excise on certain textil es and textile  articles .—1[(1) 
When goods of the description mentioned in the Schedule chargeable with a duty of excise under the 
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944  (1 of 1944) , read with any notification for the time being in force 
issued by the Central Government in relation to the duty so chargeable (not being a notification providing 
for any exemption for giving credit with respect to, or reduction of duty of excise under the said Act on 
such goods equal to, any duty of excise under the said Act , or th e additional duty under s ection 3 of the 
Customs Tariff Act, 1975  (51 of 1975) , already paid on the raw material used in the production or 
manufacture of such goods), are assessed to duty, there shall be levied and collected a duty of excise 
equal to 2[fifteen per cent .] of the total amount so chargeable on such goods.]  
(2) The duties of excise referred to in sub -section ( 1) in respect of the goods specified in the Schedule 
shall be in addition to the duties of excise chargeable on such goods under the Cent ral Excises and Salt 
Act, 1944  (1 of 1944) , or any other law for the time being in force and shall be levied for the purposes of 
the Union and the proceeds thereof shall not be distributed among the States.  
(3) The provisions of the Central Excises and Sal t Act, 1944  (1 of 1944) , and the rules made 
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duties, shall, so far as may be, apply 
in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of excise leviable under this section in respect of any 
goods as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that 
Act or those rules.  
4. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Articles) 
Ordinance, 1978 (4 of 1978), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corre sponding provisions of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 11 of 1983, s. 57 , for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1983).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 19 96, s. 84, for “twenty  per cent.” (w.e.f. 28-9-1996). 2 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3 ) 
NOTES  
1. In this Schedule, “heading”, “sub -heading”, “tariff item” and “Chapter ” mean respectively a  
heading , sub-heading, tariff item and Chapter  in the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff            
Act, 1985 (5 of 1986).  
2. The rules for the interpret ation of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act,                
1985  (5 of 1986)  and the Section and Chapter Notes and the General Explanatory Notes of the First 
Schedule shall apply for the purposes of classification of goods specified in the  Schedule.  
 
Sl. No.  Description of goods  
(1) (2) 
1. Silk, that is to say, all goods falling within Chapter 50.  
2. Wool, that is to say, all goods falling within Chapter 51, other than fabrics of headings 5111, 
5112 and 5113.  
3. Cotton, that is to say, all goods falling within Chapter 52.  
2[4. Man-made filaments; strip and the like of man -made te xtile materials, that is to say, all goods 
falling within Chapter 54. ] 
5. Man-made staple fibres, that is to say, all goods falling within Chapter 55.  
6. Terry towelling and similar woven terry fa brics, falling within heading 58 02. 
7. Tulle s and other net fabrics, not including wove n, knitted or crocheted fabrics  lace in the piece, 
in strips or in motifs, other than fabrics of headings 6002, 6003, 6004, 6005 and 6006.  
8. Knitted or crocheted fabrics, that is to say, all goods falling within  Chapter 60.  
9. Metallised yarn , falling within heading 56 05. 
10. Embroidery in the piece, in strips or in motifs, fa lling within heading 5810 .] 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2005, s. 118 and the Eleventh Schedule (w.e.f. 13 -5-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2006, s. 74 and the Ninth Schedule , for S.  No. 4 and the entry relating  thereto  (w.e.f. 18 -4-2006).  
--------------------------The Banking Service Commission (Repeal) Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE BANKING SERVICE COMMISSION (REPEAL) ACT, 1978  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Repeal of Act 42 of 1975 and the dissolution of the Banking Service Commission . 
4. Consequential provisions . 
5. Savings.  
  2 
 THE BANKING SERVICE COMMISSION (REPEAL) ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1978  
[18th May, 1978 .] 
An Act to repeal the Banking Service Commission Act, 1975.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short  title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Banking Service Commission 
(Repeal) Act, 1978.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of September, 1977.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 19th day of September, 1977;  
(b) “Banking Service Commission ” means the Banking Service Commission established under 
section 3 of the Banking Service Commission Act, 1975(42 of 1975).  
3. Repeal of Act 42 of 1975 and the dissolution of the Banking Service Commission .—On the 
appointed day the Banking Service Commission Act, 1975, shall stand repealed and the Banking Service 
Commission shall stand dissolved.  
4. Consequential provisions .—On the dissolution of t he Banking Serv ice Commission, — 
(a)(i) the person appointed as the Chairman of the Banking Service Commission; and  
(ii) every other person appointed by the Banking Service Commission,  
and holding office as such immediately before the appointed day shall vacate their resp ective offices 
and no such Chairman or other person shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature 
termination of the term of his office or of any contract of service;  
(b) any  proceeding of whatever nature pending before the Banking Service Commission 
immediately before the appointed day shall stand terminated;  
(c) the balance of all monies (including any fee) received by, or advanced to, the Banking Service 
Commission and not spent by it  before the appointed day shall, on the appointed day, stand 
transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government and shall be utilised for the purposes of 
clauses ( e) and ( f); 
(d) all property of whatever kind owned by, or vested in, the B anking Service Commission 
immediately before the appointed day, shall, on the appointed day, stand transferred to, and shall vest 
in, the Central Government;  
(e) all liabilities and obligations of whatever kind incurred by the Banking Service Commission 
and subsisting immediately before the appointed day shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed 
to be the liabilities or obligations, as the case ma y be, of the Central Government;  and any proceeding 
or cause of action, pending or existing immediately be fore the appointed day by or against the 
Banking Service Commission in relation to such liability or obligation may, as from the appointed 
day, be continued or enforced by or against the Central Government.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, “liability” does not include any liability for any 
money advanced to the Banking Service Commission under sub -section ( 3) of section 19 of the 
Banking Service Commission Act, 1975(42 of 1975);  
(f) all monies vested in the Central Government under clause ( c) shall, after deducting the amount 
incurred for discharging the liabilities and obligations under clause ( e), be refunded by the Central 
Government to each public sector bank as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Banking Service 
Commission Act, 1975  (42 of 1975) , in proportion to the amount advanced by such public sector 
bank to the Banking Service Commission under sub -section ( 3) of section 19 of that Act.  3 
 5. Savings .—(1) Anything done or any action taken under the Banking Service Commission (Repeal) 
Ordinance, 1977  (10 of 1977), which ceased to operate, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 
the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect the right of the Chairman of the Banking Service 
Commission or of any other person appointed by the said Commission to receive salary, allowances or 
other benefits, in accordance with the terms and conditions of service applicable to him, for the period 
from the date of cesser of operation of the said Ordinance til l the date on which this Act receives the 
assent of the President (both days inclusive).  
  
 
--------------------------The Bolani Ores Limited (Acquisition of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE BOLANI ORES LIMITED (ACQUISITION OF SHARES ) AND  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1978                                                                                                                                        
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF SHARES OF BOLANI ORES LIMITED  
3. Vesting in the Central Government of the shares held by the Company.  
4. Payment of amount to the Company.  
5. Allocation of shares to the Steel Authority of India.  
CHAPTER III  
VESTING OF UNDERTAKIN GS IN THE STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA AND DISSOLUTION OF  
BOLANI ORES LIMITED  
6. Vesting of undertakings in the Steel Authority of India and dissolution of Bolani Ores Limited.  
7. “Undertaking” meaning of.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
8. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of dissolved company.  
9. Provisions relating to directors.  
10. Provision relating to auditors.  
11. Directors, etc., not entitled to compensation.  
12. Provident fund.  
13. Gratuity, welfare fun d and other funds.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS  
14. Provisions with respect to income -tax and surtax.  
15. Taxes, fees and other charges not payable.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Duty to deliver possession of properties, etc.  
17. Penalties.  
18. Offences b y companies.  
19. Protection of action taken in good faith.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Cognizance of offences.  
21. Saving of contracts, etc.  
22. Saving of legal proceedings.  
23. Board of Directors of the Steel Authority of India to adopt accounts of dissolved company.  
24. Transfer of documents relating to the dissolved company.  
25. Power to remove difficulties.  
26. Act to override the provisions of other laws.  
27. Power to amend memorandum and articles of association.  
28. Power to make rules.  
  3 
 THE BOLANI ORES LIMITED ( ACQUISITION OF SHARES) AND MISCELLANEOUS 
PROVISIONS ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1978  
[8th December, 1978 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition of shares of the Bolani  Ores Limited in public interest in 
order to serve better the needs of the nation and to facilitate the promotion and development 
in the interests of the general public, of national steel industry and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Bolani Ores Limited was incorporated as a private limited company in June, 1957  for 
supplying ores mainly to the Durgapur Steel Plant;  
WHEREAS  50.5 per cent.  shares in the share capital of the said Bolani Ores Limited are held by the 
Steel Authorit y of India Limited, a wholly owned Government company and the remaining 49.5 per cent. 
shares are held by the Orissa Minerals Developments Company Limited;  
WHEREAS cumulative losses suffered by the said Bolani Ores Limited at the end of 1977 -78 were to 
the extent of over Rs.  270 lakhs and the said Bolani Ores Limited is in need of urgent funds to carry on 
the operations of its undertakings;  
AND WHEREAS the Orissa Minerals Development Company is not willing to contribute any further 
amount towards the share capital of the Bolani Ores Limited;  
AND WHEREAS the Bolani Ores Limited is the main source of supply of iron ores to the Durgapur 
Steel Plant and without further substantial investments by way of capital outlay and otherwise the supply 
of iron ores to the said Plant cannot be maintained;  
AND WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest that  the shares of the said Bolani O res Limited 
should be acquired;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the T wenty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Bolani Ores Limited 
(Acquisition of Shares ) and Miscellaneous Provisions A ct, 1978.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this A ct comes into force;  
(b) “Bolani Ores Limited ” means the Bolani Ores Compan y Limited, a company formed and 
registered under the C ompanies Act and having its registered office at Chartered Bank Buildings in 
Calcutta in the state of West Bengal;  
(c) “Companies Act ” means the C ompanies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(d) “dissolved company ” means the Bolani Ores Limited dissolved by virtue of section 6;  
(e) “the Company ” means the Orissa Minerals Development Company Limited, a company 
formed and registered under the C ompanies Act and having its register ed office at Chartered Bank 
Buildings, C alcutta in the State of West Bengal;  
(f) “Steel Authority of India”  means the S teel Authority of India Limited, a company  formed and 
registered under the C ompanies Act and having its registered office at New Delhi.  
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1979, vide notification No. S.O. 714(E), dated 16th December , 1972, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (2) Save as provided in section 14, the w ords and expressions used herein and not defined but defined 
in the Companies Act have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF SHARES OF BOLANI ORES LIMITED  
3. Vesting in the Central Govern ment of the shares held by the C ompany .—(1) On the appointed 
day, all the shares held by the Company in the share capital of the Bolani Ores Li mited shall, by virtue of 
this A ct, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government.  
(2) All the shares which  have vested in the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall, by force 
of such vesting, be freed and discharged of all trusts, liabilities, obligations, mortgages , charges, liens and 
other encumbrances affecting them, and any attachment or injunction  or any decree or order of any court, 
tribunal or other authority restricting the use of such shares in any manner shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  
4. Payment of amount to the Company .—(1) For the transfer t o, and vesting in, the Central 
Government under section 3 of the shares held by the Company in the Bolani Ores Limited, the Central 
Government shall, within thirty days from the appointed day, pay to the Company in cash an amount of 
forty -nine thousand five hundred rupees.  
(2) Where the Central Go vernment fails to pay to the Company the amount specified in                  
sub-section ( 1) within the period specified in tha t sub -section, the C entral Government shall pay on the 
said amount simple inter est at the rate of six per cent.  per annum from t he appointed day till the date of 
payment.  
5. Allocation of share s to the Steel Authority of India .—(1) All the shares held by the Company in 
the Bolani  Ores Limited which have vested in the Central Government by virtue of section 3 shall, 
immediately after they have so vested, stand transfer red to, and shall vest in, the Steel A uthority of India.  
(2) The amount paid by the Central Government for the shares which stand transferre d to, and vested 
in, the Steel A uthority of India under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to  be the contribution by the C entral 
Governmen t to the equity capital of the S teel Authority of India and the Steel A uthority of India sha ll 
issue (if necessary, after amending its memorandum and articles of association) to the Central 
Government forty -nine fully paid -up shares of the face value of one thousand rupees each and pay to that 
Government five hundred rupees in cash.  
CHAPTER III  
VESTING OF UNDERTAKINGS IN THE STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA AND DISSOLUTION OF  
BOLANI ORES LIMITED  
6. Vesting of undertakings in the Steel Authority of India and dissolution of Bolani Ores 
Limited .—On the appointed day — 
(a) all the undertakings of the Bolani  Ores Limited, the shares of which have vested in the Steel 
Authority of India by virtue of section 5, shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Steel 
Authority of India;  
(b) the Bolani Ores Limited shall stand dissolved.  
7. “Under taking” meaning of.—For the purposes of this A ct, the undertakings of the  dissolved 
company shall be deemed  to include all assets, rights, lease -holds (including mining leases), industrial or 
other licences, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and  immovable, including 
lands, buildings, works, mines, workshops, projects, stores, instruments, machinery, automobiles and 
other vehicles, equipment, cash or bank balances, cash in hand, reserve funds, investments and book debts 
and all other rights and in terests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the 
appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the dissolved company and all books of 
account, registers, maps, drawings, records of survey and all other documents  of whatever nature relating 
thereto, and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings liabilities and obligations of whatever kind of 
the dissolved company.  5 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
8. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of dissolved company .—(1) Every officer 
(not being a director) or other employee holding office immediately before the appointed day in the 
dissolved company in relation to any undertaking of such company, shall, as from the appointed day, 
continue  to hold office as such in respect of the  undertaking vested in the S teel Authority of India by 
virtue of section 6, by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service and with the 
same rights and privileges as to retirement benef its as would have been admissible to him if the company 
in which he was holding office had not b een dissolved and shall continue  to do  so unless and until such 
tenure and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Steel Authority of India.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), rules relating to the conditions of service 
and Standing Orders applicable to the officers or other employees referred to in sub -section ( 1), as 
immediately before the appointed day, shall continue to apply unless and unti l they are duly altered by the 
Steel Authority of India.  
9. Provisions relating to directors .—Every person holding office  as a director of the dissolved 
company immediately before the appointed day shall, on that day, cease to hold off ice as such director.  
10. Provisio n relating to auditors .—Every person appointed under section 619 of the Companies 
Act as an auditor of the dissolved company holding office immediately before the appointed day, may 
contin ue to hold office as such auditor  in relation to the undertakings to the dissolved com pany which 
stand vested in the S teel Authority of India by virtue of section 6, for the duration for which he was so 
appointed, on the same terms and conditions a were applicable to him immediately before  the appointed 
day. 
11. Directors, etc., not entitled to compensation .—(1) Notwiths tanding anything contained in any  
law for the time being in force, no director or managerial personnel specified in section 197A of the 
Companies Act or other person entitle d to manage the whole or a substantial part of the business and 
affairs of the undertakings of the dissolved company under a special agreement or otherwise shall be 
entitled to any compensation against the dissolved company or the C entral Government or the  Steel 
Authority of  India for the loss of office or  for the premature termination of any contract of management 
entered into by him with the dissolved company whether such loss or termination was  due to the 
provisions of this A ct. 
(2) Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 8 shall not entitle any 
officer or other employee referred to in that sub -section to any compensa tion under that A ct or under any 
other law for the time being in force and no claim for such compensation shall be entertained by any 
court, tribunal or other authority.  
12. Provident fund .—Where a provident fund has been established by the dissolved compa ny for the 
benefit of the employees and the same stands vested in a trust, the monies and other assets standing to the 
credit of such provident fund shall continue to be held in trust with the same objects as were applicable 
before the appointed day and th e trustees of such trusts functioning immediately before the appointed day 
shall, subject to the provisions of the trust deeds and the rules relating to such trusts, continue to function 
as trustees in respect of such provident fund maintained in relation to the undertakings o f the dissolved 
company which stand vested in the Steel Authority of India by v irtue of section 6, as if this A ct had no t 
been passed:  
Provided that the right to nominate trustees and other rights relating to the trust vested in the 
dissolved company shall vest in the Steel Authority of India.  
13. Gratuity, welfare fund and other funds .—Where any gratuity, welfare fund or other fund has 
been established by the dissolved company for the benefit of its employees and is in existence 
imme diately before the appointed day, all monies and other assets standing to the credit of or relatable to 
such gratuity, welfare fund or othe r fund shall vest in the Steel A uthority of India.  6 
 CHAPTER V  
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS  
14. Provisions with respect to inco me-tax and surtax .—(1) The Steel A uthority of India shall be 
liable to pay any sum under the pro visions of the Income -tax Act or the Companies (P rofits) Surtax Act 
which the dissolved company would have been liable to pay if the dissolution had not taken p lace, in the 
like manner and to the same extent as the dissolved company.  
(2) For the purpose of making an assessment of the income or, as the case may be, the chargeable 
profits of the dissolved company and for the purpose of levying any sum in accordance  with the  
provisions of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) any proceeding taken against the dissolved company before the appointed day shall be 
deemed to have been taken against the Steel Authority of India and may be continued against the 
Steel Authority of India from  the stage at which it stood immediately before the appointed any;  
(b) any proceeding which could have been taken against the dissolved company, if the dissolution 
had not taken place, may be taken against the Steel Authority of India; and  
(c) all the provisions of the Income -tax A ct or, as the case may be, the C ompanies (Profits) Surtax 
Act shall apply accordingly.  
(3) The assessment of the income or, as the case may be, the chargeable profits of the previous year of 
the dissolved company up to th e appointed day shall be made as if such dissolution had not taken place 
and all the p rovisions of the Income -tax Act  or, as the case m ay be, the Companies (Profits) S urtax Act 
shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly.  
(4) The transfer and vesting of the  undertakings o f the dissolved company in the Steel A uthority of 
India under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be an amalgamation in relation to  the dissolved 
company and the Steel A uthority of India and the provision s of the Income -tax Act sha ll, so far as may 
be, apply accordingly as if references in the said Act to the amalgamating company and the amalgamated 
company were references to the dissolved company and the Steel Authority of India respectively.  
(5) The accumulated loss and the unabso rbed depreciation, if any, of the dissolved company shall be 
deemed to be the loss or, as the case may be, allowance for depreciation of the Steel Authority of India for 
the previous year in which the amalgamation referred to in sub -section ( 4) has taken p lace and the 
provisions of the Income -tax Act relating to set -off and carry forward to loss and allowance for 
depreciation shall apply accordingly.  
(6) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 5) shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in the income -tax Act or the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “Income -tax Act ” means the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 ); 
(b) “Companies (P rofits) Surtax Act ” means the C ompanies (Profits) Surtax Act,                      
1964 (7 of 1964);  
(c) words and expressions used in this section and not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Income -tax Act or the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act shall have the meanings respectively as signed 
to them in the said Acts.  
15. Taxes, fees and other charges not payable .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
that no taxes, duties, fees or other charges of whatever nature (including registration charges ), shall be 
payable in respect o f any transfer of shares or transfer of undertakings or transfer of any immovable 
property, under the provisions of this Act. 
  7 
 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Duty to deliver possession of properties, etc. —(1) Where any property appertaining to any of 
the un dertakings of the dissolved company has been transferred to, and vested in , the Steel Authority of 
India,— 
(a) every person in whose possession, custody or control any such property may be, shall , on 
demand by the Steel Authority of India, forthwith deliver the property to the Steel Authority of India 
or to such person as the Steel Au thority of India may authorise  in this behalf;  
(b) any person who, immediately before such vesting, has , in his poss ession, custody or control, 
any books, documents or other papers relating to any of the undertakings of the dissolved company 
shall be liable to account for the said books , documents  and papers to the Steel A uthority of India and 
shall deliver them to the Steel A uthority of India or to such person as the S teel A uthority of India may 
authorise in this behalf.  
(2) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this secti on, it shall be lawful for the S teel 
Authority of India to take all necessary step s for taking possession of all properties, which have been 
transferred to, and vested in, it under this Act.  
17. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having  in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the dissolved 
company wrongfully withholds such property from the Steel Authority of India; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of any of the 
undertakings of the dissolved company; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Steel Authority of India or any person authorised 
by it any books, documents or other papers relating to any of the undertakings of the dissolved 
company which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Steel A uthority of India or to a person authorised by it, any assets, books 
of account, registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control relating to any of the 
undertak ings of the dissolved company; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any of the undertakings of the 
dissolved company; or  
(f) wrongfully uses any property forming part of any of the undertakings of the dissolved 
company,  
shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to two years, or  with fine  which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
18. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act  has been committed by a 
company, every person who,  at the time offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, 
the company for the conduct of the business of the company , as well as the company, shall be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and pun ished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commiss ion of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed  with the consent or 
connivance  of, or is attributable to an y neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary o r other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly . 
  8 
 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company”  means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of     
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
19. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosec ution or other legal proceeding  shall 
lie against the Central Government or  the Steel A uthority of India or any of its officers or other 
employees for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
20. Cognizance of offences .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ), no Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a 
complaint, in writing, made by the Central Government or any offic er aut horised in this behalf by the 
Government.  
21. Saving of contracts, etc. —All c ontracts, deeds, bonds, agreements and other instruments of 
whatever nature to which the dissolved company is a party subsisting or having effect imm ediately before 
the appo inted da y, shall , as from that day, be of full force and effect against, or, as the case m ay be, in 
favour of, the Steel A uthority of India and may be enforced as fully and effectual ly as if, instead of the 
dissolved company, the Steel Authority of India h ad been a party thereto.  
22. Saving of legal proceedings .—If, on the appointed day, there is pending any suit, arbitration, 
appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature by or against the dissolved company, the same shall 
not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the 
undertakings of the dissolved company or  of anything contained in this A ct, but the suit, arbitration , 
appeal or other proceeding may  be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or again st the Steel Authority 
of India in the same manner and to the same extent as it would or might have been continued, prosecuted 
and enforced by or against the dissolved company if this Act had not been passed.  
23. Board of Directors of the S teel A uthority o f India to adopt accounts of dissolved 
company .—(1) The accounts of the dissolved company shall stand closed on the appointed day and the 
balance -sheet and the profit and loss accounts for the current financial year up to  the appointed day shall 
be prepare d and audited in accorda nce with the provisions of the C ompanies Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions in t he Companies Act, the Board of D irectors of the Steel 
Authority of India shall be deemed to be the Board of Directors of the dissolved company and  the 
shareholders of the Steel A uthority of India shall be deemed to be the shareholders of the dissolved 
company for the purpose of adop tion of the accounts, directors’  report and completion of other formalities 
in accordance with the provisions of the Com panies Act in this regard.  
24. Transfer of documents relating to the dissolved company .—(1) The Registrar of Companies 
with whom the dissolved company is registered shall, as soon as may be after the appointed day, transfer 
all documents relating to the di ssolv ed company to the Registrar of  Companies, New Delhi.  
(2) The Registrar of Companies, New Delhi, on receipt of the documents relating to the dissolved 
company , shall add those documents to the file ma intained by him in relation to t he Steel A uthority of 
India, and shall consolidate the files relating to the dissolved company and the Steel Authority of India 
and the documents filed by the dissolved company shall, for the purposes of t he C ompanies Act, be 
deemed to  have been filed by the Steel A uthority of India in relation to the business of the undertakings of  
the dissolved company which stands  transferred to and vested in the Steel A uthority of India by virtue of 
section 6.  
25. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official  Gazette, make such provisions  not 
inconsiste nt with the provisions of this A ct, as appears to it to be necessary, for the  removal of the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the 
appointed day.  9 
 26. Act to override the provisions of other laws .—The provisions of this A ct or of any order made 
thereunder shall hav e effect notwithstan ding anything contained in the C ompani es Act or in any other law 
for the time being in force or in any contract, express or implied , or in any rules or regulations having 
effect by vir tue of any law other than this A ct. 
27. Power to ame nd memorandum and articles of association .—(1) For the purpose of giving 
effect to the provisions of this Act , the Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, 
make amendments in the memorandum or articles of association, or both of the  Steel Authority of India.  
(2) Any amendments in the memorandum or articles or association of the Steel A uthority of India 
made in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Companies A ct. 
28. Power to make rul es.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it 
is made, before each House of P arliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the se ssion or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid, bo th Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may  be; so,  however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
 
--------------------------The Britannia Engineering Company Limited (Mokameh Unit) and the Arthur Butler and Company (Muzaffarpore) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1978--------------------------
 
1 THE BRITANNIA ENGINEERING COMPANY LIMITED (MOKAMEH UNIT) AND THE 
ARTHUR BUTLER AND COMPANY (MUZAFFARPORE) LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1978  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND UNDERTAKINGS OF ARTHUR  BUTLER  AND 
COMPANY  
3. Vesting in the Central Government of Mokameh unit and undertakings of Arthur Butler and 
Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of Mokameh unit  and the undertakings of Arthur 
Butler and Company in a Government company.  
6. Britannia Engineering Company and Arthur Butler and Company to be liable for certain prior 
liabilities.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
7. Payment of amount.  
8. Payment of further amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND THE UNDERTAKINGS OF ARTHUR  BUTLER AND COMPANY  
 9.  Management , etc., of Mokameh unit and the undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company.  
10. Duty to deliver possession of Mokameh unit and undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company.  
11. Duty of the companies to furnish particulars.  
12. Duty of persons in charge of manag ement of Mokameh unit or undertakings of Arthur Butler and 
Company to deliver assets, etc.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND OF ARTHUR  BUTLER AND COMPANY  
 
13. Employment of employees to continue.  
14. Provident fund and other fu nds. 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER  OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner.  
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government company.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
19. Priority of claims.  
20. Examination of claims.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims.   
2 SECTIONS  
22. Disbursement of money by Commissioner.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to Britannia Engineering Company and Arthur Butler and Company.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the General Revenue Account.  
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act have overriding effect.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the Government 
company.  
27. Penalties.  
28. Offenc es by companies.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Delegation of Powers.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to remove difficulties.  
33. Declaration as to the policy of the State.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
   
3 THE BRITANNIA ENGINEERING COMPANY LIMITED (MOKAMEH UNIT) AND THE 
ARTHUR BUTLER AND COMPANY (MUZAFFARPORE) LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING S) ACT , 1978  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1978  
[8th December , 1978 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest of the 
undertakings of Britannia Engineering Company in relation to the Mokameh unit owned by it 
and the right, title and interest of Arthur Butler and Company in relation to the undertakings 
owned by it, with a view to ensuring the continued manufacture of railway wagons a nd other 
goods essential to the needs of the country in general and the Railways in particular, and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Britannia Engineering C ompany at the Mokameh unit and Arthur Butler and Company 
were engaged in the manufacture of railway wagons and other goods;  
AND WHEREAS as a result of the closure of the wagon and other undertakings owned by the 
companies afore said, there was a substantial fall in the manufacture of railway wagons and other goods;  
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of bringing the closed works of the companies aforesaid into operation 
the management of the Mokameh unit of Britannia Engineering Company and the management of the 
undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company were taken over by the Central Government under the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951);  
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire the said wago n and other undertakings to ensure the 
continued manufacture of railway wagons and other goods which are essential to the needs of the country 
in general, and the Railways in particular ; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1.  Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Britannia Engineering 
Company Limited (Mokameh Unit) and the Arthur Butler and Company (Muzaffarpore) Limited 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertak ings) Act , 1978.  
(2) The provisions of sections 27 and 28 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April , 1978.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of April , 1978;  
(b) “Arthur Butler and Company ” means Messrs.  Arthur Butler and Company (Muzaffarpore) 
Limited , a company with in the meaning of the Companies Act 1956 (1 of 1956) , and having its 
registered office at 40, Stand Road, Calcutta , in the State of West Bengal;  
(c) “Britannia Engineering Company ” means Messrs.Britannia Engineering Company Limited , a 
company within the meaning of the Companies Act 1956 (1 of 1956) , and having i ts registered office 
at 3, Netaji Subhash Road, Calcutta , in the State of West Bengal;  
(d) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 15;  
(e) “Government company ” means a company within the meaning of section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and referred to in section 5 of this Act; 
(f) “Mokameh unit ” means the wagon and other undertakings owned by Britannia Engineering 
Company at Mokameh in the State of Bihar;  
(g) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;   
4 (h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may,  by notification , specify for the purpose of that provision and different dates may be 
specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(j) “wagon and other undertaking ” means the undertaking which is engaged in the manufacture of 
railway wagons and other g oods;  
(k) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                   
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , have the meanings, respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND UNDERTAKINGS OF ARTHUR  BUTLER  AND 
COMPANY  
3. Vesting  in the Central Government of Mokameh unit and undertakings of Arthur Butler and 
Company .—On the appointed day, — 
(i) the Mokameh unit and the right, t itle and interest of Britannia Engineering C ompany in 
relation to the Mokameh unit ; and 
(ii) the undertaking s owned by Arthur Butler and Company and the right, title and interest of 
Arthur Butler and Company in relation to the said undertakings,  
shall, by virtue of this Act, stand trans ferred to, and shall vest in , the Central Government.  
4. General effect o f vesting .—(1) The Mokameh unit, and the undertakings of Arthur Butler and 
Company , referred to in section 3, shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, lease -holds powers , 
authorities and privileges and all property , movable and immovable , including lands, buildings , 
workshops, stores , instruments , machinery and equipment , cash balances, cash in hand , reserve funds , 
investments and bo ok debts pertaining to the Mokameh unit or, as the case may be, the undertakings of 
Arthur Butler and Company , and all other r ights and interests in, or arising out of , such property as were 
immediately before the appointed day in the ownersh ip, possession, power or control — 
(a) of Britannia Engineering Company , in relation to the Mokameh unit , or 
(b) of Arthur Butler and Company , in relation to the undertakings owned by it,  
whether within or outside India , and all books of account , registers and other documents of whatever 
nature relating ther eto. 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall , by 
force of such vesting , be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation , mortgage , charge , lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting it, and any at tachment, injunction or decree or order of any court or other 
authority, restricting the use of such  properties in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the  
whole or any part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in , or in relation to , any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescri bed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge , lien  or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts , it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section  (3) or any other person holding and charge , lien or other interest in, or in relation to any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues , in whole or in part , out of amounts specified in the First Schedule and also out of  
the monies determined under section 8 , but no such mortgage , charge , lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Centra l Government or the Government 
company , as the case may be.   
5 (5) If, on the appointed day, a ny suit , appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature instituted or 
preferred by or against Britannia E ngineering Company in relation to the Mokameh unit , or by or  against 
Arthur Butler and Company in relation to any undertaking owned by it, is pending , the same shall not 
abate , be discontinued or be , in any way , prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the Mokameh 
unit or, as the case may be , the undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company , or of anything contained in 
this Act, but the suit, appe al or other proceeding may be continued , prosecuted or enforced by or against 
the Central Government or the Government company as the case may be.  
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of Mokameh unit and the undertakings of 
Arthur Butler and Company in a Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 3 , the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company (whether in 
existence at the commencement of this Act or incorporated thereafter) is willing to comply, or has 
complied, with such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to impose, direct , by 
notification,  that the Mokameh unit and t he undertakings referred to in section 3,  and the right, title and 
interest of Britannia Engineering Company in relation to the Mokameh unit , and the right , title and 
interest of Arthur Butler and Company in relation to the undertakings owned by it, which have vested in 
the Central Government under section 3 , shall instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, 
vest in the Government company either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not 
being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the right , title and interest in relation to the Mokameh unit and in relation to the other 
undertakings referred to in s ection 3, vest in a Government c ompany under sub -section (1), the 
Government c ompany shall, on and from the date of such vesting , be deemed to have become  the owne r 
of the Mokameh unit and of the undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company and  all the rights and 
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to the Moka meh unit and the undertakings of Arthur 
Butler  and Company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed  to have been the rights and 
liabilities, respectively , of the Government c ompany.  
6. Britannia E ngineering Company and Arthur Butler and Compa ny to be liable for certain 
prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability of Britannia Engineering Company in relation to the Mokameh unit , 
or of Arthur Butler and C ompany in relation to the  undertakings owned by it, in re spect of any period 
prior to the appointe d day , shall be the liability of Britannia Engineering Company, o r Arthur Butler and 
Company , as the case may be, and shall be enforceable against such company and not against the Centra l 
Government or the Government c ompany.  
(2) For the removal of dou bts, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in  any other section of this Act,— 
(i) no liability of Britannia E ngineering Company , in relation to the Mokameh unit , and 
(ii) no liability of Arthur Butler and Comp any, in relation to the undertakings owned by it,  
in respect of any period prior to the appointed day , shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government or the Government company , as the case may be;  
(b) no award , decree or order of any court , tribunal o r other authority in relation to the Mokameh 
unit, or in relation to the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company , passed after the 
appointed day in respect of any matter , claim or dispute , which arose before that day , shall be 
enforceable against the Central Go vernment or the Government c ompany, as the case may be;  
(c) no liability incurred befor e the appointed day by — 
(i) Britannia E ngineering Company , in relation to the Mokameh unit , or 
(ii) Arthur Butler and Company , in relation to the undertaki ngs owned by it,  
for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being in force shall be enforceable against 
the Central Government or the Government company as the case may be.   
6 CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
7. Payment of amount .—(1) For the transfer to, and vesting in , the Centr al Government, under 
section 3, — 
(a) of the Mokameh unit and the right , title and interest of Britannia Engineering Company , in 
relation to that unit ; and 
(b) of the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company , and the right , title and interest of 
Arthur Butler and Company , in relation to those undertakings,  
there shall be given by the Central Government to Britannia Engineering Company and Arthur Butler and 
Company , in cash and in the manner specified in C hapter V1, an amount equal to the amount specified, 
respectively , in the F irst Schedule , against Britannia Engineering C ompany and Arthur Butler and 
Company.  
(2) For the removal of doubts , it is hereby d eclared that the liabilities of — 
(i) Britannia Engineering C ompany , in relation to the Mokameh unit , and 
(ii) Arthur Butler and Company , in relation to the undertakings owned by it,  
shall be met , in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the respective company from 
the amount due, respectively , to Britannia E ngineering Company and Arthur and C ompany , under             
sub-section ( 1). 
8. Payment of further amount .—(1) For the deprivation of Britannia Engineering Company of the 
management of the Mokameh unit and for the deprivation or Arthur Butler  and Company of the 
management o f the undertakings owned by it, there shall be given , in cash , by the Central Government to 
the respective company , in addition to the amount specified in section 7 , an amount computed at the rate 
of ten thousand rupees per annum for the period commencing on the date on which the management of 
such unit or, as the case may be , such undertakings , was taken over by the Central Government under t he 
Industries (Developmen t and R egulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) and ending with the appointed day.  
(2) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provis ions of sections 3 , 4 and 6 , there shall 
also be given , in cash , by the C entral Government to Britannia E ngineering  Company and to Arthur 
Butler and Company an amount equal to an amount calculated at the rate of ten thousand rupees per 
annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending with the date on which this Act 
receives the assent of the President.  
(3) The amount specified in section 7 and the amount computed under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall 
carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum for the period commencing on the appointed 
day and ending with the date on which the payment of amount is made by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner.  
(4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall be 
given to Britannia Engineering Company and to Arthur Butler and Company in addition to the amount 
specified in the F irst Schedule.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND THE UNDERTAKINGS OF ARTHUR  BUTLER AND COMPANY  
9. Management , etc., of Mokameh unit  and the undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company .—
On the appointed day, the general  superintendence , direction , control and management of the affairs and 
business of the Mokameh unit and of the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company shall — 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government under section 5 , vest in the 
Government company specified in such direction , or  
7 (b) where no such direction  has been made, vest in such person or body  of persons as may be 
appointed by the Central Government in this behalf,  
and thereupon the Government company so specifie d or the person or body of persons so appointed, as 
the case may be , shall be entitled to exerc ise all such powers and do all such things as Britannia 
Engineering Company is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its Mokameh unit  or, as the case may 
be, Arthur Butler and Company is authorised to exercise and do in relation to the undertakings owned by 
it. 
10. Duty to deliver possession of Mokameh unit and undertakings of Arthur Butler and 
Company .—(1) Every person , in whose p ossession or custody or control— 
(i) the Mokameh unit , or 
(ii) any undertaking or Arthur Butler and Company , or 
any part of such unit or undertaking or any machinery , instrument or other movable assets forming part of 
such unit or undertaking , may be immediately before the appoin ted day , shall forthwi th deliver possession 
of the Mokameh unit or such undertaking or such part , machinery , instrument or other asset, as the case 
may be , to the Central Government or the Government company or to such person or body of persons as 
the Centra l Government or the Government c ompany may specify in this behalf . 
(2) Every person  who has , on the appointed day , in his possession or under his control any assets, 
books , documents or other papers  relating to the Mokameh unit or any undertaking own ed by Arthur 
Butler and Company , which has ve sted in the Central Government or a Government company under this 
Act, and which belong to Britannia Engineering C ompany or , as the case may be , Arthur Butler and 
Company , or would have s o belonged if the Mokame h unit , or as the case may be , the under takings 
owned by Arthur Butler and Company, had not vested in the  Centra l Government or the Government 
company , shall be liable to account for the said assets, books , documents and other papers to the Centra l 
Governm ent or the Government c ompany and shall deliver them up to the Centra l Government or the 
Government c ompany or to such person or body or persons as the Central Government or the 
Government Company may specify in this behalf.  
(3) The Central Government may take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for securing possession 
of the Mokameh unit and the undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company which have vested in it under 
section 3.  
11. Duty of the companies to furnish particulars .—Britannia Engineering C ompany and Arthur 
Butler and Company shall , within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf , 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all it s propertie s and assets , as on the appointed day , 
pertaining to the Mokameh unit , or as the case may be , the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and 
Company which has or have vested in the Central Government under section 3 , and, for this purpose the 
Central Government or the Government company shal l afford Britannia Engineering Company o r Arthur 
Butler and Company all  reasonable facilities.  
12. Duty of persons in charge of manage ment of Mokameh unit or under takings of Arthur  
Butler and C ompany to deliver assets , etc.—On the vesting in the Central Government or the 
Government company of the management of the Mokameh unit or of any undertakings owned by Arthur 
Butler and Company , all persons in charge of the management of the Mokameh unit or , as the case may 
be, the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company immediately before the dat e of such vesting , 
shall be bound to deliver to the Central Government or the Government company or to such person or 
body or persons as the Central Government or the Government company may specify in this behalf , all 
assets, books of account , registers or  other documents in their custody relating to the Mokameh unit or , as 
the case may be , any undertaking owned by Arthur Butler and Company.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND OF ARTHUR  BUTLER AND COMPANY  
13. Employment of employe es to continue .—(1) Every person who has been , immediately befor e 
the appointed day , employed by — 
(i) Britannia Engineering Company , in connection with the Mokameh unit , or  
8 (ii) Arthur Butler and Company , in co nnection with any under taking owned by it , 
shall become , on and from the appointed day , an employee of the Central Government or , as the case may 
be, of the Government c ompany , and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or  the 
Government company , as the case may be , with the same rig hts and privileges as to pension , gratuity and 
other matters as wou ld have been admissible to him i f there had been no such vesting and shall continue 
to do so unless and until his employment under the Central Government or the Government  company , as 
the case may be , is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly 
altered by the Centra l Government or the Government c ompany , as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in the Industrial Di sputes A ct 1947 (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force , the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in the Mokameh unit or any undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company , to the Central 
Government or the  Government company shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any 
compensation under this A ct or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
14. Provident fund and ot her funds .—(1) Where Britannia Engineering Company or Arthur Butler 
and Company has established a provident fund , superannuation  fund, welfare fund or other fund for the 
benefit of persons employed in the Mokameh unit or , as the case may be , any of the undertakings owned 
by Arthur Butler and Company , the monies relatable to the employees , whose services have  becom e 
transferred by or under this A ct to the Central Government or the Government company shall out of the 
monies standing , on the app ointed day , to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund , welfare 
fund or other funds, stand transferred to , and vest in , the Centra l Government or the Government 
company , as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand  transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the 
Government company , as the case may be , shall be dealt with by tha t Government or the Government 
company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER  OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) the Central Government shall , for the 
purpose of dis bursing the amount payable under section s 7 and 8 to Britannia Engineering Company and 
to Arthur Butler and Company , by notification , appoint a Commissioner o f Payments.  
(2) The Ce ntral Government may appoint  such other persons  as it ma y think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authoris e one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under  this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authoris ed by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manne r and with the same effec t as if  they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authori sation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed ou t of the C onsolidated Fund of India.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) the Central Government shall , 
within thirty d ays from the specified date , pay,  in cash , to the Commissioner , for payment to Britannia 
Engineering Company and to Arthur Butler and Company ,— 
(a) an amount equal to that specified agai nst each of their names in the F irst Schedule,  
(b) an amount equal to that payable to Britannia Engineering C ompany and Arthur Butler and 
company under section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central  Government in fav our of the Commissioner in 
the P ublic Account of India , and every  amount paid under this A ct to the Commissioner shall  be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Com missioner.   
9 (3) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of Mokameh unit and the 
undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company in relation to which payment h as been made to him 
under this A ct. 
(4) Interest acquiring on the amoun ts standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in              
sub-section (2) shall enure to the benefit of Britannia Engineering Company and Arthur Butler and 
Company.  
17. Certain power s of the Ce ntral Government or Government c ompany .—(1) The Centra l 
Government or the Government c ompany , as the case may be , shall be entitled to receive , up to the 
specified date , to the exclusion of all other persons , any money due to Britannia Engineering Company in 
relation to  any of  the Mokameh unit , or Arthur Butler and Company in relation to any of the undertakings 
owned by it , which has vested in the Central Go vernment or the Government c ompany , and realised after 
the appointed day , notwithstanding that the reali sation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government c ompany , as the case may be , may  make a claim to 
the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by that Government after the appointed day for 
discharging any liab ility of Britannia Engineerin g Company in relation to the Mokameh unit, or of Arthur 
Butler and Company in relation to any of the undertakings owned by it , in relation to any period prior to 
the appointed day , and every such cla im shall have priority , in accordance with the priorities  attaching 
under this Act, to the matter in relation to which such liability has been discharged by the Central 
Government or the Government company.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act , the liabilities of Britannia Engineering C ompany in 
relation t o the Mokameh unit , or of Arthur Butler and Company in relation to any of the undertakings 
owned by it , in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day , which have not been discharged  on 
or before the specified date , shall be the liabilities of Britannia Engineering C ompany or Arthur Butler 
and Company , as the case may be.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against Britannia 
Engineering Company in relation to the Mokameh unit , or ag ainst Arthur Butler and Company in relation 
to the undertakings owned by it , shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thir ty days from 
the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by suffi cient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days , he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days , but not thereafter.  
19. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Second Schedule shall 
have priorities in accordance with the following principles , namely:— 
(a) category I shall have precedence over all categories and category II shall have precedence over 
category III and so on;  
(b) the claim s specified in each of the categor ies, except category IV, shall rank equally and be paid 
in full , but if  the amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full , they shall abate in equal proportion 
and be paid accordingly;  
(c) the liabilities specified in category IV shall be discharged subject to the priorities specified in this 
section in accordance with the terms of the secured loan and the priority inter se , of such loans; and  
(d) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a low er category shall 
arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher category.  
20. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18 , the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in th e order or priorities specified in the Second Schedule and examine the same 
in accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2) If on an examination of the claim , the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category , he shall not be 
required to examine the claim in respect of such lower category.   
10 21. Admission  or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Seco nd S chedule , the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim failing which he will be excluded from the benefit of the 
disbursement made by the Commissioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of t he date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of the daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the country 
and one issue of such daily newspaper in the regional language as the Commissioner may consider  
suitable , and every such notice shall call upon the  claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the  period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the period specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded  from the disbursement made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall , after such investigation as may , in his opinion , be necessa ry and after 
giving Britannia Engineering Company or , as the case may be , Arthur Butler and Company , an 
opportunity  of refuting the claim and  after giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity of being heard , in 
writing , admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions , including the place or places at which he may hold his sitting and shall , for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit , respect o f the following 
matters , namely:— 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any docume nt or other material object pro ducible evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examina tion of witnesses . 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section s 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for t he purposes of section 195 and C hapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure , 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(7) A cla imant who is dissatisfied with t he decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the princip al court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the Mokameh unit or , as the ca se may be , the registered office of Arthur  Butler and Company 
is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner , 
such app eal shall lie to the High Court of the State in which the registered office of Britannia Engineering 
Company or , as the case may be , Arthur Butler and Company is situated , and such appeal shall be heard 
and disposed of by not less than t wo Judges of that H igh Court.  
22. Disbursement of money by Commissioner .—After admitting the claim under this Act , the 
amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons to whom 
such sums are due and on such paym ent the liability o f Britannia E ngineering Company in relation to the 
Mokameh unit , or of Arthur Butler and Company in respect of any claim relating to the undertakings 
owned by it shall stand discharged.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to Britannia Engineering Company and Arthur Butler and 
Company .—(1) If out of the monies paid to  him in relation to the Mokameh unit or in relation to any 
undertaking owned by Arthur Butler and Company there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as 
specified  in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to Britannia Engineering 
Company , or as the case may be , to Arthur Butler and Company.   
11 (2) Where the possession of any machinery , equipment or other property has vested in the Central 
Government or the Government company under this Act, but such machinery , equipment or other 
property does not belong to Britannia Engineering Company or , as the case may be , Arthur Butler and 
Company , it shall be lawful f or the Central Government to continue to possess such machinery or 
equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which they were possessed by 
Britannia Engineering Company or , as the case may be , Arthur Butler and Company , immediately before 
the appointed day.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed a mount to be deposited with the G eneral Revenue A ccount .—
Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed for a period of three 
years from the last date on which t he disbursement was made , shall be transfer red by the Commissioner 
to the General Revenue A ccount of the Central Government ; but a claim to any money so transferred may 
be preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall  be dealt  with as 
if such transfer had not been made , the order , if any , for payment of the claim being treated as an order 
for the refund of the revenue . 
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect .—The provision of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law , other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court , tribunal or 
other authority.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the 
Government company .—(1) Every contract entered into  by Britannia Engineering C ompany in relation 
to the Mokameh unit , or Arthur Butler and Company in relation to any of the undertakings owned but it , 
which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 , for any service , sale or supply and in force 
immediately before the appointed day , shall , on and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty da ys from 
the date on which this A ct receives the assent of the President , cease to have effect unless such contract is , 
before the expiry of that period , ratified , in writing , by the Central Government , or the Government 
company , and in ratifying such contract , the Centra l Government or the Government c ompany m ay make 
such alternation or modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Centra l Government or the Government c ompany shall not omit to ratify contract 
and shall not make any alternation or modification in a contract unless it is satisfied that such contract is 
unduly onerou s or has been entered into in ba d faith or is detrimental to the interest s of, the Central 
Government or the Government company.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract , and shall 
not make any alternation or modification therein , except after giving the parties to the contract a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard and except after recording  in writing its reasons for r efusal to ratify 
the contract or  for making any alte rnation or modification therein.  
27. Penalties .—Any person who ,— 
(a) having in his possession , custody or control any property forming part of the Mokameh unit , 
or any of the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company , wrongfully withholds such 
property from the Central Government or the Government company ; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of , or retains , any property forming part of , the Mokameh unit , 
or any of the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company ; or 
(c) wil fully withholds o r fails to furnish to the Central Government or the Government c ompany 
or any person or body of persons specified by tha t Government or the Government c ompany , as the 
case may be , any document relating to the Mokameh unit , or any of the undertakings owned by 
Arthur Butler and Company , which may be in his possession , custody or control ; or  
12 (d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Government company or any person or body 
of persons specified by that Government or the Government company , any assets , books of account , 
registers or other documents in his possession , custody or control relating to the Mokameh unit , or 
any of the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company ; or 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroy s any property forming part of the Mokameh  unit, or any of the 
undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and  Company or prefers any claim under this Act which he 
knows or has reason to believe to be false o r grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which m ay extend to two years , or with fine which may  
extend  to ten thousand rupees , or with both.  
28. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who , at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to , the company for the conduct of the business of the company , as well as the company , shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and s hall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment , if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exe rcised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where any offence under this A ct has been 
committed by a company an d it is proved that the offence  has been committed with the con sent or 
connivance of , or is attributable to any neglect on the part of , any director , manager , secretary or other 
officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly . 
Explanation —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit , prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Government company  
or other person authorised by that Government or the Government company for anything which is in good 
faith done or  intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or 
other employees or the Government c ompany or any officer or other person authori sed by that company 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this A ct. 
30. Delegation of Powers .—(1) The Central Government may , by notification , direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act , other than the powers conferred by sections 31 and 32 , may 
also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction , control and supervision of the Central Government.  
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may , by notification, make rules  for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular , and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which , and the manner in which , an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other fund , referred to in                         
sub-section ( 2) of section 14 shall be dealt with;   
13 (c) any other matter which is required to be , or may  be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under  this Act shall be laid , as soon as may  be after it 
is made , before each H ouse of Parliament whi le it is in session for a total  period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one se ssion or in  two or more successive sessions an d if before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be ; so, however , that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to t he validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may , by order , not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of t wo years from the appointed 
day. 
33. Declaration as to the policy of the State .—It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect 
to the policy of the  State towards securing the pr inciples specified in clause ( b) of article 39 of the 
Constitution,  
Explanation —In this section, “ State ” has the same meaning as in article 12 of the Constitution .   
14 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 4,  7, 8 and 16)  
 
 
 
S. No .  
Name of the company  Amount  
(Rupees in lakhs)  
   1 The Britannia Engineering Company  152.85  
2 Arthur Butler and Company  137.70  
 
   
15 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See sections 19,  20, 21 and 23)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES  
Category  I 
(i) Employees ’ dues on account of arrears of tripartite settlement f or the period from the 1st day 
of January , 1957 to the 31st day of May , 1975 . 
(ii) Employees ’ dues on account of unpaid salaries , wages , provide nd fund , Employees ’ State 
Insurance contribution or premium relating to Life Insurance Corporation of India.  
Category  II 
Secured loans from nationali sed banks and secured loans from Industrial Reconstruction Corporation 
of India for t he post -take-over management pe riod. 
Catego ry  III 
Central Government loans for the post -take-over management period . 
Category  IV 
Secured loans from nationalis ed banks and secured loans from financial institutions for the                 
pre-take-over management period . 
Category  V 
Revenue , taxes , ceases , rates or other due s to Central Government, State Government and local 
authorities or State Electricity Board for the pre -take-over management period.  
Category  VI 
Trade and other creditors for the pre -take-over management period.  
 
--------------------------The Coast Guard Act, 1978--------------------------
1 THE COAST GUARD ACT, 1978  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Persons subject to this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE COAST GUARD AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE                    
COAST  GUARD  
4. Constitution of the Coast Guard.  
5. Control , direction, etc.  
6. Enrolment.  
7. Liability for service outside India.  
8. Oath of allegiance.  
9. Resignation and withdrawal from the post.  
10. Tenure of service under the Act.  
11. Dismissal or removal by Central Government and by other officers.  
12. Certificate of termination of service.  
13. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc.  
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COAST  GUARD  
14. Duties and functions of Coast Guard.  
CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCES  
15. Correspondence, etc., with offenders.  
16. Deserting post and neglect of duty.  
17. Mutiny.  
18. Persons on board ship or aircraft seducing Coast Guard pe rsonnel from allegiance.  
19. Striking or threatening superior officers.  
20. Disobedience to superior officer.  
21. Ill -treating subordinate s. 
22. Quarrelling , fighting and disorderly behaviour.  
23. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct.  
24. Drunkenness.  
25. Desertion and aiding desertion.  
26. Breaking out of ship and absence without leave.  
27. Losing ship or aircraft.  
28. Dangerous unauthorised flying.  
29. Inaccurate certificate.  
30. Low flying and annoyance by flying.  
31. Disobedi ence of lawful command of captain of an aircraft.  2 SECTIONS  
 
32. False accusations.  
33. Falsifying official documents and false declarations.  
34. Offences in respect of property.  
35. Damage to property.  
36. Taking unauthorised goods on board.  
37. Offences in respect of papers relati ng to vessel, craft or aircraft taken into custody.  
38. Offences in respect of vessel, craft or aircraft taken into custody.  
39. Unlawful taking of ransom.  
40. Offences relating to Coast Guard Courts.  
41. Escape from custody.  
42. Violation of the Act, rule s and orders.  
43. False answers on enrolment.  
44. Offences against good order and discipline.  
45. Attempt.  
46. Abetment of offences that have been committed.  
47. Abetment of offence punishable with death and not committed.  
48. Abetment of offences punishab le with imprisonment and not committed.  
49. Civil offences.  
50. Civil offences not triable by a Coast Guard Court.  
51. Period of limitation for trial of offences under the Act.  
52. Trial, etc., of a person who ceases to be subject to the Act.  
CHAPTER V  
PUNISHMENTS  
53. Punishments awardable by Coast Guard Courts.  
54. Alternative punishments awardable by Coast Guard Courts.  
55. Combination of punishments.  
56. Punishments otherwise than by Coast Guard Courts.  
57. Minor punishments.  
57A. Punishment for office rs below the rank of Commandant.  
58. Provisions as to award of punishments.  
CHAPTER VI  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
59. Custody of offenders.  
60. Duty of Commanding Officer in regard to detention.  
61. Arrest by civil authorities.  
62. Capture of dese rters.  
63. Coast Guard police officers.  
CHAPTER VI I 
COAST GUARD  COURTS  
64. Power to convene a Coast Guard Court.  
65. Composition of Coast Guard Courts.  
66. Dissolution of a Coast Guard Court.  
67. Powers of a Coast Guard Court.  
68. Prohibition of second trial. 
69. Application of Act during term of sentence.  3 SECTIONS  
 
70. Place of trial.  
71. Choice between criminal court and Coast Guard Court.  
72. Power of criminal court to require delivery of an offender.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PROCEDURE OF COAST  GUARD  COURTS  
73. Law Officer.  
74. Challenges.  
75. Oaths of member, Law Officer and witness.  
76. Voting by members.  
77. General rule as to evidence.  
78. Judicial notice.  
79. Summoning of witnesses.  
80. Documents exempted from production.  
81. Commissions for examination of w itnesses.  
82. Examination of a witness on commission.  
83. Alternative findings.  
84. Presumption as to signatures.  
85. Enrolment paper.  
86. Presumption as to certain documents.  
87. Evidence of previous convictions and general character.  
88. Lunacy of accused.  
89. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial.  
90. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 89.  
91. Release of lunatic accused.  
92. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives.  
93. Order for custody and disposal of property pe nding trial.  
94. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence  is committed.  
95. Powers of Coast Guard Court in relation to proceedings under this Act.  
CHAPTER IX  
EXECUTION AND SUSPENSION OF SENTENCES  
96. Form of sentence of death.  
97. Interim cus tody until execution of sentence of death.  
98. Execution of sentence of death.  
99. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment or detention . 
100. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.  
101. Temporary custody of offender . 
102. Conveyance of prisoner from place  to place.  
103. Communication of certain orders to prison officers.  
104. Execution of Sentence of fine.  
105. Informality or error in the order or warrant.  
106. Imprisonment or detention of offender already under sentence.  
107. Su spension of sentence of imprison ment or detention.  
108. Release on suspension.  
109. Computation of period of suspension.  
110. Order after suspension.  4 SECTIONS  
 
111. Reconsideration of case after suspension.  
112. Fresh sentence after suspension.  
113. Scope of power of suspension.  
114. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal.  
CHAPTER X  
CHIEF LAW OFFICER  AND LAW OFFICERS  
 
115. Appointment of Chief Law Officer and Law Officers.  
116. Functions of Chief Law Officer.  
CHAPTER XI  
JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PROCEEDINGS OF COAST GUARD  COURTS  
 
117. Judicial review by the Chief Law Officer.  
118. Consideration by the Director -General . 
CHAPTER XII  
MODIFICATION OF FINDINGS AND SENTENCES, PARDONS, COMMUTATION AND REMISSION OF SENTENCES  
 
119. Petitions to Central Government or Director -General against findings and sentences.  
120. Powers of Central Government and Director -General in respect of findings and sentences.  
 
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
121. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Coast Guard.  
122. Protection for ac ts of members of the Coast Guard.  
123. Power to make rules.   5 THE COAST GUARD ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1978  
[18th August, 1978.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an Armed Force of the Union for 
ensuring the security of the maritime zones of India with a view to the protection of maritime 
and other national interests in such zones and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Coast Guard Act, 1978.  
(2) It shal l come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chief Law Officer ” and “Law Officer ” mean, respectively, the Chief Law Officer and a Law 
Officer of the Coast Guard appointed under section 115;  
(b) “civil offence ” means an offence which  is triable by a criminal court ; 
(c) “civil prison ” means any  jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prisoner under the 
Prisons Act, 1894 (9 of 1894), or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(d) “Coast Guard ” means the Coast G uard constituted under this Act ; 
(e) “Coast Gua rd Court ” means a court convened under section 64 ; 
(f) “Coast Guard custody ” means the arrest or confinement of a member of the  Coast Guard 
according to rules ; 
(g) “Commanding Officer ”, when used in any provision of this Act with reference to any unit or 
ship of the Coast Guard, means the officer whose duty it is under the rules to discharge with respect 
to that unit or ship, the functions of a Commanding Officer in regard to matters of the descriptio n 
referred to in that provision ; 
(h) “criminal court” means a court of ordinary criminal justice in any part of India ; 
(i) “Deputy Inspector -General ” means a Deputy Inspector -General of the Coast Guard appointed 
under section 5;  
(j) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of the Coast Guard appointed under section 5;  
(k) “enrolled person ” means a subordinate officer, sailor or other person enrolled under this Act ; 
(l) “Inspector -General ” means an Inspector -General of the Coast Guard appointed und er             
section 5;  
(m) “maritime zones of India ” means the territorial waters, the contiguous zone, the continental 
shelf, the exclusive economic zone or any other maritime zone of India;  
(n) “member of the Coast Guard ” means an officer, a subordina te officer, a sailor or other 
enrolled person;  
(o) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(p) “offence ” means any act or omission punishable under this Act and includes a civil offence;  
                                                           
1. 19th August , 1978, vide notification No. S.R.O . 10(E), dated 18th August , 1978, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,           
     Part I I, sec. 4. 6 (q) “officer ” means a person appointed or in pay as an officer of the Coast Guard, but does not 
include a subordinate officer, sailor or other enrolled person;  
(r) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(s) “rule” means a rule made under this Act;  
(t) “sailor ” means a member of the Coast Guard other than an officer, a subordinate officer or 
other enrolled person;  
(u) “ship”, except in the expression “on board a ship ”, means a Coast Guard vessel, and includes 
any establishment or station belonging to , or under the control of, the Coast Guard whether within or 
without India;  
(v) “skipper ” means a subordinate officer in command of a ship;  
(w) “subordinate officer ” means a person appointed or in pay as a Pradhan Adhikari , a Pradhan 
Sahayak  Engineer, an Uttam Adhikari , an Uttam Sahayak  Engineer, an Adhikari  1[, a Sahayak  
Engineer  or a Pradhan Yantrik ] of the Coast Guard;  
(x) “superior officer ”, when used in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any officer or 
subordinate officer — 
(i) who is senior  to that person under the rules ; or 
(ii) who is entitled under this Act or the rules t o give a command to that person ; 
(y) “territorial waters ”, “contiguous zone ”, “continental shelf ” and “exclusive economic zone ”, 
shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, 
Exclusive Economic Zone and other Marit ime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976 ); 
(z) all words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860 ) shall  have the meanings assigned to them in that Code.  
3. Persons subject to this Act. —(1) The following persons shall be subject to this Act, wherever 
they may be, n amely:— 
(a) officers ; 
(b) subordinate officers and other persons enrolled under this Act;  
(c) persons who have, by a general or special order of the Central Government, been required to 
serve in a ship, to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; and  
(d) persons ordered to be received, or being passengers, on board any ship or aircraft of the Coast 
Guard, to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every person referred to in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section  (1) shall remain so subject until he 
retires, or he is discharged, released, removed or d ismissed from the Coast Guard in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE COAST GUARD AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE                    
COAST  GUARD  
4. Constitution of the Coast Guard. —(1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the 
Coast Guard for ensuring the security of the maritime zones of India with a view to the protection of 
maritime and other n ational inter ests in such zones.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Coast Guard shall be constituted in such manner as may 
be prescribed and the conditions of service of the members of the Coast Guard shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2002, s.  2, for “or a Sahayak  Engineer ” (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  7 5. Control , direction, etc. —(1) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Coast 
Guard shall vest in, and be exercised by, the Central Government and subject thereto, and to the 
provisions of this Act and the rules, the command and supervision of the Coast Guard shall vest in an 
officer to be appointed by the Central Governme nt as the Director -General of the Coast Guard.  
(2) The Director -General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted by such 
number of Inspectors -General, Deputy Inspectors -General, Commandant and such other officers as may 
be appointe d by the Central Government.  
6. Enrolment. —(1) The persons to be enrolled to the Coast Guard, the mode of enrolment and the 
procedure for enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the rules, every person who has, for a 
continuous period of three months, been in receipt of pay as a person enrolled under this Act and borne on 
the rolls of the Coast Guard shall be deemed to have been duly enrolled.  
7. Liabi lity for service outside India. —Every member o f the Coast Guard shall be liable to serve in 
any part of India as well as outside India . 
8. Oath of allegiance. —Every member of the Coast Guard shall, as soon as may be, after 
appointment or enrolment to the Coast Guard, make and subscribe before his Comm anding Officer or 
other prescribed officer, an oath or affirmation in the prescribed form.  
9. Resignatio n and withdrawal from the post. —No member of the Coast Guard shall be at  
liberty— 
(a) to resign his appointment du ring the term of his engagement ; or 
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of  the duties of his appointment,  
except with the previous permission in writing of the prescribed authority.  
10. Tenure of service under the Act. —Every member of the Coast Guard shall hold office during 
the pleasure o f the President.  
11. Dismissal or removal by Central Government and by other officers. —Subject to the 
provi sions of this Act and the rules — 
(a) the Central Government may dismiss or remove from service any member of the Coast Guard;  
(b) the Director -Genera l or any Inspector -General may dismiss or remove from the Coast Guard 
any person other than an officer;  
(c) any prescribed officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector -General may dismiss or 
remove from the Coast Guard any person under his command othe r than an officer or a subordinate 
officer.  
12. Certificate of termination of service. —An enrolled person who retires, or is discharged, 
released, removed or dismissed from the Coast Guard or permitted to resign therefrom, shall be furnished 
by the officer , to whose command he is subject, with a certificate in the language which is the mother 
tongue of such person and also in Hindi or  English language setting forth — 
(a) the authority terminating his service;  
(b) the reasons for such termination ; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the Coast Guard.  
13. Restrictions respecting right to form assoc iation, freedom of speech, etc. —(1) No member of 
the Coast Guard shall, without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or  of the               
prescribed authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, or political 
association ; or 8 (b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, institution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of the Coast Guard or is not of a purely social, r ecreational 
or religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document except where such communication or publication is in the bona fide discharge of his duties 
or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character or i s of a prescribed nature.  
Explanation .—If any question arises whether any society, institu tion, association or o rganisation is of 
a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section, the decision of the 
Central Gov ernment  thereon shall be final.  
(2) No member of the Coast Guard shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any 
demonstration organised by any body of persons for any political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be specified in this beh alf by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COAST  GUARD  
14. Dutie s and functions of Coast Guard. —(1) It shall be the duty of the Coast Guard to protect by 
such measures, as it thinks fit, the maritime and other national interests  of India in the maritime zones of 
India.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures refe rred to 
therein may provide for — 
(a) ensuring the safety and protection of artificial islands, offshore terminals, inst allations and 
other structures and devices in any maritime zone;  
(b) providing protection to fishermen including assistance to them at sea while in distress;  
(c) taking such measures as are necessary to preserve and protect the maritime environment and 
to prevent and control marine pollution;  
(d) assisting the customs and other authoritie s in anti -smuggling operations;  
(e) enforcing the provisions of such enactments as are for the time being in force in the maritime 
zones; and  
(f) such other matters, includ ing measures for the safety of life and property at sea and collection 
of scientific data, as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Coast Guard shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with, and subject to 
such rules  as may be prescribed and such rules may, in particular, make provisions for ensuring that the 
Coast Guard functions in close liaison with Union agencies , institutions and authorities so as to avoid 
duplication of effort.  
CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCES  
15. Corres pond ence, etc., with offenders. —Any pe rson subject to this Act, who, — 
(a) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, an offender; or  
(b) wilfully fails to make known to the proper authorities any information he may have received 
from an offender; or  
(c) assists the offender in any manner; or  
(d) having been captured by an offender, voluntarily serves with or aids him,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard  Court, be liable to suffer im prisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven  years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  9 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,  “offender ” includes— 
(a) all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates and any person in arms against 
whom it is the duty of any person subject to this Act to take action ; and  
(b) any person or persons engaged in smuggling, unlawful exploration or exploitation or any 
other unlawful activity in the maritime zones of India.  
16. Dese rting post and neglect of duty. —Any person subject to this Act, who, — 
(a) deserts his post ; or 
(b) sleeps upon his watch; or  
(c) fails to perform, or negligently pe rforms, the duty imposed on him ; or 
(d) wilfully conceals any words, practice or design tending to the hindrance of the Coast Guard,  
shall, on convicti on by a Coast Guard Court,  be liable to suffer im prisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned . 
17. Mutiny.—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the foll owing offences, that is to 
say,— 
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any mutiny in the Coast 
Guard or in the mili tary, naval or air forces of India or any forces co -operating therewith; or  
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or  
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavours to suppress the same; or  
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or of any intention 
to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information thereof to h is 
Commanding Offic er or other superior officer ; or 
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Coast Guard or in the military, naval or air forces of 
India or any forces co -operating therewith from his duty or allegiance to the Union,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this 
Act mentioned:  
Provided that a sentence of death awarded under this section shall not be carried out unless it is 
confirmed by the Central Government.  
18. Persons on bo ard ship or aircraft seducing Coast G uard personnel from allegiance. —Any 
person not otherwise subject to this Act who, being on board any ship or aircraft belonging to or in the 
service of the Coast Guard endeavours to seduce any person subject to this Act  from his allegiance to the 
Constitution or loyalty to the State or duty to his superior officers shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard 
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment as is in this  Act mentioned.  
19. Striking or threatening superior officers.—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the foll owing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) uses criminal force  to or assaults his superior officer ; or 
(b) uses threatening language to such officer; or  
(c) uses insubordinate language to such officer; or  
(d) behaves with contempt to such officer,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard  Court, be liable to suffer im prisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of offences specified in clauses ( c) and ( d), the imprisonment shall not 
exceed five years.  10 20. Di sobedience to superior officer. —(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority any lawful command given personally by his superior 
officer in the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing or by signal or 
otherwise, shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suf fer imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful command given by his superior officer, 
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Cour t, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
21. Ill -treating subordinate s.—Any person subject to this Act who uses criminal force to or 
otherwise ill -treats any other p erson subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or position, shall, on 
conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
22. Quarrell ing, fighting and disorderly behaviour. —Any p erson subject to this Act, who, — 
(a) quarrels, fights with or strikes any other person, whether such person i s or is not subject to 
this Act ; or 
(b) uses reproachful or provoking speeches or gestures tending to make a quarrel or                
disturbance; or  
(c) behaves in a disorderly manner,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
23. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel,  indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) malingers, or feigns, or produces disease or infirmity in himself or intentionally delays his 
cure or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to 
himself or that person,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
24. Drunkenness. —(1) Any person subject to this Act, who is guilty of drunkenness shall, on 
conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to be guilty of drunkenness if, 
owing to the influence of alcohol or any drug whether alone or in combination with any other 
circumstances, he is unfit to be entrusted with his duty or with any duty which he may be called upon to 
perform or behaves in a disorderly manner or in a manner likely to bring discredit to the Coast Guard.  
25. Desertion and aiding desertion. —(1) Any person subject to this Act, who absents himself from 
his ship or from the place where his duty requires him to be, with an intention of not returning to such 
ship or place, or who, at any time and under any circumstances when absent from his ship or place of duty 
does any act which shows that he has an intention of not returning to such s hip or place is said to desert.  11 1[(2) Every person who deserts or attempts to desert the Coa st Guard shall, on conviction by a Co ast 
Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned  and in every such case he shall forfeit, — 
(a) all pay, salvage, prize money and allowances that have been earned by him;  
(b) pension and gratuity, medals and decorations that have been granted to him; and  
(c) all clothes and effects which he may have left on board the ship or the place from which he 
deserted,  
unless the Tribunal by which he is tried or the Central Government or the Director -General otherwise 
directs.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, all pay, salvage, prize money and allowances 
shall be deemed to have been earned by a  person when such pay, salvage, prize money and allowances 
have become due but have not been paid to him. ] 
(3) Any person subject to this Act, who knowingly harbours any such deserter, shall, on conviction by 
a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such 
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
26. Breaking out of ship and absence without leave. —Any person subject to this Act, who without 
being guilty of desertion improperly leaves his shi p or place of duty or is absent without leave shall, on 
conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned, and shall also be punished by such mul cts of 
pay and a llowances as may be prescribed.  
27. Losing ship or aircraft. —(1) Any person subject to this Act who wilfully loses, strands o r 
hazards or suffers to be lost  stranded or hazarded any ship belonging to or in the service of the Coast 
Guard, or  loses or suffers to be lost any aircraft belonging to or in the service of the Coast Guard shall, on 
conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act m entioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act, who negligently or by any default loses, strands or hazards or 
suffers to be lost, stranded or hazarded any ship belonging to or in the service of the Coast Guard, or loses 
or suffers to be lost any aircraft be longing to or in the service of the Coast Guard shall, on conviction by a 
Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such 
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
28. Dangerous unauthorised flying. —Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act or 
neglect in flying or in the use of any aircraft belonging to or in the service of the Coast Guard, or in 
relation to any such aircraft or aircraft material, which causes or is likely to cause loss o f life or bodily 
injury to any person shall, on con viction by a Coast Guard Court, — 
(a) if he acts wilfully or with wilful neglect, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years or such less punishm ent as is in this Act mentio ned; and  
(b) in any other case, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years 
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
29. Inaccurate certificate. —Any person subject to this Act who signs any certificate in relation to an 
aircraft belonging to or in the service of the Coast Guard or to any material thereof without ensuring its 
accuracy shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years or such less pu nishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
30. Low flying and annoyance by flying. —Any person subject to this Act, being the pilot of an 
aircraft belonging to or in the service of the Coast Guard, who — 
(a) flies it at a height lower than the minimum height authorised by his Commanding Officer 
except while taking off or landing; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2002, s. 3, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  12 (b) flies it so as to cause or likely to cause unnec essary annoyance to any person,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court , be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
31. Disobedi ence of lawful command of captain of an aircraft. —Any person subject to this Act, 
who while he is in an aircraft be longing to or in the service of the Coast Guard, disobeys any lawful 
command given by the captain of the aircraft whether such captain is subject to this Act or not, in relation 
to all matters relating to flying or handling of the aircraft or affecting the  safety thereof, shall, on 
conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
32. False accusations. —Any person subject to this Act, who commit s any of the foll owing offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false; or  
(b) in making a complaint against any person subject to this Act make s any statement affecting 
the character of such person, knowing or having reason to believe such statement to be false or 
knowingly or wilfully suppresses any material facts,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for  a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
33. Falsifying official documents and false declarations. —Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the foll owing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other document made or signed by him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly make s, or is privy to the making 
of, any false or fraudulent statement; or  
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause ( a) knowingly makes, or is privy to 
the making of, any omission, with intent to defraud; or  
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, alters or m akes away with any document which it is his duty to preserve or 
produce; or  
(d) where it is his official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter, know ingly makes a 
false declaration; or  
(e) obtains for himself , or for any other person, any pension , allowance or other adv antage or 
privilege by a state ment which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not 
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book or record, or by making any 
document containing a false statement, or by omitting to make a true entry or document containing a 
true statement,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act m entioned.  
34. O ffences in respect of property. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government or to any Coast Guard mess, or 
institution, or to any person subject to this Act ; or 
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts t o his own use any such property ; or 
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of any such property; or  
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in respect of whi ch any of the offences under 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having reason to believe the commission of 
such offence; or  13 (e) wilfully destroys or damages any property of the Government entrusted to him; or  
(f) does any other thing w ith intent to defraud or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard  Court, be liable to suffer im prisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in t his A ct mentioned.  
35. Damage to property. —Any person subject to this Act, who commits any act which causes 
damage to, or destruction of, any property of the Government shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard 
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
36. Taking unauthorised goods on board. —Every officer or subordinate officer in command of any 
ship belonging to or in the service of the Coast Guard who receives on board  or permits to be received on 
board such ship, any goods or merchandise whatsoever other than for the sole use of the ship or persons 
belonging to the ship, except goods and merchandise on bo ard any ship which may be ship -wrecked or in 
imminent danger eith er on the high seas or in some port, creek or harbour for the purpose of preserving 
them for their proper owners, or except such goods or merchandise as he may, at any time be ordered to 
take or receive on board by order of the Central Government or his su perior officer, shall, on conviction 
by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer dismissal from the Coast Guard or such less punishment as  is 
in this Act mentioned.  
37. Offences in respect of papers relating to vessel, craft or aircraft taken into c ustody.—(1) All 
the papers, charter parties, bills of lading, passports and other documents that shall be taken, seized or 
found on board any vessel, craft or aircraft taken into custody by the Coast Guard shall be duly preserved 
and the Commanding Officer or ski pper shall send the same to his immediate superior.  
(2) Every Commanding Officer or skipper who fails to send the documents as required under                  
sub-section ( 1) shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer dismissal from t he Coast 
Guard or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
38. Offences in respect of vessel, craft or aircraft taken into custody. —Any person subject to this 
Act who commits any of the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) takes out without proper authority from any vessel, craft or aircraft taken into custody, any 
money or goods; or  
(b) pillages, beats or ill -treats persons on board the  said vessel, craft or aircraft ; or 
(c) breaks bulk on board any such vessel, craft or aircraft with intent  dishonestly to 
misappropriate anything therein or belonging thereto , 
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
39. Unlawful t aking of ransom. —Every Commanding Of ficer or skipper of a ship who, — 
(a) unlawfully agrees with any person for the ransoming of any vessel, craft, aircraft, goods or 
things taken into custody by the Coast Guard; or  
(b) in pursuance of any unlawful agreemen t for ransoming or otherwise by collusion actually 
quits or restores any vessel, craft, aircraft, goods or things taken into custody by the Coast Guard,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
40. Offences relating to Coast Guard Courts. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a w itness before a Coast Guard Court, wilfully 
or without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or  14 (b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a Coast Guard Court to be 
taken or made; or  
(c) refuses to produce or deliver an y document in his power or control legally required by a Coast 
Guard Court to be produced or delivered by him; or  
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question which he is by law bound to answer; or  
(e) is guilty of contempt of a Coast Guard Court by  using insulting or threatening language, or by 
causing any interruption or disturbance in  the proceedings of such Court,  
shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
41. Escape from custody. —Any person subject to this Act who, being in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
42. Violatio n of the Act, rules and orders. —Any person subject to this Act who neglects to obey, or 
contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule or any order issued by any law ful authority under this 
Act, shall, if no other punishment is provided in this Act for such neglect or contravention, on conviction 
by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or 
such less punishment a s is in this Act mentioned.  
43. False answers on enrolment. —Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered 
to have made at the time of enrolment, a wilfully false answer to any question set forth in the prescribed 
form of enrolment which ha s been put to him by the enrolling officer before whom he appears for the 
purpose of being enrolled, shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in th is Act mentioned.  
44. Offences against good order and discipline. —Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of 
any act or omission or disorder or neglect, which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good 
order and discipline of the Coast Guard shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court,  be liable to suffer  
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
45. Attempt. —Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences specified 
in sections 15 to 44 (both inclusive) and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the 
offence shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, where no express provision is made by this Act for 
the punishment of such attem pt, be l iable,— 
(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if the offence attempted to be committe d is punishable with imprisonment, to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence 
or such less punishm ent as is in this Act mentioned . 
46. Abetment of offences that have been committed. —Any person subject to this Act who abets 
the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 15 to 44 (both inclusive), shall, on conviction 
by a Coast Guard Court, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express 
provision  is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment 
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
47. Abetment of offence punishable with death and not committed. —Any person subject to  this 
Act, who abets the commission of an offence punishable with death under section 17 shall, on conviction 
by a Coast Guard Court, if that offence be not committed in consequence of that abetment, be liable to 
suffer imprisonment for a term which may ex tend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this 
Act mentioned.  15 48. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed. —Any person 
subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 15 to 44 (both 
inclusive) and punishable with imprisonment shall, on conviction by a Coast Guard Court, if that offence 
be not commit ted in consequence of the abet ment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be liable t o suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half 
of the longest term provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
49. Civil offences. —Subject to the provisions of section 50, any person subject to this Act who  at any 
place in, or beyond, India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against 
this Act and, if charged therewith under this sect ion shall be liable to be tried  by a Coast Guard Court, 
and, on conviction, be punishable as f ollows, that is to say, — 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India with death, he 
shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law or such less 
punishment as is in this Act m entioned; and  
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence by the 
law in force in India, or im prisonment for a term which may  extend to seven years, or such less 
punishment a s is in this Act mentioned.  
50. Ci vil offences not triable by a Coast Guard Court. —A person subject to this Act who commits 
an offence of murder or of culpable homicide not amounting to murder against, or of rape in relation to, a 
person not subject to this Act shall not be deemed to be gu ilty of an offence against this Act and shall not 
be tried by a Coast Guard Court, unless he co mmits any of the said offences, — 
(a) at any place outside India; or 
(b) at any place specified by the Central Government by notification in this behalf.  
51. Period of limitation for trial of offences under the Act. —(1) No person unless he is an offender 
who has avoided apprehension or escaped arrest or committed the offence of desertion or of giving false 
entry on enrolment or the offence of mutiny shall be tr ied or punished in pursuance of this Act for any 
offence committed by him unless such trial commences  1[within a period of three years from the 
commission of such offence and such period shall commence, — 
(a) on the date of the offence; or  
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the offence or 
to the authority competent to initiate action, the first day on which such offence comes to the 
knowledge of such person or authority; or  
(c) where it is not known by whom th e offence was committed, on the first day on which the 
identity of the offender becomes known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the authority 
competent to initiate action,  
whichever is earlier.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, in the computation of the period of time 
mentioned in this sub -section, any time spent by such person, as a prisoner of war in the enemy territory, 
or in evading arrest, after the commission of  the offenc e, shall be excluded ]. 
2[(1A) Where a proceeding in respect of an offence has been stayed by an injunction or an order of a 
court, then, in computing the period of limitation under this section, the period of the continuance of the 
injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn shall 
be excluded.]  
(2) No trial for an offence of desertion or of giving false entry on enrolment shall be commenced if 
the person in question, not being an officer, has subsequent to the commission of the offence served 
continuousl y in an exemplary manner for not less than three years in the Coast Guard.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2002, s. 4, for “within three years from the commission of such offence” (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  16 52. Trial, etc., of a person who ceases to be subject to the Act. —(1) Where an offence under this 
Act had been committed by any person while subject to this Act, and such person has  since the 
commission of the offence ceased to be subject to this Act, he may be taken into and kept in the Coast 
Guard custody, and tried and punished for such offence as if he had continued to be so subject.  
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offen ce, unless his trial commences 1[within a period of two 
years after he has ceased to be subject to this Act; and in computing such period, the time during which 
such person has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself or where a proceeding in respect of 
an offence has been stayed by an injunction or order, the period of the continuance of the injunction or 
order, the day on which it was issued or made and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded] : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to the trial of any such person for an 
offence of mutiny or desertion.  
CHAPTER V  
PUNISHMENTS  
53. Punishments awardable by Coast Guard Courts. —(1) Punishments may be inflicted in respect 
of offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by Coast Guard Courts according to 
the scale following, that is to say, — 
(a) death;  
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term o f life or any other lesser term ; 
(c) dismissal  from the Coast Guard;  
(d) detention in Coast Guard custody for a  period not exceeding two years ; 
(e) reduction to the ranks or to a lo wer rank in the case of sailors ; 
(f) forfeiture of seniority of rank, forfeiture of all or any part of the servi ce for the purpose of 
promotion ; 
(g) forfeiture of service fo r the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose;  
(h) fine, in respect of civil offences ; 
(i) mulcts of pay and allowances;  
(j) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons below the rank of an Uttam Navik  
or Uttam Yan trik. 
(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to 
every punishment preceding it in the above scale.  
54. Alternative punishments a wardable by Coast Guard Courts. —Subject to the provisions of 
this Act,  a Coast Guard Court may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences 
specified in sections 15 to 48 (both inclusive) award either the particular punishment with which the 
offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable, or in  lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower 
in the scale set out in section 53 regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.  
55. Combination of punishments. —Subject to the provisions of section 58, a sentence of a Coast 
Guard Court may awar d in addition to, or without any one other punishment, the punishment specified                       
in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 53 and any one or more of the punishments specified in               
clauses ( e) to ( j) (both inclusive) of th at sub -section.  
56. Punishments otherw ise than by Coast Guard Courts. —Punishments may also be inflicted in 
respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of a Coast Guard 
Court in the manner stated in section 57  2[or section 57A] . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of  2002, s. 5, for “within six months after he has ceased to be subject of this Act” (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  
2. Ins. by  s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  17 57. Minor punishments. —Subject to the provisions of section 58, a Commanding Officer or such 
other officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director -General may, in 
the prescribed manner, proceed against a p erson subject to this Act, otherwise than as an officer, who is 
charged with an offence under this Act and award such person, to the extent prescribed, one or more of 
the following punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months;  
(b) dismissal from the Coast Guard;  
(c) detention in Coast Guard custody for a period not exceeding three months;  
(d) reduction to the ranks or to a lo wer rank in the case of sailors ; 
(e) fine, in respect of civil offences;  
(f) mulcts of pay and allowances ; 
(g) deprivation of good conduct bad ges; 
(h) reprimand;  
(i) extra work and drill for a period not exceeding fourteen days in the case of persons below the 
rank of an Uttam Navik  or Uttam Yantrik;  
(j) stoppage of leave for a period not exceeding sixty days ; 
(k) admonition:  
Provided that no punishment  specified in clauses ( a) to ( d) (both  inclusive) shall be inflicted, — 
(a) in the case of a subordinate officer, unless it is approved by an officer not below th e rank of 
an Inspector -General ; and  
(b) in the case of others, unless it is approved by an officer not below the rank of a Deputy 
Inspector -General.  
1[57A. Punishment for officers below the rank of Commandant. —The Director -General or an 
officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector -General who is appointed as Commander of a region or 
such other officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director -General, 
may in the prescribed manner proceed against an officer below the rank of Commandant, wh o is charged 
with an offence under this Act and award such person one or more of the following punishments, that is 
to say,— 
(a) forfeiture of seniority of rank or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon 
length of service, forfeiture of ser vice for the purpose of promotion, for a period not exceeding twelve 
months, but subject to the right of the accused, previous to the award, to elect to be tried by a Coast 
Guard Court;  
(b) forfeiture of seniority of rank, or in the case of any of them who se promotion depends upon 
length of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding six 
months, but subject to the right of the accused, previous to the award, to elect to be tried by a Coast 
Guard Court;  
(c) mulcts o f pay and allowances;  
(d) severe reprimand:  
Provided that no punishment specified in clause ( a) shall be inflicted by an officer other that the 
Director -General:  
Provided further that no punishment specified in clause ( b) shall be inflicted by an officer below the 
rank of Deputy Inspector -General who is appointed as the Commander of a region.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2002, s. 7 (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  18 58. Provisions as to award of punishments. —(1) The punishments that may be inflicted under this 
Act shall be awarded in accordance with the provisions of this sectio n. 
(2) A sentence of imprisonment under this Act shall in all cases be accompanied by a sentence of 
dismissal.  
(3) A sentence of imprisonment may be rigorous or simple or partly rigorous and partly simple.  
(4) No officer shall be subject to detention for a ny offence under this Act.  
(5) No subordinate officer shall be sentenced to detention except for desertion.  
(6) A sentence of detention shall not be accompanied by a sentence of dismissal from the Coast 
Guard.  
(7) A sentence of detention for a period exceeding fourteen days shall in all cases be accompanied by 
stoppage of pay and allowances during the period of detention.  
1[(8) Where mulcts of pay and allowances are awarded for absence without leave, the absence shall be 
treated as regulari sed for all purposes.]  
CHAPTER VI  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
59. Custody of offenders. —(1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may 
be taken into Coast Guard custody, under the  order of any superior officer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), an officer may order into Coast Guard 
custody any other officer engaged in a quarrel, affray or disorder, though such other officer may be of a 
higher rank.  
60. Duty of Commanding Officer in regard to detention. —(1) It shall be the duty of every 
Commanding Officer to take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not 
detained in custody for more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is 
reported to him, without  the charge being investigated, unless investigation within that period seems to 
him to be impracticable havin g regard to the public service.  
(2) The case of every person being detained in custody beyond a period of forty -eight hours, and the 
reasons there for, shall be reported by the Commanding Officer to the Deputy Inspector -General under 
whom he is serving or such other officer to whom an application may be made to convene a Coast Guard 
Court for t he trial of the person charged.  
(3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub -section ( 1), Sundays and other pub lic 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules providing for the 
manner in which and the period for which any p erson subject to this Act may be taken into and detained 
in Coast Guard custody, pending the trial by any competent authority fo r any offence committed by him.  
61. Arrest by  civil authorities. —Whenever any person subject to this Act, who is accused of an 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisdiction of any Magistrate or police officer, such Magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Coast Guard custody of such person upon 
receipt of a written application to that effect s igned by his Commanding Officer or an officer authorised 
by the Commanding Officer in that behalf.  
62. Capture of deserters. —(1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the Commanding 
Officer of the unit or ship to which he belong s, shall give inf ormation of the desertion to such civil 
authorities as, in his opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards the capture of the deserter; and 
such authorities shall thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in like manner as if he 
was a person for whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a Magistrate, and shall deliver the 
deserter, when apprehended, into Coast Guard custody.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2002 , s. 8 (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  19 (2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be subject to thi s 
Act, and to be a deserter or to be travelling without authority, and shall bring him without delay before the 
nearest Magistrate, to be dealt with according to law.  
63. Coast Guard police officers. —(1) The Director -General or any prescribed officer may a ppoint 
persons for discharging the functions specifi ed in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3). 
(2) The duties of a person appointed under sub -section ( 1), are to take charge of persons confined for 
any offence, to preserve good order and discipline and to prevent breaches of the same by persons serving 
in, or attached to, the Coast Guard.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 59, a person appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, 
at any time, arrest and detain for trial any person subject to this Act who com mits, or is charged with, an 
offence, and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in pursuance of a sentence awarded 
by a Coast Guard Court or by an officer exercising authority under section 57 but shall not inflict any 
punishment on his  own authority:  
Provided that no officer shall be  so arrested or detained other wise than on t he order of another officer.  
CHAPTER VI I 
COAST  GUARD  COURTS  
64. Power to convene a Coast Guard Court. —(1) A Coast Guard Court may be convened by the 
Cent ral Government or the Director -General or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the 
Director -General (hereafter in this Act referred to as the convening authority).  
(2) A warrant issued under sub -section ( 1) may contain such restrictions, reser vations or conditions as 
the Director -General may think fit.  
65. Composition of Coast Guard Courts. —(1) A Coast Guard Court shall consist of not less than 
five officers each of whom has held the post of Assistant Commandant for not less than three years.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section “Assistant Commandant ” includes any post of a 
higher rank and any post declared by the Central Government by notification to be an equivalent post as 
also any post higher in rank than the post so declared.  
(2) At every Coast Guard Court, the senior member shall be the presiding officer.  
(3) A Coast Guard Court shall not be duly constituted unless the members thereof are drawn from at 
least tw o ships.  
(4) No Coast Guard Court for the trial of an officer shall be duly constituted unless the presiding 
officer and at least two members of the court are of the same rank as the accused or of a higher rank.  
66. Diss olution of a Coast Guard Court. —(1) If a Coast Guard Court after the commencement of a 
trial is reduced below the minimum number of officers required by t his Act, it shall be dissolved.  
(2) If, on account of the illness of the Law Officer or of the accused before the finding, it is 
impossible to continue the trial, a Coast Guard Court shall be dissolved.  
(3) The convening authority of a Coast Guard Court may dissolve the same if it considers that the 
exigencies of the service or necessities of discipline render it impossible or inexpedient to  continue the 
said Coast Guard Court.  
(4) Where a Coast Guard Court is dissolved under this section, the accused may be tried again.  
67. Powers of a Coast Guard Court. —Every Coast Guard Court shall have the power to try any 
person subject to this Act for any offence punishable thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised  
thereby.  
68. Prohibition of second trial. —(1) When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a Coast Guard Court or by a criminal court or has been dealt with under 
section 57, he shall not be liable to be tried again  for the same offence by a Coast Guard Court or dea lt 
with under the said section.  20 (2) When any person, subject to this Act, has been acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Coast 
Guard Court or has been dealt with under section 57, he shall not be liabl e to be tried again by a criminal 
court for the same offence or on the same facts.  
69. Application of Act during term of sentence. —(1) When a person subject to this Act is 
sentenced by a Coast Guard Court to imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during  the term of his 
sentence, though he is dismissed from the Coast Guard, or has otherwise ceased to be subject to this Act, 
and he may be kept, removed, imprisoned and punished as if he conti nued to be subject to this Act.  
(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a Coast Guard Court to death, this Act shall 
apply to him till the sentence is carried out.  
70. Place of trial. —A Coast Guard Court may be held on shore or afloat.  
71. Choice between crimin al court and Coast Guard Court. —When a criminal court and a             
Coast Guard Court have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the 
Director -General or the Inspector -General or the Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the 
accused perso n is serving or such other officer as may be prescribed, to decide before which court the 
proceedings shall be instituted, and, if that officer decides that they shall be instituted before a Coast 
Guard Court, to direct that the accused person shall be det ained in Coast Guard custody.  
72. Power of criminal court to require delivery of an offender. —(1) When a criminal court having 
jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 
offence, it may, by writt en notice, require the officer referred to in section 71 at his option either to 
deliver over the offender to the nearest Magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to 
postpone proceedings, pending a reference to the Central Govern ment.  
(2) In every such case, the said officer shall either deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted, for the determination of the Central Gove rnment whose order upon such reference shall be 
final.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PROCEDURE OF COAST  GUARD  COURTS  
73. Law Officer. —Every Coast Guard Court shall be attended by a Law Officer, or if no such officer 
is available, an officer approved by the Chief Law Officer or a Law Officer.  
74. Challenges. —(1) At all trials by a Coast Guard Court, as soon as the court is assembled, the 
names of the presiding officer and members shall be read over to the accused, who shall thereupon be 
asked whether he objects to bein g tried by any officer sitting on the court.  
(2) If the accused objects to such officer, his objection and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the court shall, in the absence of the 
challenged of ficer, decide on the objection.  
(3) If the objection is allowed by one -half or more of the votes of the members entitled to vote, the 
objection shall be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be filled in the 
prescribed manner, by another officer subject to the same right of the accused to object.  
(4) Where no challenge is made , or when a challenge has been made and disallowed, or the place of 
every officer su ccessfully chal lenged has been filled by another office r to whom no objection is made or 
allowed, the court shall proceed with the trial.  
75. Oaths of member, Law Officer and witness. —(1) An oath or affirmation in the prescribed 
manner shall be administered to every member of a Coast Guard Court and to the Law  Officer or , as the 
case may be, the officer approved under section 73, before the commencement of the trial.  
(2) 1[Every person] giving evidence before a Coast Guard Court shall be examined after being duly 
sworn or affirmed in the prescribed form.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1988, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Every officer” (w.e.f. 31-3-1988).  21 (3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under twelve years 
of age and the Coast Guard Court is of opinion that though the witness understands the duty of speaking 
the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oat h or affirmation.  
76. Voting by members. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub - sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision 
of a Coast Guard Court shall be passed b y an absolute majority of votes ; and where there is an equality of 
votes on either the finding or th e sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the accused.  
(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a Coast Guard Court without the concurrence of at least 
two-thirds of the members of the court.  
(3) In matters, other than a challenge or the finding or  sentence, the presiding officer shall have a 
casting vote.  
77. General rule as to evidence. —The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a Coast Guard Court.  
78. Judicial notice. —A Coast Guard Court may take judicial notice of any matter within the general 
knowledge of the members as officers of the Coast Guard.  
79. Summoning of witnesses. —(1) The convening authority, the presiding officer of a Coast Guard 
Court, the Law Officer or, as the case may be, the officer approved under section 73 or the Commanding 
Officer of the accused person may, by summons under his hand, require the attendance, at a time and 
place to be mentioned in the summons, of any person either to give evidence or to produ ce any document 
or other thing.  
(2) In the case of a witness who i s subject to this Act, the sum mons shall be sent to his Commanding 
Officer and such officer shall  serve it upon him accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the Magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction he may be, or resides, and such Magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if the witness 
were required in the court of such a Magistrate.  
(4) When a witness is required to produce any particula r document or other thing in his possession or 
power, the summons shall describe it with reasonable  precision . 
80. Documents exempted from production. —(1) Nothing in section 79 shall be deemed to affect 
the operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian E vidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or to apply to any 
letter, post card, telegram or other document in the custody of the postal or telegraph authorities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any Chief Judicial Magistrate, Chief 
Metropolit an Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court, wanted for the purpose of any Coast Guard 
Court, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to 
deliver such document to such person as such Magistrate or Cour t may direct.  
(3) If any such document is, in  the opinion of any other Magis trate or of any Commissioner of Police 
or District Superintendent of Police wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be made for, and to detain such document pending 
the orders of any such Chief Judicial Magistrate, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Court of Session or High 
Court.  
81. Commissions for examination of witnesses. —(1) Whenever, in the course  of a trial by a Coast 
Guard Court, it appears to the court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice, 
and that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or 
inconvenience which, in th e circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such court may address 
the Chief Law Officer in order that a commission to take the evidence of such witness may be issued.  
(2) The Chief Law Officer may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a commission t o any Metropolitan 
Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such 
witness resides, to tak e the evidence of such witness.  22 (3) The Magistrate to whom the commission is issued, or, if he is the Chief M etropolitan Magistrate 
or Chief Judicial Magistrate, he or such Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class as 
he appoints in this behalf shall proceed to the place where the witness is, or shall summon the witness 
before him and shal l take down his evidence in the same manner, and may, for this purpose, exercise the 
same powers, as in the trials of warrant -cases under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(4) When the witness resides in any place outside India, the commiss ion may be issued in the           
form and manner specified in sub section ( 3) of section 285 of the Code of Criminal P rocedure,                 
1973 (2 of 1974).  
82. Examinat ion of a witness on commission. —(1) The prosecutor and the accused person in any 
case in which a commission is issued under section 81 may respectively forward any interrogatories in 
writing which the court may think relevant to the issue, and the Magistrate executing the commission 
shall examine the witness upon such interrogatories.  
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such Magistrate by counsel, or except 
in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross -examine and re -examine, 
as the case may be, the said witness.  
(3) After a commi ssion issued under section 81 has been duly executed, it shall be returned together 
with the deposition of the witness examined there under to the Chief Law Officer.  
(4) On receipt of a commission, and deposition returned under sub -section ( 3), the Chief La w Officer 
shall forward the same to the Coast Guard Court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if such 
court has been dissolved, to any other court convened for the trial of the accused person ; and the 
commission, the return thereto and the depo sition shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the 
accused person, and may,  subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the 
prosecutor or the accused, and shall form part o f the proceedings of the court.  
(5) In every  case in which a commission is issued under section 81, the trial may be adjourned for a 
specified time reasonably  sufficient for the execution and return of the commission.  
83. Alternative findings. —If an accused is charged before a Coast Guard Court with  one offence and 
it appears in evidence that he committed a different offence, he may be convicted of the offence which he 
is shown to have committed although he was not charged with it.  
84. Presumption as to signatures. —In any proceeding under this Act, a ny application, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to have been duly signed by the person by whom and in the character in 
which it purports to have been signed, until the contrary is shown.  
85. Enrolment paper. —(1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an enrolling officer 
shall, in proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person enrolled having given the answers to 
questions wh ich he is therein represented as having given.  
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of his 
enrolment paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer having the custody of the 
enrolment  paper.  
86. Presumption as to certain documents. —(1) A letter, return or other document respecting the 
service of any person in, or the dismissal or discharge of any person from, any unit or ship of the Coast 
Guard, or respecting the circumstances of any p erson not having served in, or belonged to, any unit or 
ship, if purporting to be signed by or on behalf of the Cent ral Government or the Director -General, or by 
any prescribed officer, shall be evidence of the facts stated in such le tter, return or other document.  
(2) A Coast Guard List or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be evidence of the 
status and rank of the officers therein mentioned, and of any appointment held by them and of the unit or 
ship of the Coast Guard to which they bel ong. 
(3) Where a record is made in the books of a ship in pursuance of this Act or any rule or otherwise in 
the discharge of official duties, and purports to be signed by the Commanding Officer or by the officer 
whose duty it is to make such record, such r ecord shall be evidence of the facts therein stated.  23 (4) A copy of any record in the books of a ship purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the 
officer having custody of such books shall be evidence of such record.  
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of any officer or other person subject to 
this Act or any unit or ship of the Coast Guard, or has been apprehended by suc h officer or person, a 
certificate purporting to be signed by such officer, or by the Commanding Officer of the unit or ship to 
which such person belongs, as the case may be, and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or 
apprehension, and the m anner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of improperly 
leaving a ship or of absence without leave and such person has surrendered himself i nto the custody of, or 
has been apprehended by, a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, a 
certificate purporting to be signed by such police off icer and stating the fact, date and place of such 
surrender or apprehension and the manner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the matters so 
stated.  
(7) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of a Chemical Examiner or Assistant 
Chemical Examiner to Government  1[or any of the Government scienti fic experts, namely, the Chief 
Inspector of the Explosives, the Director of the Fingerprint Bureau, the Director, Haffkeine Institute, 
Mumbai, the Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a State Forensic Science Laboratory 
and the Serologist t o the Government]  upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or 
analysis and report, may be used as evidence in any proceeding under this Act.  
Explanation .—In this section, the term “books of a ship ” shall include any official book, doc ument or 
list purporting to contain the name or names of persons appointed to the ship.  
87. Evidence of previous con victions and general character. —(1) When any person subject to this 
Act has been convicted by a Coast Guard Court of any offence, such court  may inquire into, and receive, 
and record evidence of any previous convictions of such person, either by a Coast Guard Court or by a 
criminal court, or any previous award of punishment under section 57  2[or section 57A] , and may further 
inquire into and r ecord the general character of such person and such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or certified 
extracts from, books of Coast Guard Courts o r other official re cords ; and it shall not be necessary to give 
notice before trial to the person tried, that evidence as to his previous convictions or character will be 
received.  
88. Lunacy of accused. —(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Coast Guard Court, it appea rs to 
the court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his defence, or 
that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of knowing the 
nature of the act or knowing that it was wro ng or contrary to law, the court shall record a finding 
accordingly.  
(2) The presiding officer of the Coast Guard Court shall forthwith report the case to the convening 
authority.  
(3) The convening authority to whom the finding of a Coast Guard Court is re ported under                 
sub-section ( 2) shall order the accused person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall 
report the case for the orders of the Central Government.  
(4) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 3), the Central Government may order the accused 
person to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other sui table place of safe custody.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2002, s. 9 (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  24 89. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial. —Where any accused person, having been found 
by reason of unsoundness of mind to be inca pable of making his defence, is in custody or under detention 
under section 88, any officer prescribed in this behalf, may, — 
(a) if such person is in custody under sub -section ( 3) of section 88, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is ca pable of making his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in jail under sub -section ( 4) of section 88, on a certificate of the 
Inspector -General of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a lunatic as ylum under the said                 
sub-section, on a cer tificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum and if he is detained in 
any other place under that sub -section, on a certificate of the prescribed authority, that he is capable 
of making his defence,  
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Coast Guard Court for the offence with which 
he was originally charged, or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal court.  
90. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 89. —A copy of every order 
made by an officer under section 89 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central 
Government.  
91. Release of lunatic accused. —Where any person is in custody under sub -section ( 3) of section 88 
or under detention under su b-section ( 4) of that section, — 
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section ( 3), on the re port of the medical       
officer, or  
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub -section ( 4), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause ( b) of section 89 that in the judgment of such officer or authority such 
person may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody, or transferred to a 
public lunatic asylum if he has not alrea dy been sent to such asylum.  
92. Delivery o f lunatic accused to relatives. —Where any relative or friend of any person who is in 
custody under sub -section ( 3) of section 88 or under detention under sub -section ( 4) of that section 
desires that he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may, upon 
application by such relative or friend and, on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government 
that the person delivered shall be properly  taken care of, and, prevented from doing injury to himself or to 
any other person, and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the 
Central Government may direct, order such person to be delivered to such relative o r friend.  
93. Order for custody and disp osal of property pending trial. —When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to have been committed, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission of any offence, is produced before a Coast Guard Cou rt during a trial, the court may make 
such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and 
if the property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks 
necessa ry, order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.  
94. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence  is committed. —(1) After the 
conclusion of a trial before a Coast Guard Court, an officer not below the rank of  a Deputy                   
Inspector -General within whose command the trial was held, may make such order as he thinks fit for the 
disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to be entitled t o possession thereof, 
or other wise, of any property or document produced be fore the court or in its custody, or regarding which 
any offence appears to have been committed or which has been used for the commission of any offence.  
(2) Where any order has been made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed and certified by the authority 
making the same may, whether the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a Magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situat ed, and such Magistrate s hall thereupon cause the 
order to be carried out into effect as if it were an order passed by him under the provisions of the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  25 (3) In this section, the term “property ” includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession  or under 
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have been  converted or 
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.  
95. Powers of Coast Guard Court in relation to proceedings under this Act. —Any trial by a 
Coast Guard Court under the provisions of this Act sha ll be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of th e Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) and the Coast Guard Court                 
shall be deemed to be a court within the meaning of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Crim inal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
CHAPTER IX  
EXECUTION AND SUSPENSION OF SENTENCES  
96. Form of sentence of death. —In awarding a sentence of death, a Coast Guard Court shall, in its 
discretion, direct that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead or shall 
suffer death by being shot to death.  
97. Interim custody until execution of sentence of death. —A person sentenced to death may be 
detained in Coast Guard custody or may be removed to a civil prison to be kept in custody u ntil further 
orders are received from the Central Government, the Director -General or the convening authority of the 
Coast Guard Court by which he was sentenced to death or other prescribed officer, and the order of the 
Central Government, the Director -General or the convening authority or such officer shall be sufficient 
warrant for detaining the person in custody.  
98. Execution of sentence of death. —(1) When a sentence of death is to be executed, the               
Director -General or the convening authorit y or the prescribed officer shall give directions as to the time, 
place and manner in which such sentence is to be carried out and the order of such officer or authority in 
the prescribed form shall be sufficient warrant for the execution of such sentence.  
(2) There shall be attached to the prescribed form, an order of the Central Government certifying the 
confirmation of the sentenc e by the Central Government.  
99. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment or detention. —Whenever any person is 
sentenced under  this Act to imprisonment or detention, the term of the sentence shall be reckoned to 
commence on the date on which the sentence was awarded.  
100. Executi on of sentence of imprisonment. —(1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is 
passed under this Act or whenever any sentence of death is commuted to imprisonment, the presiding 
officer of the Coast Guard Court which passed the sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed 
shall direct that the sentence shall be carried out by  confinement in a civil pr ison.  
(2) When a direction has been made under sub -section ( 1), the Commanding Officer of the person 
under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form 
to the officer in charge of the prison in which su ch person is to be confined and shall arrange for his 
despatch to such prison with the warrant.  
101. Temporary custody of offender. —Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be 
undergone in a civil prison, the offender may be kept in Coast Guard custody or in any other fit place, till 
such time as it is possible to send him to a civil prison.  
102. Conveyance o f prisoner from place to place. —A person under sentence of imprisonment may 
during his conveyance from place to place, or when on board a sh ip, aircraft or otherwise, be subject to 
such restraint as is necessary for his safe conduct and removal.  
103. Communication of cer tain orders to prison officers. —Whenever an order is duly made under 
this Act setting aside or varying any sentence, order or  warrant under which any person is confined in a 
civil prison, a warrant in accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or 
his staff officer or such person as may be prescribed, to the officer in charge of the prison in wh ich such 
person is confined.  26 104. Execution of sentence of fine. —When a sentence of fine is imposed by a Coast Guard Court 
under section 53, a copy of such sentence signed and certified by the presiding officer of the court may be 
sent to any Magistrate in  India and such Magistrate shall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in 
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), as if it were a 
sentence of fine  imposed by such Magistrate.  
105. Informality or error in the o rder or  warrant. —Whenever any person is sentenced to 
imprisonment under this Act, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in which he might be 
confined under a lawful order or warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement of such person s hall 
not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of any informality or error in, or as respects the order, warrant 
or other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was brought into, or is 
confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant or document may be amended accordingly.  
106. Imprisonment or detention of o ffender already under sentence. —Whenever a sentence is 
passed by a Coast Guard Court on a person already under sentence either of imprisonment or detention 
passed on him under this Act for a former offence, the court may award a sentence of imprisonment or 
detention for the offence for which he is under trial to commence at the expiration of the sentence of 
imprisonment or detention to which he has been previ ously sentenced:  
Provided that so much of any term of detention imposed on a person by a sentence in pursuance of 
this section as will prolong the total term of detention beyond two years shall be deemed to be remitted.  
107. Suspension of sentence of impri sonment or d etention.—(1) Where a person subject to this 
Act is sentenced to imprisonment or detention, the Central Government, the Director -General, the 
Commanding Officer imposing the sentence or any prescribed officer may suspend the sentence whether 
or not the offender has already been committed to prison or to Coast Guard custody.  
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may, in the case of an offender so sentence d, 
direct that until the orders  of such authority or officer have been ob tained, the offender shall not be 
committed to pr ison or to Coast Guard custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) may be exercised in the case of any such 
sentence which has been reduced or commuted.  
108. Release on suspension. —Where a sentence is suspended under section 107, the offender shall 
forthwith be released from custody.  
109. Computation of period of suspension. —Any period during which the sentence is under 
suspension shall be reckoned as part o f the term of such sentence.  
110. Order aft er suspension. —The authority or officer specified in section 107 may, at any time 
while  a sentence is suspended, order — 
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the un expired portion of the sentence; or  
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
111. Reconsideration of case after suspension. —(1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case 
may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than four months, be reconsidered by the authority or 
officer specified in section 107, or by any officer not b elow the rank of a Deputy Inspector -General duly 
authorised by the authority or officer specified in section 107.  
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so authorised it appears to him that the conduct of 
offender since his conviction has been su ch as to justify a remission of the sentence, he shall refer the 
matter to the authority or officer specified in section 107.  
112. F resh sentence after suspension. —Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is sentenced for any  other o ffence, then — 
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act , the sentence shall run concurrently;  27 (b) if the further sentence is for a period of three months or more and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall also be committed to prison or Coast Guard custody for the unexpired portion 
of the previous sentence, but both senten ces shall run concurrently; and  
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less than three months and is not suspen ded under this 
Act, the offend er shall be so committed on that sentence only, and the previous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 110 or section 111 continue to be suspended.  
113. Scope of power of suspension. —The powers conferred by sections 1 07 and 110 shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  
114. Effect of suspens ion and remission on dismissal. —(1) Where in addition to any other 
sentence, the punishment of dismissal has been awarde d under this Act and such other sentence is 
suspended under section 107, then, such dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the authority or 
officer specified in section 107.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 110, the punishm ent of dismissal shall also be 
remitted.  
CHAPTER X  
CHIEF LAW OFFICER AND LAW OFFICERS  
115. Appointment of Chie f Law Officer and Law Officers. —(1) There shall be appointed by the 
Central Government, a Chief Law Officer and as many Law Officers as the Central Government may 
deem necessary.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment  as Chief Law Officer unless he — 
(a) is a citizen of India ; and  
(b) has for at least ten years held a judicial o ffice in the territory of India ; or 
(c) has for at lea st ten years been an advocate of a High Court or two or more such Courts in 
succession:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do 
in the exigencies of service, relax, for reasons to be recorded  in writing, the qualification specified in 
clause ( b) or clause ( c) in respect of any person.  
(3) A person shall not be qualifi ed for appointment as Law Offi cer unless he — 
(a) is a citizen of India, and  
(b) is qualified for enrolment as an advocate of a High Court.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate of a High Court, there 
shall be included any period during which the person has held a judicial off ice after he became an 
advocate ; 
(b) the expression “judicial office ” shall be deemed to include the post of Law Officer.  
116. Functions of Chief Law Officer. —(1) It shall be the duty of the Chief Law Officer to perform 
such duties of a legal and judicial character pertaining to the Coast Guard as may, from time to time, be  
referred or assigned to him by the Central Government or the Director -General, and to discharge the 
functions conferred on him by or under this Act.  
(2) The functions of the Chief Law Officer shall, in his abse nce or otherwise, be performed by such 
Law Officer as may be designated in this behalf by the Director -General.   28 CHAPTER XI  
JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PROCEEDINGS OF COAST  GUARD  COURTS  
117. Judicial review by the Chief Law Officer. —(1) All proceedings of trials by  Coast Guard 
Courts shall be reviewed by the Chief Law Officer either on his own motion or on application made                  
to him within the prescribed time by any person aggrieved by any sentence or finding, and the Chief Law 
Officer shall transmit th e report of such review together with such recommendations as may appear                   
to him just and proper to the Director -General for his consideration and for such action as the                  
Director -General may think fit.  
(2) Where any person aggrieved has made an application under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Law Officer 
may, if the circumstances of the case so require, give him an opportunity of being heard either in person 
or through a legal practitioner or an officer of the Coast Guard.  
118. Consideration by the  Director -General.—(1) On receipt of the report and recommendations, if 
any, under section 117, the Director -General shall in all cases of sentences of death, and in all cases 
where the Coast Guard Court is convened by the Central Gover nment, and may, in other cases, transmit 
the proceedings and the report to the Central Government together with such recommendations as he may 
deem fit to make.  
(2) Nothing in section 117 or this section shall authorise the Chief Law Officer or the                       
Director -General to make any recommendation for setting aside, or the Central Government to set aside, 
an order of acquittal passed under this Act.  
CHAPTER XII  
MODIFICATION OF FINDINGS AND SENTENCES, PARDONS, COMMUTATION AND REMISSION OF SENT ENCES  
119. Petitions to Central Government or Director -General against finding s and sentences. —Any 
person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of any Coast Guard 
Court may present a petition to the Central Government  or to the Director -General, and the Central 
Government or the Director -General, as the case may be, may pass such orders thereon as  it or he may 
think fit.  
120. Powers of Central Government and Director -General in respect of findings and 
sentences. —(1) Wh ere any person is tried under the provisions of this Act, the Central Government or 
the Director -General ma y, in the case of a conviction, — 
(a) set aside the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accu sed or order him to be                  
re-tried; or 
(b) alter the finding without modifying the sentence if such sentence may be legally passed on the 
altered finding; or  
(c) with or without altering the finding, reduce the sentence or commute the punishment awarded 
for any punishment inferior in sc ale; or 
(d) either with or without conditions, pardon the person or remit the whole or any par t of the 
punishment awarded; or  
(e) with or without conditions release the person on parole:  
Provided that a sentence of imprisonment shall not be commuted for a sentence of detention for a 
term exceeding the term of imprisonment awarded:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall authorise the Central Government or the 
Director -General to enhance the sentence.  
(2) Any sentence modified under the provi sions of sub -section ( 1) shall be carried into execution as if 
it had been originally passed.  29 (3) If any condition on which a person has been pardoned or has been released on parole or a 
punishment has been remitted is in the opinion of the authority which  granted the pardon, release or 
remission not fulfilled, such authority may cancel the pardon or release or remission and thereupon the 
sentence awarded shall be carried into effect as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted:  
Provided tha t in the case of a person sentenced to imprisonment or detention, such person shall 
undergo only the unexpi red portion of the sentence.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
121. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Coast Guard. —(1) The 
Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject 
to such conditions and limitations, and within the local limits of such inland area adjoining the coast of 
India, as may be specified in the order, any member of the Coast Guard may, — 
(i) for the purpose of prevention of any offence punishable under the Passport (Entry into India) 
Act, 1920 (34 of 1920), the Emigration Act, 1922 (7 of 1922), the Registration of Foreigners                 
Act, 1939 (16  of 1939), the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946), the Merchant Shipping Act,                    
1958 (44 of 1958), the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), the Passports Act, 1967 (15 of 1967), the 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973), or the Terr itorial Waters, Continental Shelf, 
Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976), or of any cognizable 
offence punisha ble under any other Central Act ; or 
(ii) for the purpose of apprehending any person who has committed any offenc e referred to in 
clause ( i), 
exercise or discharge such of the powers or duties under that Act or any other Central Act as may be 
specified in the said order, being the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
an officer of the co rresponding or lower rank is by that or such other Act empowered to exercise or 
discharge for the said purposes.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, direct, 
with the concurrence of the State Govern ment concerned, that any of the powers or duties which may be 
exercised or discharged under a State Act by a police officer may, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, and within the local limits of such inland area adjoining the coast of India, as ma y be 
specified in the order, be exercised or discharged by a member of the Coast Guard who, in the opinion of 
the Central Government, holds a corresponding or higher rank.  
(3) The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Officia l Gazette, dire ct 
that, subject to such condi tions and limitations, and within the local limits of such area in any maritime 
zone of India, as may be specified in the order, any  member of the Coast Guard may, — 
(i) for the purpose of prevention of any offen ce punishable under any enactment which extends 
for the time being to such area ; or 
(ii) for the purpose of apprehending any person who has committed any off ence referred to in 
clause ( i), 
exercise or discharge such of the powers or duties under that enact ment, as may be specified in the said 
order, being the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Government, an officer of the 
corresponding or lower rank is by that enactment empowered to exercise or discharge for the said 
purposes.  
(4) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be com prised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter h ave effect 
only in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be ; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  30 122. Protection for acts of members of the Coast Guard. —(1) In any suit or proceeding against 
any member of the Coast Guard for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant or order of a 
competent authority , it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under the authori ty 
of such warrant or order.  
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant or order directing the act, and if it 
is so proved, the member of the Coast Guard shall thereupon be discharged from liability in respect of the 
act so done by hi m, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the authority which issued such 
warrant or order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any legal 
proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any member of the Coast 
Guard for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or in pursuance of any 
provision of this Act or the rules, shall be commenced within  three months after the act com plained of 
was commi tted and not otherwise, and notice in writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall 
be given to the defendant or his superior officer at least one month before the commencement of such 
proceeding.  
123. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Gover nment may, by notification, make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into eff ect the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for, — 
(a) the constitution, governance, command and discipline of the Coast Guard;  
(b) the enrolment of persons to the Coast Guard and the recruitment of other members of the 
Coast Guard;  
(c) the conditions of service (including service privileges and deductions from pay and 
allowances) of membe rs of the Coast Guard;  
(d) the rank, precedence, powers of command and authority of the officers, subordinate offi cers 
and other enrolled persons ; 
(e) the removal, retirement, release or discharge from the service of officers, subordinate offi cers 
and other enrolled persons;  
(f) the purposes and other matters required to  be prescribed under section 13 ; 
1[(fa) the manner in which proceedings may be initiated under section 57A ;] 
(g) the additional matters in respect of which the Coast Guard may undertake measures in th e 
performance of its functions;  
(h) the convening, constitution, adjournment, dissolution and sittings of Coast Guard Courts, the 
procedure to be observed in trials by such courts, the persons by whom an accused may be defended 
in such trials  and the appearance of such persons thereat ; 
(i) the forms of orders to be made under the provisions of this Act relating to Coast Guard Courts 
and the awards and infliction of death, imprisonment and detention;  
(j) the carrying into effect of s entences of  Coast Guard Courts;  
(k) any matter necessary for the purpose of carrying this Act into execution, as far as it relates to 
the investigation, arrest, custody, trial and punishment of offences triab le or punishable under this 
Act; 
(l) the procedure relating  to the exerc ise of powers under section 120;  
(m) the ceremonials to be observed and marks of respect to be paid in the Coast Guard;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2002, s. 11 (w.e.f. 12 -8-2002).  31 (n) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed or in respect of which this Act makes no 
provision or makes insuf ficient provision and provision is, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
necessary for the proper implementation of this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses ag ree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effec t, as the case may be ; so, however, that any such modifi cation or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
--------------------------The Delhi Police Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI POLICE ACT, 1978                                                                                                                                         
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ORGANISATION, SUPERINTENDENCE AND CONTROL OF THE POLICE FORCE  
3. One police force for the whole of Delhi.  
4. Superintendence of police force to vest in the Administrator.  
5. Constitution of police force.  
6. Commissioner of Police.  
7. Additional Commissioner of Police.  
8. Deputy, Additional Deputy and Assistant Commissioners of Police.  
9. Appointment of Principals of Police training institutions.  
10. Constitution of police districts, sub -divisions and police stations.  
11. Officers in charge of police districts, police sub -divisions and police stations.  
12. Appointment of subordinate ranks.  
13. Certificate of appointment.  
14. Effect of suspension of police officer.  
15. General powers of Commissioner of Police.  
16. Power of Commissioner of Police to investigate and regulate matters of police accounts.  
17. Special police officers.  
18. Additional police officers.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE OF THE DELHI POLICE  
19. Framing of regulations for administration of the police.  
20. Commissioner of Police may call for  returns.  
21. Powers of punishment.  
22. Procedure for awarding punishments.  
23. Appeal from orders of punishment.  
24. Police officers to be deemed to be always on duty and to be liable to employment in any part 
of Delhi.  
25. Circumstances under which police officer of subordinate rank may resign.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
26. Certificate, arms, etc., to be delivered by person ceasing to be a police officer.  
27. Occupation of , and liability to vacate , premises provided for police officers.  
CHAPTER IV  
POLICE REGULATIONS  
28. Power to make regulations for regulating traffic and for preservation of order in public  
places, etc.  
29. Power to give directions to the public.  
30. Power to prohibit certain acts for prevention of disorder.  
31. Police to provide against disorder, etc., at places of public amusement or public assembly or 
meeting.  
32. Power to prohibit, etc., continuance  of music, sound or noise.  
33. Issue of order of prevention of riot, etc.  
34. Maintenance of order at religious or ceremonial display, etc.  
35. Commissioner of Police may take special measures to prevent outbreak of epidemic disease at 
fairs, etc . 
36. Power to reserve street or other public place for public purpose and power to authorise 
erecting of barriers in streets.  
37. Power to make regu lations prohibiting disposal of the d ead except at places set apart.  
CHAPTER V  
SPECIAL MEASURES FOR MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND SECURITY OF STATE  
38. Employment of additional police to keep peace.  
39. Employment of additional police in cases of special  danger to public peace.  
40. Employment of additional police at large work and when apprehension regarding behaviour 
of employees exists.  
41. Compensation for injury caused by unlawful assembly how recoverable.  
42. Dispute in regard to cost of deputing additional police or compensation under section 41.  
43. Recovery of amount payable under section 38, 39, 40 or 41.  
44. Collector to award compensation.  
45. Recovery of amounts payable under sections 39 and 41.  
46. Dispersal of gangs and bodies of persons.  
47. Removal of persons about to commit offences.  
48. Removal of persons convicted of certain offences.  
49. Period of operation of orders under section 46, 47 or 48.  
50. Hearing to be given before order under section 46, 47 or 48 is passed.  
51. Appeal against orders under section 46, 47 or 48.  
52. Finality of order in certain cases.  
53. Procedure on failure of person to leave the area and his entry therein after removal.  
 3 
 SECTIONS  
54. Temporary permission to enter and consequences of non -observance of c onditions of such 
permission.  
55. Taking measurements and photographs, etc., of persons against whom an order under    
section 46, 47 or 48 is made.  
56. Resistance to the taking of measurements, etc.  
57. Banning of use of dress, etc., resembling uniform of  armed forces.  
58. Constitution of Defence Societies.  
CHAPTER VI  
EXECUTIVE DUTIES AND POWERS OF POLICE OFFICERS  
59. Duty of police officer to enforce provisions of the Act.  
60. Other duties of a police officer.  
61. Power to enter places of public resort.  
62. Power to search suspected persons in street, etc.  
63. Emergency duties of police.  
64. Superior police officer may himself perform duties im posed on a subordinate officer.  
65. Persons bound to comply with the reasonable directions of police officer.  
CHA PTER VII  
POWERS IN RELATION TO UNCLAIMED PROPERTY  
66. Police to take charge of unclaimed property.  
67. Procedure for disposal of property taken charge of under section 66.  
68. Delivery of property to person entitled.  
69. In default of claim, property to be  at disposal of Government.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXERCISE OF POWERS UNDER THE CODE OF  
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973  
70. Power of Central Government to authorise  Commissioner of Police and certain other officers 
to exercise powers of District Magistrates and Executive Magistrates under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
71. Notifications under section 70 to be laid before Parliament.  
72. References to Judicial Magistrate of the first class in sections 108, 109 and 110 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 not to be construed as references to an Executive Magistrate . 
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL POWERS UNDER THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960  
73. Powers with regard to offences under Act 59 of 1960.  
74. Powers of Metropolitan Magistrate to return animal to person from whose possession it was 
taken.  
75. Veterinary officer to examine the animal.  
76. Animal to be dealt with under Act 59 of 1960.  4 
 SECTIONS  
77. Power  of police officer to unsaddle animal or to unload it.  
78. Arrest without warrant in case of certain offences under Act 59 of 1960.  
79. Provisions of Chapter to be in addition to the provisions of Act 59 of 1960.  
CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS  
80. Disr egarding the rules of the road.  
81. Causing obs truction or mischief by animal.  
82. Exposing animal for hire, sale, etc.  
83. Causing any obstruction in a street.  
84. Obstructing a footway.  
85. Causing obstruction and annoyance by performances, etc.  
86. Doing offensive acts in or near  a street or public place.  
87. Letting loose horse, etc., and suffering ferocious dogs t o be at large.  
88. Bathing or washing in places not set apart for those purposes.  
89. Defiling water in public wells, etc.  
90. Obstructin g bathers.  
91. Behaving indecently in public.  
92. Obstructing or annoying passengers in the street.  
93. Misbehaviour with intent to provoke a breach of the peace.  
94. Prohibition against flying kites, etc.  
95. Committing nuisance in or near street, etc.  
96. Disregard of notice in public building.  
97. Penalties for offences under sections 80 to 96.  
98. Penalty for failure to keep in confinement cattle, etc.  
99. Punishment for cruelty to animals.  
100. Wilful trespass.  
101. False alarm of fire or damage to fire alarm.  
102. Being found under suspicious circumstances between sunset and sunrise.  
103. Possession of property of which no satisfactory account can be given.  
104. Omission by pawn -brokers, etc. , to report to police possession or tender of p roperty 
suspected to be stolen.  
105. Melting, etc ., of property referred to in section 104.  
106. Taking pledge from child.  
107. Suffering disorderly conduct at places of public amusement, etc.  
108. Cheating at games and gambling in street.  
109. Penalty for disobedien ce to order under section 27.  
110. Penalty for contravening regulations, etc., under section 28.  5 
 SECTIONS  
111. Liability of licensee of place of public amusement or entertainment for acts of servants.  
112. Penalty for not obtaining licence  in respect of place of public entertainment or certificate of 
registration in respect of eating house or for not renewing such licence or certificate within 
prescribed period.  
113. Penalties for contravention of orders, etc., under sections 29, 30, 31, 32 , 33 and 34.  
114. Penalty for contravention of regulations, etc., made under sections 35, 36 and 37.  
115. Penalty for contravent ion of directions under section  46, 47 or 48.  
116. Penalty for entering without permission area from which a person is directed to remove 
himself or overstaying when permitted to return temporarily . 
117. Penalty for contravention of orders under section 57.  
118. Penalty for opposing or not complying with direction given under clause ( b) of                 
sub-section ( 1) of section  59. 
119. Penalty for contravening directions under section 65.  
120. Dangerous performances.  
121. Neglect or refusal to serve as special police officer.  
122. Penalty for making false statement, etc., and for misconduct of police officers.  
123. Penalty for failure to deliver up certificate of appointment or other article.  
124. Vexatious entry, search, arrest, etc., by police officer.  
125. Penalty for vexatious delay in forwarding a person arrested.  
126. Penalty for unauthorised use of police uniforms.  
127. P ower to make regulations regarding carrying weapons without authority.  
128. Prosecution for certain offences against this Act to be in the discretion of Delhi police.  
129. Summary disposal of certain cases.  
130. Prosecution for offences under other enactments not affected.  
131. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
132. Disposal of fees, rewards, etc.  
133. Method of proving orders and notifications.  
134. Rules, regulations or orders not invalidated by defect of form or irregularity in procedure.  
135. Presumption in prosecutions for contravention of order made under section 46, 47 or 48 . 
136. Officers holding charges of, or succeeding to, vacancies competent to exercise powers.  
137. Forfeiture of bond entered into by person under sub -section ( 1) of section 54.  
138. No police officer to be liable to penalty or damage for act done in good faith in pursuance of 
duty.  
139. No public servant liable as aforesaid for giving effect in good faith to any rule, regulation, 
order or direction issued with apparent authority . 
140. Bar to suits and prosecutions.  6 
 SECTIONS  
141. Licences and written permissions to specify conditions, etc., and to be signed.  
142. Public notice s how to be given.  
143. Consent, etc., of a competent authority may be proved by writing under its signature.  
144. Signature on notices, etc., may be stamped.  
145. Persons interested may seek to annul, reverse or alter any rule or order . 
146. Powers of Commissioner of Police under other Acts . 
147. Power to make rules.  
148. Notification of rules and regulations in the Official Gazette and laying of rules and 
regulations . 
149. Cesser of operation of certain enactments and savings.  
150. Police force functioning in Delhi immediately before the commencement of this Act to be  
deemed to be police force constituted under this Act . 
151. Power to remove difficulties.  
152. Repeal and saving.  
SCHEDULE  I 
SCHEDULE  II 
SCHEDULE  III 
 
 
 
 
  7 
 THE DELHI POLICE ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1978  
[27th August, 1978 .] 
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to the regulation of the police in the Union 
territory of Delhi . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Police Act, 1978.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of July, 1978.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of Delhi appointed under article 239 of the 
Constitution;  
(b) “cattle ” includes elephants, camels, horses, asses, mules, sheep, goats and swine;  
(c) “competent authority ”, when used with reference to the exercise of a ny power or discharge of 
any duty under the provisions of this Act, means the Commissioner of Police appointed under   
section 6 or any other police officer specially empowered in that behalf by the Central Government;  
(d) “constable ” means a police office r of the lowest grade;  
(e) “Corporation ” means the Municipal Corporation of Delhi constituted under the Delhi 
Muni cipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66  of 1957);  
(f) “Delhi ” means the Union territory of Delhi;  
(g) “Delhi p olice ” or “police force ” means the police force referre d to in section 3 and includes — 
(i) all persons appointed as special police officers under sub -section ( 1) of section 17 and 
additional police officers appointed under section 18; and  
(ii) all other persons, by whatever name known, who exercise any police function in any part 
of Delhi;  
(h) “eating house ” means any place to which the public are admitted and where any kind of food 
or drink is supplied for consumption on the premises by any person  owning, or having any interest in, 
or man aging, such place and includes — 
(i) a refreshment room, boarding house or coffee house, or  
(ii) a shop where any kind of food or drink is supplied to the public for consumption in or 
near such shop,  
but does not include a place of public entertainment;  
(i) “municipality ” means the New Delhi Municipal Committee, the Cantonment Board or any 
other municipal body, other than the Corporation, established by or under any law for the time being 
in force in or i n any part of Delhi;  
(j) “place ” includes — 
(i) any building, tent, booth or other erection, whether permanent or temporary; and  
  8 
 (ii) any area, whether enclosed or open;  
(k) “place of public amusement ” means any place where music, singing, dancing or game  or any 
other amusement, diversion, or recreation or the means of carrying on the same is provided, to which 
the public are admitted either on payment of money or with the intention that money may be collected 
from those admitted and includes a race course , circus, theatre, music hall, billiard or bagatelle room, 
gymnasium, fencing school, swimming pool or dancing hall;  
(l) “place of public entertainment ” means a lodging house, boarding and lodging house or 
residential hostel and includes any eating house o r other place in which any kind of liquor or 
intoxicating drug is supplied (such as a tavern or a shop where beer, spirit, arrack, toddy, ganja, bhang 
or opium is supplied) to the public for consumption in or near such place;  
(m) “police officer ” means any member of the Delhi p olice;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules;  
(o) “public place ” means any place to which the public have access, whether as  of right or not, 
and includes — 
(i) a public building and monument and precincts thereof; and  
(ii) any place accessible to the public for drawing water, washing or bathing or for purposes 
of recreation;  
(p) “regulations ” means regulations made under this Act;  
(q) “rules ” means rules made under this Act;  
(r) “street ” includes any highway, bridge, way  over a causeway, viaduct or arch or any road, lane, 
footway, square, court, alley or passage accessible to the public , whether or not it is a thoroughfare;  
(s) “subordinate ranks ” means members of the police force of and below the rank of the 
Inspector;  
(t) “vehicle ” means any carriage, cart, van, dray , truck, handcart or other conveyance of any 
description and includes a bicycle, tricycle, a rickshaw, a motor vehicle, a vessel or an aeroplane.  
CHAPTER II  
ORGANISATION, SUPERINTENDENCE AND CONTROL OF THE POLICE FORCE  
3. One police force for the whole of Delhi .—There shall be one police force for the whole of Delhi 
and all officers and subordinate ranks of the police force shall be liable for posting to any branch of the 
force including the Delhi Armed Poli ce. 
4. Superintendence of police force to vest in the Administrator .—The superintendence of the 
Delhi p olice throughout Delhi shall vest in, and be exercisable by the Administrator and any control, 
direction or supervision exercisable by  any officer over any member of the police force shall be 
exercisable subject to such superintendence.  
5. Constitution of police force .—Subject to the provisions of this Act ,— 
(a) the Delhi police shall consist of such number in the several ranks and have such organisation 
and such powers, functions and duties as the Administrator may, by general or special order, 
determine; and  
(b) the recruitment to, and the pay, allowances and all other conditions of servic e of the members 
of, the Delhi p olice shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that nothing in clause ( b) shall apply to the recruitment to, and the pay, allowances and 
other co nditions of service of the members of the Indian Police Service or  the Delhi, Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Police Service.  9 
 6. Commissioner of Police .—For the direction and supervision of the police force in Delhi, the 
Administrator shall appoint a Commissio ner of Police who shall exercise and perform such powers and 
duties and perform such functions as are specified by or under this Act.  
7. Additional Commissioner of Police .—(1) The Administrator may appoint one or more Additional 
Commissioners of Police for  the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Additiona l Commissioner of Police shall — 
(a) assist the Commissioner of Police in the exercise of his powers and the performance of his 
duties in such manner and to such extent, and  
(b) exercise  such powers and perform such duties of the Commissioner of Police and within such 
local limits,  
as the Administrator may, by general or special order, specify.  
8. Deputy, Additional Deputy and Assistant Commissioners of Police .—(1) The Administrator 
may a ppoint one or more Deputy Commissioners of Police or Additional Deputy Commissioners of 
Police or Assistant Commissioners of Police for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act and subject to any general or specia l orders 
made by the Administrator in this behalf, every Deputy Commissioner of Police or Additional Deputy 
Commissioner of Police or Assistant Commissioner of Police shall, under the orders of the Commissioner 
of Police, exercise such of the powers (excep t the power to make regulations) and perform such of the 
duties of the Commissioner of Police and within such local limits as may be specified in such orders.  
9. Appointment of Principals of P olice training institutions .—(1) (a) The Administrator shall 
appoint a police officer not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner of Police to be the Principal of the 
Police Training School for Delhi.  
(b) The Commissioner of Police may by general or special order assign to the Principal of the Police 
Training School  such powers and duties as he may deem fit for the proper functioning of that School.  
(2) (a) The Administrator may establish a Police Training College for Delhi and appoint a police 
officer of appropriate rank to be the Principal of such College.  
(b) The Commissioner of Police may by general or special order assign to the Principal of the Police 
Training College such powers and duties as he may deem fit for the proper administration of that College.  
10. Constitution of police districts, sub -divisions and p olice stations .—Subject to the control of 
the Administrator, th e Commissioner of Police shall — 
(a) constitute police districts within Delhi;  
(b) divide  such police districts into police sub -divisions and specify the police stations comprised 
in each such sub -division; and  
(c) define the limits and extent of such police districts, police sub -divisions and police stations.  
11. Officers in charge of police districts, police sub -divisions and police stations .—(1) Each 
police district shall be under the charge of a Deputy Commissioner of Police who may be assisted in the 
discharge of his duties by one or more Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police.  
(2) Each  police sub -division shall be under the charge of an Assistant Commissioner of Police and 
each police station shall be under the charge of an Inspector of Police.  
12. Appointment of subordinate rank s.—Subject to such general or special orders in writing as  the 
Administ rator may make in this behalf, — 
(a) Inspectors of Police may be appointed by the Additional Commissioner of Police; and  
(b) Sub -Inspectors of Police and other officers of subordinate rank may be appointed by the 
Deputy Commissioners of Police,  Additional Deputy Commissioners of Police, Principal of the 
Police Training College or of the Police Training School, or any other  police officer of equivalent 
rank.  10 
 13. Certificate of appointment .—(1) Every police officer of the rank of Inspector and bel ow shall on 
enrolment receive a certificate of appointment.  
(2) The certificate shall be issued under the seal of such officer, and shall be in such form, as the 
Administrator may, by general or special order, specify.  
(3) A certificate of appointment shall become null and void when the person named therein  ceases to 
belong to the Delhi p olice or shall remain inoperative during the period such pers on is suspended from the 
Delhi p olice.  
14. Effect of suspension of police officer .—The powers, functions an d privileges vested in a police 
officer shall remain suspended while such police officer is under suspension from office:  
Provided that notwithstanding such suspension such person shall not cease to be a police officer and 
shall continue to be subject to t he control of the same authorities to which he would have been subject if 
he had not been under suspension.  
15. General powers of Commissioner of Police .—The Commissioner of Police shall direct and 
regulate all matters of arms, drill, exercise, observation  of persons and events, mutual relations, 
distribution of duties, study of laws, orders and modes of proceedings and all matters of executive detail  
or the fulfil ment  of their duties by the police force under him.  
16. Power of Commissioner of Police to investigate and regulate matters of police accounts .—
The Commissioner of Police shall have the authority to investigate and regulate all matters of ac count 
connected with the Delhi p olice and all persons concerned shall be bound to give him reasonable aid and 
facilities in conducting such investigations and to conform to his orders consequent thereto.  
17. Special police officers .—(1) The Commissioner of Police may , at any time, by a written order, 
signed by himself and sealed with his own seal, appoint any able bodied male person not less than 
eighteen years of age, whom he considers fit, to be a special poli ce officer to assist the Delhi p olice on 
any occasion, when he has reason to apprehend the occurrence of any riot or grave disturbance of the 
peace in a ny area and he is of opinion that the ordinary police force is not sufficient for the protection of 
persons residing, and for the security of property, within such area.  
(2) The Commissioner of Police shall publish the names of special police officers appo inted under 
this section in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any person objecting to the appointment of any person as such special police officer may send his 
reasons for such objection to the Commissioner of Police within fifteen days of such appoint ment and the 
Commissioner may accept such objection and cancel the appointment of such officer or, after giving to 
the objector an opportunity to be heard, reject the objection.  
(4) Every special police officer appointed under this  section shall, on appoin tment ,— 
(a) receive a certificate of appointment in such form as may be specified by the Administrator in 
this behalf;  
(b) have  the same powers, privileges and immunities and perform the same duties and be subject 
to the same authorities as an ordinary police officer.  
18. Additional police officers .—Where additional police officers are required to be deputed under 
section 38, sect ion 39 or section 40 the Commissioner of Police may appoint such number of additional 
police officers as he considers necessary and every such additional police officer shall, on appointment, — 
(a) receive a certificate o f appointment in such form as may be  specified by the Administrator in 
this behalf;  
(b) have such of the powers, privileges and immunities and perform such of the duties of a police 
officer as are specifically mentioned in the certificate; and  
(c) be subject to the same authorities as an ordinary police officer of the same or similar rank or 
grade.  11 
 CHAPTER III  
REGULATION, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE OF THE DELHI POLICE  
19. Framing of regulations for administration of the police .—Subject to the orders of the 
Administrator, the Commissioner of Police may make regulations not inconsistent with this Act or any 
other l aw for the time being in force — 
(a) regulating the inspection of the police force by his subordinates;  
(b) determining  the description and quantity of arms, accoutrements, clothing and other 
necessaries to be furnished to the police;  
(c) prescribing the places of residence of members of the police force;  
(d) for institution, management and regulation of any police fund fo r any purpose connected with 
police administration;  
(e) regula ting the distribution, movements  and location of the police;  
(f) assigning duties to police officers of all ranks and grades, and prescribing the manner in 
which, and the conditions subject to w hich they shall exercise and perform their respective powers 
and duties;  
(g) regulating the collection and communication by the police of intelligence and information;  
(h) generally, for the purpose of rendering the police efficient and preventing abuse or  neglect of 
their duties.  
20. Commissioner of Police may call for returns .—The Commissioner of Police may call for such 
returns, reports and statements on any subject connected with the prevention and detection of crime, the 
maintenance of order and the pe rformance of the duties of his subordinates as such subordinates may be 
able to furnish to him.  
21. Powers of punishment .—(1) Subject to the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution and the 
rules, the Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police, 
Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police Training College o r of the Police 
Training School or any other officer of equivalent rank, may award to any police officer of subordinate 
rank any of the following punishments, namely: — 
(a) dismissal;  
(b) removal from service;  
(c) reduction in rank;  
(d) forfeiture of approv ed service;  
(e) reduction in pay;  
(f) withholding of increment; and  
(g) fine not exceeding one month’ s pay.  
(2) Subject to the rule s— 
(a) any police officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may award the punishment of censure to any 
police officer of subordina te rank;  
(b) the Assistant Commissioner of Police may award the punishment of censure to police officers 
of, or below, the rank of Sub -Inspectors of Police;  
(c) any police officer of, and above, the rank of Inspector may award punishment drill not 
exceeding fifteen days or fatigue duty or any other punitive duty to constables.  
  12 
 (3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall affect any police officer ’s liability for 
prosecution and punishment for any offence committed by him.  
(4) The Commis sioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of Police, Deputy Commissioner of 
Police, Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police Training College or of the 
Police Training School, Assistant Commissioner of Police, or any other police o fficer of equivalent rank 
may suspend any police officer of subordinate rank who is reasonably suspected to be guilty of 
misconduct, pending an investigation or enquiry into such misconduct.  
(5) An Inspector of Police may suspend any police officer below t he rank of Sub -Inspector of Police, 
who is reasonably suspected to be guilty of misconduct, pending an investigation or enquiry into such 
misconduct.  
22. Procedure for awarding punishments .—When any officer passes an order of awarding a 
punishment of dismi ssal, removal from service, reduction in rank, forfeiture of service, reduction in pay, 
withholding of increments or fine, he shall record such order or cause the same to be recorded together 
with the reasons therefor, in accordance with the rules.  
23. Appeal from orders of punishment .—An appeal against any order of punishment passed against 
a police officer under section 21 or the rules thereunder [not being an order of punishment under      
clause ( c) of sub -section (2) of that section] shall lie — 
(a) where the order is passed by the Commissioner of Police, to the Administrator;  
(b) where the order is passed by an Additional Commissioner of Police, to the Commissioner of 
Police;  
(c) where the order is passed by a Deputy Commissioner of Police, Additiona l Deputy 
Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police Training College or School, Assistant Commissioner 
of Police or any other officer of equivalent rank, to the Additional Commissioner of Police.  
24. Police officers to be deemed to be always on duty a nd to be liable to employment in any part 
of Delhi .—Every police officer not on leave or under suspension shall for all purposes of this Act be 
deemed to be always on duty and any police officer or any number or body of police officers allocated for 
duty i n any part of Delhi may, if the Commissioner of Police so directs, at any time, be employed on 
police duty in any other part of Delhi for so long as the services of the police officer or number or body of 
police officers may be required in such other part of Delhi.  
25. Circumstances under which police officer of subordinate rank may resign .—(1) Resignation 
of any police officer of subordinate rank may be accepted only by the officer empowered to appoint (the 
officer so empowered to appoint being hereafter in this section referred to as the appointing authority) 
officers of such subordinate rank.  
(2) A police officer of subordinate rank who intends to resign from police service shall give to the 
appointing authority notice in writing to that effect and shall  not be permitted to withdraw himself from 
duty unless he has been granted permission to resign by such authority and two months have elapsed from 
the date on which he tendered his resignation:  
Provided that the appointing authority may at his discretion, permit a Head Constable or a constable 
to withdraw himself from duty on his crediti ng to the Government two months’  pay in lieu of notice.  
(3) A Head Constable or a constable who has agreed to serve for any specific period may not be 
permitted to resign be fore the expiry of that period.  
(4) Inspector s, Sub -Inspectors or Assi stant Sub -Inspectors of Police, whose appointments involve 
training at any Police Trai ning College or Police Training School may not be permitted to resign within 
three years from the da te of their successfully completing the training.  
(5) No police officer of subordinate rank whose resignation has been accepted by the appointing 
authority shall be permitted to withdraw from duty until he has fully discharged all debts, due from him as 
such police officer to Government or to any police fun d and has surrendered his certificate of 13 
 appointment, arms , accoutrements , uniform and all other Government property in his possession and has 
also rendered a complete account of all Government money and property for which he is responsible.  
(6) Notwithsta nding anything contained in this section if any police officer of subordinate rank 
tenders his resignation on medical grounds and produces a certificate signed by the police surgeon or any 
other medical officer authorised by the Administrator in this behal f declaring him to be unfit by reason of 
disease or mental or physical incapacity for further service in the police, the appointing authority shall 
forthwith permit him to withdraw from duty on his discharging, or giving a satisfactory security for the 
payment of, any debt due from him as such police officer to Government or to any police fund:  
Provided that he shall forthwith return the certificate of appointment, arms, accoutrements, uniform 
and all other Government property in his possession before he is  permitted to withdraw from duty.  
(7) If any such police officer of subordinate rank resigns or withdraws himself from the duties of his 
office in contravention of this section, he shall be liable on the orders of the appointing authority to forfeit 
all ar rears of pay then due to him in addition to the penalty to which he may be liable under section 22 or 
any other law for the time being in force.  
(8) Every such police officer on le aving the service in the Delhi p olice as aforesaid shall be given by 
the appointing authority a Discharge Certificate in such form as may be prescribed.  
26. Certificate, arms , etc., to be delivered by person ceasing to be a police officer .—(1) Every 
person who for any reason ceases to be a police officer shall forthwith deliver  to the officer empowered 
by the Commissioner of Police, the Additional Commissioner of Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police, 
Principal of the Police Training College or of the Police Training School, Additional Deputy 
Commissioner of Police or any other officer of equivalent rank to whom such officer is subordinate, to 
receive the same, his certificate of appointment and the arms, accoutrements, clothing and other 
accessories which have been provided to him for the performance of duties and functions conn ected with 
his office.  
(2) (a) Any Metropolitan Magistrate and, for special reasons which shall be recorded in writing at the 
time, the Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police Training 
College or of the Police Tra ining School or a Deputy Commissioner, Additional Deputy Commissioner or 
an Assistant Commissioner of Police may issue a warrant to search for and seize wherever they be found, 
any certificate, arms, accoutrements, clothing or other accessories not deliver ed under sub -section ( 1). 
(b) Every warrant so issued shall be executed by a police officer or, if the Metropolitan Magistrate or 
the police officer issuing the warrant so directs, by any other person in the same manner as if it were a 
warrant for a search  issued under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply in relation to any article which under the orders of the 
Commissioner of Police has become the property of the person to whom the same was provided.  
27. Occupation of , and liability to vacate , premises provided for police officers .—(1) A police 
officer occupying any premises provided by the Commissioner of Police for his residence shall — 
(a) occupy the same subject to such terms and conditions as may, by general or special order, be 
specified by the Commissioner of Police; and  
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, vacate the same on 
his ceasing to be a police officer or whenever the Commissioner of Police or any off icer authorised by 
the Administrator in this behalf considers it, for reasons to be recorded in writing, necessary and 
expedient to require him to do so.  
(2) If any person who is bound or required under sub -section ( 1) to vacate any premises fails to do so , 
the Administrator or the officer authorised in this behalf by the Administrator may order such person to 
vacate the premises and may direct any police officer with such assistance as may be necessary to enter 
upon the premises and remove therefrom any pe rson found therein and to take possession of the premises 
and deliver the same to any person specified in the direction.  
  14 
 CHAPTER IV  
POLICE REGULATIONS  
28. Power to make regulations for regulating traffic and for preservation of order in public 
places, etc.—(1) The Commissioner of Police may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) licensing and controlling persons offering themselves for employment, outside railway 
stations and other places where passengers arrive,  for the carriage of passengers’  baggages and fixing 
and providing for the enforcement of a scale of charges for the labour of such persons so employed;  
(b) regulating traffic of all kinds in streets and other public places, and the use of streets and other 
public places by persons riding, driving, cycling, walking or leading or accompanying cattle, so as to 
prevent danger, obstruction or inconvenience to the public;  
(c) regulating the conditions under whi ch vehicles may remain standing in streets and other public 
places, and the use of streets as halting places for vehicles or cattle;  
(d) specifying the number and position of lights to be used on vehicles in streets and the hours 
between which such lights should be used;  
(e) licensing, controlling or prohibiting the erection, exhibition, fixation or retention of any sign, 
device or representation for the purpose of advertisement, which is visible against the sky from some 
point in any street and is hoisted or held aloft over any land, building or structure at such height as 
may be specified in the regulations, having regard to the traffic in the vicinity, and the likelihood of 
such sign, device or representation at that height being a distraction, or causing  obstruction, to such 
traffic;  
(f) specifying certain hours of the day during which cattle shall not be driven, or, as the case may 
be, driven only in accordance with such regulations , along the streets, or along certain specified 
streets;  
(g) regulating t he leading, driving, conducting or conveying of any elephant or wild or dangerous 
animal through or in any street;  
(h) regulating and controlling the manner and mode of conveying timber, scaffold poles, ladders, 
iron girders, beams or bars, boilers or othe r unwieldy articles through the streets, and the route and 
hours for such conveyance;  
(i) licensing, controlling or, in order to prevent obstruction, inconvenience, annoyance, risk, 
danger or damage to the residents or passengers in the vicinity, prohibiti ng the carrying in streets and 
public places of gun powder or any other explosive substance;  
(j) prohibiting , except along certain specified streets and during specified hours and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in that behalf, the exposure o r movement in any street of persons 
or animals suffering from contagious or infectious diseases, the carcasses of animals or parts of such 
carcasses or corpses of persons deceased;  
(k) specifying certain h ours of the day during which ord ure or offensive ma tter or objects shall 
not be taken from or into houses or buildings in certain streets or conveyed through such streets 
except in accordance with such regulations;  
(l) setting apart places for slaughtering animals, the cleaning of carcasses or hides, the d eposit of 
noxious or offensive matter and for obeying calls of nature;  
(m) in cases of existing or apprehended epidemic or infectious disease of men or animals, the 
cleanliness and disinfection of premises by the occupier thereof and residents therein and the 
segregation and management of the persons or animals diseased or supposed to be diseased, as may 
have been directed or approved by the Administrator, with a view to prevent the disease or check the 
spread thereof;  15 
 (n) directing the closing or disuse, wholly or for certain purposes, or limiting to certain purposes 
only, the use of any source, supply or receptacle of water and providing against pollution of the same 
or of the water therein;  
(o) licensing, controlling or, in order to prevent obstruction, inconvenience, annoyance, risk, 
danger or damage to the residents or passengers in the vicinity, prohibiting the playing of music, the 
beating of drums, tom -toms or other instruments and the blowing or sounding of horns or other noisy 
instruments in or nea r streets or other public places;  
(p) regulating the conduct of or behaviour or action of persons constituting assemblies and 
processions on or along the streets and specifying in the case of processions, the routes by which, the 
order in which, and the ti mes at which, the same may pass;  
(q) prohibiting the hanging or placing of any cord or pole across a street or part thereof, or the 
making of a projection or structure so as to obstruct traffic or the free access of light and air;  
(r) prohibiting, except i n accordance with such regulations, the placin g of building materials  or 
other articles or the fastening or detention of any horse or other animals in any street or public place;  
(s) licensing, controlling or, in order to prevent obstruction, inconvenience , annoyance, risk, 
danger or damage to the residents or passenger s in the vicinity, prohibiting — 
(i) the illumination of streets and public places and the exteriors of building abutting thereon 
by persons other than servants of Government or Corporation or  other Municipal officers duly 
authorised in that behalf,  
(ii) the blasting of rock or making excavations in or near streets or public places,  
(iii) the using of loudspeaker in or near any public place or in any place of public 
entertainment;  
(t) closing c ertain streets or places temporarily, in cases of danger from ruinous buildings or other 
cause, with such exceptions as shall appear reasonable;  
(u) guarding against injury to person and property in the construction, repair and demolition of 
buildings, platforms and other structures from which danger may arise to passengers, neighbours or 
the public;  
(v) prohibiting the setting of fire to or burning of any straw or other matter, or lighting a bonfire 
or wantonly discharging a fire -arm or air -gun, or letting off or throwing a fire work or, sending up a 
fire balloon or rocket in or upon a street or within fifty feet of a street or building or the puttin g up of 
any post or other thing on the side of or across a street for the purpose of affixing thereto lamps or 
other contrivances for illumination except in accordance with regulations in this behalf;  
(w) regulating the hours during which and the manner in  which any place f or the disposal of the 
dead, any  dharmashala , village -gate or other place of public resort may be used, so as to secure the 
equal and appropriate application of its advantages and accommodation and to maintain orderly 
conduct amongst thos e who resort thereto;  
(x) (i) licensing or controlling places of public amusement or public entertainment;  
(ii) prohibiting the keeping of places of public amusement or public entertainment or assembly, in 
order to prevent obstruction, inconvenience, annoy ance, risk, danger or damage to the residents or 
passengers in the vicinity; and  
(iii) regulating the means of entrance and exit at places of public amusement or public 
entertainment or assembly and providing for the maintenance of public order and the pre vention of 
disturbance thereat;  
(y) (i) licensing or controlling in the interest of public order, decency or morality or in the interest 
of the general public (with such exceptions as may be specified in such regulations), musical, 
dancing, mimetic or thea trical or other performances for public amusement, including melas;  16 
 (ii) regulating in the interest of public order, decency or morality or in the interest of the general 
public, the employment of artists and the conduct of the artists and the audience at such 
performances;  
(iii) prior scrutiny of such performance and of the scripts in respect thereof, if any, and granting 
of suitability certificate therefor subject to conditions, if any, by a Board appointed by the 
Administrator for the purpose, either for  the whole of Delhi or for the area concerned or by an 
Advisory Committee constituted by the Commissioner of Police (the members of the Board or the 
Advisory Committee being persons who in the opinion of the Administrator or, as the case may be, 
the Commis sioner, possess knowledge of, or experience in, literature, the theatre and other matters 
relevant to such scrutiny), provision for appeal against the order or decision of the Boa rd or the 
Advisory Committee to  an appellate authority, its appointment or co nstitution, its procedure and other 
matters ancillary thereto, and the fees (whether in the form of court -fee stamps or otherwise) to be 
charged for the scrutiny of such performances or scripts, for applications for obtaining such 
certificates and for issu ing duplicates thereof and in respect of such appeals and any such 
performances and of the scripts in respect thereof granted suitability certificate by any State shall be 
exempted from this section;  
(iv) regulating the hours during which and the places at  which such performances may be given;  
(z) regulating or prohibiting the sale of any ticket or pass for admission, by whatever name called, 
to a place of public amusement;  
(za) registration of eating houses, including granting a certificate of registration  in each case, 
which shall be deemed to be a written permission required and obtained under this Act for keeping 
the eating house, and annual renewal of such registration within a specified period;  
(zb) prescribing the procedure in accordance with which an y licence or permission sought to be 
obtained or required under this Act should be applied for and fixing the fees to be charged for any 
such licence or permission:  
Provided that nothing in this section and no licence or certificate of registration granted  under any 
regulation made thereunder shall authorise any person to import, export, transport, manufacture, sell or 
possess any liquor, or intoxicating drug, in respect of which a licence, permit, pass or authorisation is 
required under any law relating to  prohibition which is for the time being in force.  
(2) The power to make regulations under clause (b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the control 
of the Administrator and the power to make regulations under the other clauses of that sub -section shal l 
be subject to the previous sanction of the Administrator.  
(3) The power of making regulations under this section shall be subject to the condition of the 
regulations being made, after previous publication and for the purposes of section 23 of the General  
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) such regulations shall be deemed to be rules; and every regulation made, 
under this section, shall also be published in the locality affected thereby by affixing copies thereof in 
conspicuous places near to the building, str ucture, work or place, as the case may be, to which the same 
specially relates or by proclaiming the same by the beating of drum or by advertising the same in such 
local newspapers in Hindi, Urdu and English, or in two or more of these languages, as the Co mmissioner 
of Police may deem fit, or by any two or more of these means, or by any other means he may think 
suitable:  
Provided that any such regulation may be made without previous publication  if the Commissioner of 
Police is satisfied that circumstances e xist which render  it necessary that such regulation should be 
brought into force at once.  
(4) If any regulation made under this section relates to any matter with respect to which there is a 
provision in any law, rule or bye -law of the Corporation or of any other municipal or local authority in 
relation to public health, convenience or safety of the locality such regulation shall be subject to such law, 
rule or bye -law. 17 
 29. Power to give directions to the public .—The Commissioner of Police and, subject to  the orders, 
if any, made by the Commissioner of Police, every police officer not inferior in rank to an Inspector, may 
from time to time as occasion may arise, but not so as to contravene any regulation made under section 28 
or any law, rule , or bye -law referred to in sub -section ( 4) of that section, give all such orders either orally 
or in writ ing as may be necessary to — 
(a) direct the conduct of, and behaviour or action of persons constituting processions or 
assemblies on or along streets;  
(b) specify the routes by which and the times at which any such processions may pass or shall not 
pass;  
(c) prevent obstruction s— 
(i) on the occasion of all processions and assemblies; and  
(ii) in the neighbourhood of all places of worship during the time o f worship; and  
(iii) in all cases when any street or public place or place of public resort may be thronged or 
liable to be obstructed;  
(d) keep order on, and in, all streets, and at, and within, public bathing and washing places, fairs, 
temples, mosques, gurdwaras, churches and all other places of public resort or public worship;  
(e) regulate and control the playing of music, singing or the beating of drums, tom -toms and other 
instruments and the blowing or sounding of horns or other noisy instruments in, and near, any street 
or public place;  
(f) regulate and control the use of loudspeakers in residential areas, streets, near any public places 
and places of public amusement or public entertainment; or  
(g) make reasonable orders consequential to, and in furt herance of, any order made under this 
section.  
30. Power to prohibit certain acts for prevention of disorder .—(1) The Commissioner of Police 
may, whenever and for such time as he shall consider necessary for the preservation of public peace or 
public safety, by notification publicly promulgated or addressed to individuals, prohibit, in relation to the 
whole  of Delhi or any part thereof, — 
(a) the carrying of arms, cudgels, swords, spears, bludgeons, guns, knives, sticks or lathis, or any 
other article, which is capable of being used for causing physical violence;  
(b) the carrying of any corrosive substance or explosives;  
(c) the carrying, collection or preparation of stones or other missiles or instruments or means of 
casting or impelling missiles;  
(d) the exhibition of persons or corpses;  
(e) the public utterance of cries, singing of songs or playing of music; or  
(f) the delivery of harangues, the use of gestures or mimetic representations, and the preparation, 
exhibition or dissemination of pictures, sy mbols, placards or any other subject or thing which may, in 
the opinion of the Commissioner of Police, offend against decency or morality or undermine the 
security of the State.  
(2) If any person goes armed with any such article as is referred to in clause  (a) of sub -section ( 1) or 
carries any corrosive substance or explosive or missile or instrument in contravention of any prohibition 
under that sub -section, the article, corrosive substance or explosive or missile shall be liable to be seized 
from him by a ny police officer.  
(3) The Commissioner of Police may, by notification publicly promulgated , prohibit any assembly or 
procession whenever and for such time as he considers such prohibition to be necessary for the 
preservation of the public order.  18 
 (4) No notification promulgated under sub -section ( 3) shall remain in force for more than fifteen days 
from the promulgation thereof:  
Provided that if the Administrator considers it necessary so to do for the preservation of the public 
order , he may, by order pub lished in the Official Gazette, direct that such notification shall remain in 
force for such further period not exceeding six months from the date on which it would have, but for such 
order, expired as he may specify in the said order.  
31. Police to provid e against disorder, etc., at places of public amusement or public assembly or 
meeting .—(1) For the purpose of preventing serious disorder or breach of the law or manifest and 
imminent danger to the persons assembled at any place of public amusement or at a ny assembly or 
meeting to which the public are invited or which is open to the public, any police officer of the rank of 
Assistant Sub -Inspector and above, present at such place of public amusement, or such assembly or 
meeting, may subject to such rules, r egulations and orders as may have been lawfully made, give such 
reasonable directions as to the mode of admission of the public to, and for securing the peaceful and 
lawful conduct of the proceedings and the maintenance of the public safety at, such place of amusement 
or such assembly or meeting as he thinks necessary and all persons shall be bound to conform to every 
such reasonable direction.  
(2) Every police officer shall have free access to every place of public amusement, assembly or 
meeting for the pu rpose of giving effect to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and to any direction made 
thereunder.  
32. Power to prohibit, etc., continuance of music, sound or noise .—(1) If the Commissioner of 
Police is satisfied from the report of an officer in charge of a  Police Station, or other information received 
by him, that it is necessary to do so in order to prevent annoyance, disturbance, discomfort or injury, or 
risk of annoyance, disturbance, discomfort or injury, to the public or to any person who dwells, or 
occupies property, in the vicinity, he may, by written order, issue such directions as he may consider 
necessary to any person for preventing, prohibit ing, controlling or regulating — 
(a) the incidence or continuance in any street, open space or any other pre mises of — 
(i) any vocal or instrumental music;  
(ii) sounds caused by the playing, beating, clashing, blowing or use in any manner 
whatsoever of any instrument, appliance or apparatus or contrivance which is capable of 
producing or reproducing sound; or  
(iii) use of loudspeaker or other apparatus for amplifying any musical or other sound at such 
pitch or volume as may cause disturbance to others, or  
(b) the carrying on, in any premises, of any trade, avocation or operation resulting in or attended 
with noi se: 
Provided that no directions shall be issued to any person under clause ( b) without giving to such 
person an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(2) The Commissioner of Police may, either on his ow n motion or on the application of any person 
aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1), either rescind, modify or alter any such order:  
Provided that before any such application is disposed of, the Commissioner of Police shall afford to 
the applicant  an opportunity of appearing , before him either in person or by counsel and showing cause 
against the order and shall, if he rejects any such application either wholly or in part, record the reasons 
for such rejection.  
33. Issue of order of prevention of r iot, etc .—(1) In order to prevent or suppress any riot or grave 
disturbance of peace, the Commissioner of Police may temporarily close or take possession of any 
building or other place and may exclude all or any persons therefrom, or may allow access there to to such 
persons only and on such terms as he shall deem expedient and all persons concerned shall be bound to 
conduct themselves in accordance with such orders as the Commissioner of Police may make and notify 
in exercise of his powers under this sectio n. 19 
 (2) If the lawful occupant of such building or place suffers any loss or injury by reason of the action 
taken under sub -section ( 1), he shall be entitled, on an application made therefor to the competent 
authority within one month from the date of such action, to receive reasonable compensation for such loss 
or injury, unless such action was in the opinion of such competent authority rendered necessary either by 
the use to which such building or place was put, or intended to be put, or by the misconduct of persons 
having access thereto.  
(3) In the event of any dispute in relation to the amount of compensation payable under                  
sub-section ( 2) or the person to whom such amount shall be payable, the matter shall be referred by the 
competent aut hority to the District Collector whose decision thereon shall be final.  
34. Maintenance of order at religious or ceremonial display, etc .—(1) In any case of an actual or 
intended religious or ceremonial or corporate display or exhibition or organised  assemblage in any street 
or public place , as to which or the conduct of, or participation in, which, it shall appear to the competent 
authority that a dispute or contention exists, which is likely to lead to grave disturbance of the peace, the 
competent a uthority may give such orders as to the conduct of the persons concerned towards each other 
and towards the public as it shall deem necessary and reasonable under the circumstances, regard being 
had to the apparent lega l rights and to any established  pract ice of the parties and of the persons interested 
and all persons concerned shall obey such orders.  
(2) Every such order shall be published in the locality or place wherein it is to operate.  
(3) Every order under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to any judg ment, decree, injunction or order 
made by a court having jurisdiction, and shall be rescinded or altered on its being made to appear to the 
competent authority that such order is inconsistent with a judgment, decree, injunction or order of such 
court.  
35. Commissioner of Police may take special measures to prevent outbreak of epidemic disease 
at fairs, etc .—(1) Whenever it shall appear to the Commissioner of Police that any place in Delhi (being 
a place where on account of a pilgrimage, fair or other such o ccurrence, large bodies of persons have 
assembled or are  likely to assemble) is visited or likely to be visited with an outbreak of any epidemic 
disease, he may in consultation with the Corporation or municipality within the local limits of the 
jurisdictio n whereof such place is situated take such special measures and may by a public notice 
prescribe such regulations to be observed by residents of the said place and persons present thereat or 
repairing thereto or returning therefrom as he deems necessary to  prevent the outbreak of such disease or 
the spread thereof.  
(2) The expenses incurred by the Commissioner of Police in respect of the arrangements for sanitation 
and the preservation of order at or about the place of assembly referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be 
recovered from the Corporation or the municipality concerned.  
36. Power to reserv e street or other public place for public purpose and power to authorise 
erecting of barriers in streets .—(1) The Commissioner of Police may, by public notice, tempor arily 
reserve for any public purpose any street or other public place and prohibit persons from entering the area 
so reserved, except on such conditions as may be specified by him.  
(2) The Commissioner of Police may, whenever in his opi nion such action is necessary, — 
(a) authorise such police officer as he thinks fit to erect barriers on any street for the purpose of 
stopping temporarily vehicles driven on such street so as to satisfy himself that the provisions of any 
law for the time being in force have n ot been contravened in respect of any such vehicle or by the 
driver or the person in charge of such vehicle; and  
(b) make such orders as he deems fit for regulating the use of such barriers.  
37. Power to make regulations prohibiting disposal of the dead except at places set apart .—(1) 
The Commissioner of Police may, from time to time , make regulations prohibiting the disposal of the 
dead, whether by cremation, burial or otherwise at places other than those set apart for such purpose:  
Provided that no such  regulations shall be made in respect of any area for which places have not been 
so set apart:  20 
 Provided further that the Commissioner of Police or any officer authorised by him in this behalf may, 
in his discretion, on an application made to him by any per son, grant to such person permission to dispose 
of the corpse of any deceased person at any place other than a place so set apart , if in his opinion such 
disposal is not likely to cause obstruction to traffic or disturbance of the public peace or is not 
objectionable for any other reason.  
(2) Any regulations made under sub -section ( 1) shall specify the places set apart for the disposal of 
the dead of different communities or sections of communities.  
(3) All such regulations shall be deemed to be rules for t he purposes of section 23 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) and shall be subject to the conditions of previous publication and the date 
to be specified under clause ( 3) of that section shall not be earlier than two months from the date on which  
the draft of the proposed regulations is published . 
CHAPTER V  
SPECIAL MEASURES FOR MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND SECURITY OF STATE  
38. Employment of additional police to keep peace .—(1) The Commissioner of Police may, on the 
application of any person, d epute any additional number of police to keep the peace, to preserve order, to 
enforce any of the provisions of this Act or of any other law in respect of any particular class or classes of 
offences or to perform any other duties imposed on the police at a ny place in Delhi.  
(2) Such additional police shall be employed at the cost (which shall be determined by the 
Commissioner of Police in accordance with the rules made in this behalf) of the person making the 
application, but shall be subject to the orders of the police authorities and shall be employed for such 
period as the Commissioner of Police considers necessary.  
(3) If the person upon whose application such additional police are employed shall at any time make a 
written requisition to the Commissioner  of Police for the withdrawal of the said police , he shall be 
relieved from the cost thereof at the expiration of such period not exceeding one week from the date of 
the delivery of such requisition as the Commissioner of Police shall determine.  
(4) Where there is any dispute as to the amount to be paid by way of cost, the Commissioner of Police 
shall, on an application made in that behalf by the aggrieved party, refer the matter to the District 
Collector, whose decision thereon shall be final.  
39. Employme nt of additional police in cases of special danger to public peace .—(1) If in the 
opinion of the Administrator any area in Delhi is in a disturbed or dangerous condition or the conduct of 
the inhabitants or of any particular section or the class of the inh abitants of such area renders it expedient 
to employ temporarily additional police in the area, he may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify the area (hereafter in this section referred to as the disturbed area) in which, and the period for 
which, the additional police shall be employed and thereupon the Commissioner of Police shall depute 
such number of additional police officers as he considers necessary, in the disturbed area:  
Provided that the period so specified may be extended by the Admin istrator from time to time, if in 
his opinion it is necessary so to do in the interests of the public.  
(2) On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1), the Administrator may require the District 
Collector, or any other authority specified by the A dministrator, to recover, whether in whole or in part, 
the cost of such additional police generally from all persons who are inhabitants of the disturbed area or 
specially from any particular section or class of such persons, and in such proportion as the Administrator 
may direct.  
(3) It shall be lawful for the Administrator to exempt, by order in writing, and for sufficient reasons, 
any person from liability to bear any portion of the cost of such additional police.  
Explanation. —In this section and in sect ion 41, the expression “inhabitants ”, when used in relation to 
any disturbed area, includes persons who themselves or by their agents or servants occupy or hold land or 
other immovable property within such area and landlords who themselves or by their agen ts or servants 
collect rent from holders or occupants of land in such area notwithstanding that they do not actually reside 
therein.  21 
 40. Employment of additional police at large work and when apprehension regarding behaviour 
of employees exists .—(1) Whenev er it appears to the Administrator or t o the competent authority that — 
(a) any large work which is being carried on or any public amusement which is being conducted 
in any place is likely to impede the traffic or to attract a large number of people; or  
(b) the behaviour or a reasonable apprehension of the behaviour of the persons employed on any 
railway, canal or other public work, or in or upon any manufactory or other commercial concern, 
under construction or in operation at any place necessitates the emp loyment of additional police at 
such place,  
the Administrator , or the competent authority, as the case may be, may depute such number of additional 
police to the said place for so long as the necessity to employ the additional police shall appear to the 
Administrator or the competent authority to continue.  
(2) Such additional police shall be employed at the cost of the person by whom the work, public 
amusement, manufactory or concern is being constructed, conducted or carried on and the said person 
shall pa y the costs therefor at such rates as the Administrator or the competent authority, as the case may 
be, shall from time to time require.  
41. Compensation for injury caused by unlawful assembly how recoverable .—(1) When any loss 
or damage is caused to any property or when death results or grievous hurt is caused to any person or 
persons, by anything done in the prosecution of the common object of an unlawful assembly, the 
Administrator may, by notification in the O fficial Gazette, specify the area (hereafter in this section called 
the “disturbed area ”) in which, and the date on which or the period during which, such unlawful assembly 
was, in his opinion, held.  
(2) On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1), the District Collector may, after such inquiry 
as he deems necessary, determine the amount of the compensation which, in his opinion, should be paid 
to any person or persons in respect of the loss or damage or death or grievous hurt aforesaid.  
(3) The am ount of the compensation shall be deemed to be a fine imposed under this section, and 
shall be payable by the inhabitants of the disturbed area.  
(4) It shall be lawful for the District Collector to exempt, by order in writing and for sufficient 
reasons, an y person from liability to pay any portion of the compensation amount.  
42. Dispute in regard to cost of deputing additional police or compensation under section 41 .—
In the event of any dispute relating to the cost payable under section 39 or section 40 or the compensation 
determined under section 41 or the person or persons or the section or class of persons by whom or the 
proportion in which such cost or compensation should be paid, the matter shall be referred by the 
Collector, or the Administrator or the  competent authority, as the case may be, on an application made in 
that behalf by the aggrieved party, to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
43. Recovery of amount payable under section 38, 39, 40 or 41 .—Any amount p ayable under 
section 38, section 39, section 40 or section 41 shall be recovered in the same manner as if it were an 
arrear of land revenue.  
44. Collector to award compensation .—(1) Amounts payable under section 38, section 39,     
section 40 or section 41  shall, when recovered, be credited to the Government.  
(2) The District Collector shall pay, from the amounts recovered by him as compensation payable 
under section 41, such amount as he deems just and proper by way of compensation to any person who 
has su ffered loss or damage to property or grievous hurt or to the legal heirs of any person who died, by 
reason of anything done in the prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly.  
(3) No compensation shall be paid under this section , except when a claim has been made therefor 
within forty -five days from the date of the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 41 and the 
District Collector is satisfied that the claimant, where the claim is by the person who suffered the l oss, 
damage or grievous hurt, or the deceased, where the claim is by the legal heirs of such deceased, has been 
free from blame in connection with the occurrence which led to the loss, damage, grievous hurt or death.  22 
 (4) The compensation payable to any per son under sub -section ( 2) shall not in any way be capable of 
being assigned or charged or be liable to attachment or to pass to any person other than the person entitled 
to it by operation of law, nor shall any claim be set off against the same.  
(5) No civ il suit shall be maintainable in respect of any loss, damage or grievous hurt for which 
compensation has been granted under this section.  
45. Recovery of amounts payable under sections 39 and 41 .—Without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in section 43,  all amounts payable under section 39 or section 41 shall be recoverable in the 
manner provided in sections 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), as if each 
such amount were a fine imposed on an offender by a court.  
46. Dispersal  of gangs and bodies of persons .—Whenever it appears to the Commissioner of Police 
that the movement or encampment of any gang or body of persons in any part of Delhi is causing or is 
calculated to cause danger to person or property or alarm or reasonable suspicion that unlawful designs 
are entertained by such gang or body of persons or by members thereof, the Commissioner of Police may, 
by order addressed to the persons appearing to be the leaders or chief men of such gang or body of 
persons and published by announcement or beat of drums, or otherwise as the Commissioner of Police 
thinks fit direct the members o f such gang or body of persons — 
(a) to so conduct themselves as shall seem necessary in order to prevent violence and alarm; or  
(b) to disperse and to remove themselves beyond the limits of Delhi, or  any part thereof, within 
such t ime as the Commissioner of Police shall specify and not to enter Delhi or the part thereof , as the 
case may be, from which they were directed to remove themselves.  
47. Removal of persons about to commit offences .—Whenever it appears  to the Commissioner of 
Police — 
(a) that the movements or acts of any person are causing or are calculated to cause alarm, danger 
or harm to person or property; or  
(b) that there are reasonabl e grounds for believing that such person is engaged or is about to be 
engaged in the commission of an offence involving force or violence or an offence punishable under 
Chapter XII, Chapter XVI, Chapter XVII or Chapter XXII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or 
under section 290 or sections 489A to 489E (both inclusive) of that Code or in the abetment of any 
such offence; or  
(c) that such person — 
(i) is so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at large in Delhi or in any part thereof 
hazardous t o the community; or  
(ii) has been found habitually intimidating other persons by acts of violence or by show of 
force; or  
(iii) habitually commits affray or breach of peace or riot, or habitually makes forcible 
collection of subscription or threatens peopl e for illegal pecuniary gain for himself or for     
others; or  
(iv) has been habitually passing indecent remarks on women and girl s, or teasing them by 
overtures;  
and that in the opinion of the Commissioner of Police witnesses are not willing to come forward to give 
evidence in public against such person by reason of apprehension on their part as regards the safety of 
their person or property, the Commissioner of Police may, by order in writing duly served on such person, 
or by beat of drum or otherwis e as he thinks fit, direct such person to so conduct himself as shall seem 
necessary in order to prevent violence and alarm or to remove himself outside Delhi or any part thereof, 
by such route and within such time as the Commissioner of Police may specify  and not to enter or return 
to Delhi or part thereof, as the case may be, from which he was directed to remove himself.  
  23 
 Explanation. —A person who during a period within one year immediately preceding the 
commencement of an action under this section has b een found on not less than three occasions to have 
committed or to have been involved in any of the acts referred to in this section shall be deemed to have 
habitually committed that act.  
48. Removal of persons convicted of certain offences .—If a person ha s been convicted — 
(a) of an offence under Chapter XII, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal           
Code (45 of 1860); or  
(b) of an offence under section 3 or section 4 of the Delhi Public Gambling                               
Act, 1955 (Delh i Act 9 of 1955), or under section 12 of that Act in so far as it relates to satta         
gambling or on two or more occasions under any other provision of that Act (including section 12 of 
that Act in so far as it does not relate to satta gambling); or  
(c) of any offence under the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls                     
Act, 1956 (104 of 1956); or  
(d) of any offence under section 25, section 26, section 27, section 28 or section 29 of the Arms 
Act, 1959 (54 of 1959); or  
(e) of any offence under section 135 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); or  
(f) of any offence under section 61, section 63 or section 66 of the Punjab Excise                      
Act, 1955 (Punjab Act No. 18 of 1955), as in force in Delhi; or  
(g) on two or  more  occasions of an offence under — 
(i) the Opium Act, 1878 (1 of 1878); or  
(ii) the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (2 of 1930); or  
(iii) the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940); or  
(iv) section 11 of the Bo mbay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959 (Bombay Act                     
No. 10 of 1960), as in force in Delhi; or  
(h) on three or more occasions of an offence under section 105 or section 107 of this Act,  
the Commissioner of Police may, if he has reason to believe that such person is likely again to eng age 
himself in the commission of any of the offences referred to in this section, by order in writing, direct 
such person to remove himself beyond the limits of Delhi or any part thereof, by such route and within 
such time as the Commissioner of Police may  specify and not to enter or return to Delhi or any part 
thereof, as the case may be, from which he was directed to remove himself.  
49. Period of operation of orders under section 46, 47 or 48 .—Any direction made under      
section 46, section 47 or seclio n 48 not to enter Delhi or any part thereof, shall be for such period as may 
be specified therein, and shall in no case exceed a period of two years from the date on which it was 
made.  
50. Hearing to be given before order under section 46, 47 or 48 is passed .—(1) Before an order 
under section 46, section 47 or section 48 is made against any person, the Commissioner of Police shall 
by notice in writing inform him of the general nature of the material allegations against him and give him 
a reasonable oppo rtunity of tendering an explanation regarding them.  
(2) If such person makes an application for the examination of any witness to be produced by him, the 
Commissioner of Police shall grant such application and examine such witness, unless for reasons to be  
recorded in writing, the Commissioner of Police is of opinion that such application is made for the 
purpose of causing vexation or delay.  
(3) Any written explanation put in by such person shall be filed with the record of the case.  
(4) Such person shall b e entitled to be represented in the proceeding before the Commissioner of 
Police by a counsel.  24 
 (5) (a) The Commissioner of Police may for the purpose of securing the attendance of any person 
against whom any order is proposed to be made under section 46, s ection 47 or section 48 require such 
person, by order in writing, to appear before him and to furnish a security bond with or without sureties 
for attendance during the inquiry.  
(b) The provisions of sections 119 to 1 24 (both inclusive) of the Code of Crim inal                 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the order under clause ( a) to 
furnish security bond.  
(6) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Commissioner of Police, while issuing notice to 
any person under sub -section ( 1) may issue a warrant for his arrest and the provisions of sections 70 to 89 
(both inclusive) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to such warrant.  
(7) The provisions of section 445, section 446, section 447 or section 448 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to all bonds executed under this 
section.  
51. Appe al against orders under section  46, 47 or 48 .—(1) Any per son aggrieved by an order made 
under section 46, section 47 or section 48 may appeal to the Administrator within thirty days from the 
date of the service of such order on him.  
(2) An appeal under this section shall be preferred in duplicate in the form of a memorandum, setting 
forth concisely the grounds of objection to the order appealed against, and shall be accompanied by that 
order or a certified copy thereof.  
(3) On receipt of such appeal, the Administrator may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to  the 
appellant to be heard either personally or by a counsel and after such further inquiry, if any, as he may 
deem necessary, confirm, vary or set aside the order appealed against:  
Provided that the order appealed against shall remain in force pending the  disposal of the appeal, 
unless the Administrator otherwise directs.  
(4) The Administrator shall make every endeavour to dispose of an appeal under this section within a 
period of three months from the date of receipt of such appeal.  
(5) In calculating the  period of thirty days provided for an appeal under this section, the t ime taken for 
obtaining a certified copy of the order appealed against, shall be excluded.  
52. Finality of order in certain cases .—An order passed by the Commissioner of Police under 
section 46, section 47 or section 48 or the Administrator under section 51 shall not be called in question 
in any court except on the grou nd— 
(a) that the Commissioner of Police or the Administrator, as the case may be, had not followed 
the procedure laid do wn in sub -section ( 1), sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) of section 50 or in 
section 51, as the case may be; or  
(b) that there was no material before the Commissioner of Police or the Administrator, as the case 
may be, upon which he could have based his o rder; or  
(c) in the case of an order made under section 47 or an order in appeal therefrom to the 
Administrator under section 51, the Commissioner of Police or the Administrator, as the case may be, 
was not of the opinion that witnesses were unwilling to come forward to give evidence in public 
against the person against whom such order has been made.  
53. Procedure on failure of person to leave the area and his entry therein after removal .—If a 
person to whom a direction has been issued under section 46, section 47 or section 48 to remove himself 
from Delhi or any part  thereof — 
(a) fails to remove himself as directed; or  
  25 
 (b) having so removed himself enters Delhi or any part thereof within the period specified in the 
order, otherwise than with the permis sion in writing of the Commissioner of Police under section 54,  
the Commissioner of Police may cause him to be arrested and removed in police custody to such place 
outside Delhi or any part thereof as the Commissioner of Police may in each case specify.  
54. Temporary permission to enter and consequences of non -observance of conditions of such 
permission .—(1) The Commissioner of Police or any other police officer specially empowered by the 
Administrator in that behalf may, by order in writing, permit any person, in respect of whom an order 
under section 46, section 47 or section 48 has been made, to return to Delhi or any part thereof, from 
which he was directed to remove himself, for such temporary period and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified  in such order and may require him to execute a bond with or without surety for the due 
observance of the conditions imposed.  
(2) The Commissioner of Police may at any time revoke any such permission.  
(3) Any person who with such permission returns to Delh i or any part thereof shall observe the 
conditions imposed, and at the expiry of the temporary period for which he was permitted to return, or on 
the revocation of such permission before the expiry of such temporary period, shall remove himself 
outside Del hi or any part thereof, as the case may be, and shall not return thereto within the unexpired 
portion of the period specified in the original order made under section 46, section 47 or section 48 
without a fresh permission.  
(4) If such person fails to obse rve any of the conditions imposed, or to remove himself accordingly or 
having so removed himself enters or returns to Delhi or any part thereof, as the case may be, without fresh 
permission, the Commissioner of Police may cause him to be arrested and remov ed in police custody to 
such place outside Delhi or part thereof as the Commissioner of Police may in each case specify.  
55. Taking measurements and photographs, etc., of persons against whom an order under 
section 46, 47 or 48 is made .—Every person agains t whom an order has been made under section 46, 
section 47 or section 48 shall, if so required by the Commissioner of Police, allow his measurements and 
photograph  to be taken by a police officer in the prescribed manner.  
56. Resistance to the taking of me asurements, etc .—(1) If any person as aforesaid when required to 
allow his measurements or photograph to be taken resists or refuses to allow the taking of such 
measurements or photograph, it shall be lawful to use all necessary means to secure the taking thereof.  
(2) Resistance to or refusal to allow the taking of measurements or photographs under this Act shall 
be deemed to be an offence under section 186 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) Where an order under section 46, section 47 or section 48 is set aside in appeal, all measurements 
and photographs (including negatives) taken under this section shall be destroyed or made over to the 
person against whom such order is made.  
57. Banning of use of dress , etc., resembling uniform of armed forces .—(1) If the Administrator is 
satisfied that the wearing in public, by any member of any body, or association or organisation, of any 
dress or article of apparel resembling any uniform required to be worn by a member of the Armed Forces 
of the Union or by a me mber of any police force or of any force constituted by or under any law for the 
time being in force, is like ly to prejudice the security of  the State or the maintenance of public order, he 
may, by a general or special order, prohibit or restrict the weari ng, or display, in publ ic of any such dress 
or article or apparel by any member of such body or association or organisation.  
(2) Every general or special order under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in the manner prescribed 
for the publication of a publi c notice under section 142.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section a dress or an article of apparel shall be deemed to be 
worn or displayed in public if it is worn or displayed in any place to which the public have access.  
58. Constitution of Defenc e Societies .—(1) For the protection of persons, the security of property 
and the public safety in any locality the Commissioner of Police may constitute voluntary bodies 
(hereafter in this section referred to as Defence Societies) in the prescribed manner.  26 
 (2) The Commissioner of Police or any officer of a Defence Society may at any time call up officers 
subordinate to him or any member of a Defence Society for training or to discharge any of the duties 
under this Act assigned to them.  
(3) Every officer or mem ber of a Defence Society shall — 
(a) on appointment receive a certificate in such form as may be specified or approved by the 
Administrator in this behalf; and  
(b) when  called up for duty have the same powers, privileges and protection as are vested in a 
police officer appointed under this Act.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, an officer or member 
of a Defence Society shall n ot be disqualified for being chosen  as, or for being, a member of — 
(a) the Delhi Metropolitan Council or the Municipal Corporation of Delhi; or  
(b) any other local authority,  
by reason of the fact that he is a member or officer of such Society.  
CHAPTER VI  
EXECUTIVE DUTIES AND POWERS OF POLICE OFFICERS  
59. Duty of police officer to enforce provisions of the Act .—(1) It shall be the duty of every police 
officer to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made 
thereunder and for that pu rpose such police officer may, — 
(a) warn persons who from ignorance fail to comply with any provision of this Act or any rule, 
regulation or order made thereunder;  
(b) require any person acting or about to act contrary to any prov ision of this Act or rule, 
regulation or order made thereunder, to desist from so doing;  
(c) subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), arrest any person contravening any 
provision of this Act or any  rule, regulation or order made  threunder, wh ere such contravention is an 
offence punishable under this Act;  
(d) seize any object used, or about to be used, in contravening, or in contravention of, the 
provisions of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder, where such contravention i s 
an offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) A police officer shall not arrest any person under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) without a warrant 
issued by a Metropolitan  Magistrate, unless such person — 
(a) has contravened any regulation made under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 28;  
(b) has contravened any order or notification made under section 29, sub -section ( 1) or            
sub-section ( 2) of section 30, section 32, section 47, section 48 or sub -section ( 1) of section 57;  
(c) commits in the presence of such police officer an offence punishable under section 97,       
sub-section ( 1) of section 108, clause ( a), (b) or ( c) of section 110 or sub -section ( 2) of section 113 in 
respect of the contravention of any order made under s ection 33 or section 34;  
(d) has committed, or is reasonably suspected to have committed, an offence punishable under 
section 100 in relation to any dwelling house, private premises or any other land or ground attached 
thereto:  
Provided that the person in possession or having charge of that dwelling house, private premises 
or land or ground complains of the commission of such offence;  
(e) has committed, or is reasonably suspected to have committed an offence punishable under 
section 101, section 102 or clau se (c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 113;  
  27 
 (f) commits in his presence in any street or public place any non -cognizable offence punishable 
under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder if such person — 
(i) after being warned by the police office r persists in committing such offence; or  
(ii) refuses to accompany the polic e officer to a police station on  being required so to do.  
(3) The Commissioner of Police or any other police officer especially empowered in this behalf by 
the Commissioner of Police may arrest without a warrant issued by a Metropolitan Magistrate any person 
who has committed an offence punishable under section 92.  
60. Other duties of a police officer .—It shall be th e duty of every police officer — 
(a) promptly  to serve every summons and obey and execute every warrant or other order lawfully 
issued to him by the competent authority and to comply with all lawful commands of his superior;  
(b) to the best of his ability, to obtain intelligence concerning the commis sion of cognizable 
offences or designs to commit such offences and to lay such information and to take such other steps 
consistent with law and with the order s of his superiors as shall be best calculated to bring offenders 
to justice and to prevent the co mmission of cognizable and, within his view, of non -cognizable 
offences;  
(c) to prevent to the best of his ability the commission of public nuisances;  
(d) to apprehend without unreasonable delay all persons whom he is legally authorised to 
apprehend and fo r whose apprehension there is sufficient reason;  
(e) to aid any other police officer when called upon by such other police officer or in the case of 
need in the discharge of the duty of such other police officer, in such ways as would be lawful and 
reasona ble on the part of the officer aided;  
(f) to prevent the breach of the public peace;  
(g) to afford every assistance within his power to disabled or helpless persons in the streets;  
(h) to take charge of intoxicated persons and of lunatics at large, who appear dangerous or 
incapable or taking care of themselves;  
(i) to take prompt measures to procure necessary help for any person under arrest or in custody, 
who is wounded or sick and whilst  guarding or conducting any such person to have due regard to his 
condition;  
(j) to arrange for the proper sustenance and shelter of every person who is under arrest or in 
custody;  
(k) in conducting searches, to refrain from needless rudeness and the causi ng of unnecessary 
annoyance;  
(l) in dealing with women and children, to act with strict regard to decency and with reasonable 
gentleness;  
(m) to use his best endeavours to prevent any loss or damage by fire;  
(n) to use his best endeavours to avert any acci dent or danger to the public;  
(o) to regulate and control  the traffic in the streets, to prevent obstructions therein and to the best 
of his ability, to prevent the contravention of any rule, regulation or order made under this Act or any 
other law in forc e for observance by the public in or near the streets;  
(p) to keep order in the streets and at and within public bathing and washing places, fairs, temples 
and all other places of public resort and in the neighbourhood of places of public worship;  
(q) to r egulate resort to public bathing and washing places and all other places of public resort, to 
prevent overcrowding there and to the best of his ability, to prevent the contravention of any 
regulation or order lawfully made for observance by the public at s uch place; and  
(r) to discharge such other duties as are imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force.  28 
 61. Power to enter places of public resort .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, 
regulations and orders made thereunder, every  police officer may, for the purpose of discharging any of 
the duties referred to in section 59 or section 60 enter without a warrant and inspect any place of public 
resort which he has reason to believe is used as a place for the storing, sale or consumpt ion of intoxicating 
drinks or narcotics or a place for resort of loose and disorderly characters.  
62. Power to search suspected persons in street, etc .—When in a street or a place of public resort a 
person is in possession or suspected to be in possession of any article which a police officer in good faith 
suspects to be stolen property, such police officer may search such person and may require an account in 
relation to any article found in his possession and should the account given by the possessor be ma nifestly 
false or suspicious, may detain such article after giving to the possessor a receipt in the prescribed form 
and report the facts to a Metropolitan Magistrate who shall thereupon proceed according to the provisions 
of sections 457, 458 and 459 of t he Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
63. Emergency duties of police .—(1) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare any specified service to be an essential service to the community.  
(2) A declaration made under sub-section ( 1) shall remain in force for one month in the first instance, 
but may be extended from time to time by a like notification.  
(3) Upon a declaration being made under sub -section ( 1) and so long as it remains in force, it shall be 
the duty of eve ry police officer to obey an y order given by any superior officer in relation to any 
employment in connection with the service specified in the declaration.  
64. Superior police officer may himself perform duties imposed on a subordinate officer .—A 
police o fficer of a rank superior to that of a constable may perform any duty assigned by law or by a 
lawful order to any officer subordinate to him, and in the case of any duty imposed on such subordinate, a 
superior may aid, supplement, supersede, or prevent any  action of such subordinate by his own action or 
that of any person lawfully acting under his command or authority, whenever the same shall appear 
necessary or expedient for giving more comple te or convenient effect to the l aw or for avoiding any 
infringem ent thereof.  
65. Persons bound to comply with the reasonable directions of police officer .—(1) All persons 
shall be bound to comply with the reasonable directions given by a police officer in the discharge of his 
duties under this Act.  
(2) Where any person  resists, refuses or fails to comply with any direction referred to in                 
sub-section ( 1), a police officer may , without prejudice to any other action that he may take under any 
other provision of thi s Act or any other law for the t ime bei ng in force, remove such person  and either 
produce him before a Metropolitan Magistrate or, in trivial cases, release him when the occasion which 
necessitated the removal has ceased to exist:  
Provided that the person  so removed shall in all cases be produced before the Metropolitan Magistrate 
or released, as the case may be, within a period of twenty -four hours of such removal.  
CHAPTER VII  
POWERS IN RELATION TO UNCLAIMED PROPERTY  
66. Police to take charge of unclaimed property .—(1) It shall be the duty of every police of ficer to 
take temporary charge — 
(a) of all unclaimed property found by, or made over to, him; and  
(b) of all property found lying in any public street, if the owner or person in charge of such 
property, on being directed to remove the same , refuses or fails to do so.  
(2) The police officer taking charge of the property under sub -section ( 1) shall furnish an inventory 
thereof to the Commissioner of Police.  
67. Procedure for disposal of property taken charge of under section 66 .—(1) Where any 
property has been taken charge of under sub -section ( 1) of section 66, the Commissioner of Police shall 
issue a proclamation specifying the articles of which such property consists and requiring that any person 29 
 who may have a claim thereto shall appear bef ore him or some other officer whom he authorises in this 
behalf and establish his claim within six months from the date of such proclamation.  
(2) If the property, or any part thereof, is subject to speedy and natural decay or consists of livestock 
or if th e property appears to be of the value of less than fifty rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction 
under the orders of the Commissioner of Police and the net proceeds of such sale shall be dealt with in the 
same manner as is hereinafter provided for the disposal of the said property.  
(3) Where any person who has a claim to the property is required by the proclamation under          
sub-section ( 1) to appear before the other officer authorised by the Commissioner of Police in that behalf 
and establish his claim , such officer shall forward the record of the proceedings before him with his 
findings thereon to the Commissioner of Police.  
68. Delivery of property to person entitled .—(1) The Commissioner of Police on being satisfied of 
the title of any claimant to the possession or administration of the property specified in the proclamation 
issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 67  order the same to be delivered to him, after deduction or 
payment of the expenses incurred by the Delhi p olice in the seizure and d etention thereof.  
(2) The Commissioner of Police may, at his discretion, before making any order under                   
sub-section ( 1), take such security as he may think proper from the person to whom the said property is to 
be delivered and nothing her einbefore contained shall affect the right of any person to recover the whole 
or any part of the same from the person to whom it may have been delivered pursuant to such order.  
69. In default of claim, property to be at disposal of Government .—(1) If no person establishes 
his claim to such property within the period specified in the proclamation, the property, or such part 
thereof as has not already been sold under sub -section ( 2) of section 67, may be sold by auction under the 
orders of the Commissioner of Police and the proceeds thereof shall be credited to the Government.  
(2) If any claim is made to any proceeds credited under sub -section ( 1) to the Government and if such 
claim is established, whether wholly or to any extent, to the satisfaction of the prescribed authority, the 
Administrator shall pay to the claimant the amount determined in that behalf by the prescribed authority.  
(3) The form and manner in which claims may be made under sub -section ( 2) and the procedure for 
dealing with such claims and  all other matters connected therewith shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXERCISE OF POWERS UNDER THE CODE OF  
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973  
70. Power of Central Government to authorise  Commissioner of Police and certain other 
officers to exercise powers of District Magistrates and Executive Magistrates under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
and subject to such conditions and limitations as may  be specified therein, empower — 
(a) the Commissioner of Police to exercise and perform in relation to Delhi the powers and duties 
of an Executive Magistrate and of a District Magistrate under such of the provisions of the C ode of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), as may be specified in the notification;  
(b) any officer subordinate to the Commissioner of Police (not being an officer below the rank of 
an Assistant Commissioner of Police) to exercise and perform in relation  to such areas in Delhi as 
may be specified in the notification the powers and duties of an Executive Magistrate under such of 
the provisions of the said Code as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Every officer subordinate to the Commissioner of Police shall, in the exercise and performance of 
any powers and duties which he is empowered to exercise or perform under sub -section ( 1), be subject to 
the general control of the Commissioner of Police in the same manner and to the same extent as an 
Execu tive Magistrate appointed under section 20 of the said Code would be subject to the general control 
of the District Magistrate appointed under that section.  
  30 
 (3) The Commissioner of Police or any officer subordinate to him shall not be subject in the exer cise 
and performance of any powers and duties which he is empowered to exercise and perform under        
sub-section ( 1), to the general control of the District Magistrate appointed under section 20 of the said 
Code.  
(4) The provisions of this section shal l have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the said 
Code.  
71. Notifications under section 70 to be laid before Parliament .—Every notification made by the 
Central Government under section 70 shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or both 
Houses agree that the notification should not be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however , that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification.  
72. [References to Judicial Magistrate of the first class in sections 108, 109 and 110 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedu re, 1973 not to be construed as references to an Executive Magistrate .] Omitted by the 
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Ac t, 1980 (63 of 1980), s. 9 (w.e.f . 23-9-1980).  
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL POWERS UNDER THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960  
73. Powers with regard to offences under Act 59 of 1960 .—(1) When in respect of an animal an 
offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 or section 12 of the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals Act, 1960 has been committed, or when there is a reasonable ground for suspecting that such 
offence has been committed, a pol ice officer may — 
(a) take the animal to the Metropolitan Magistrate, or  
(b) if the accused person so requires, take the animal to a veterinary officer specified by general 
or speci al order by the Administrator in this behalf:  
Provided that the police officer may, instead of taking the animal to a veterinary officer, take the 
animal for detention in a dispensary, or in any suitable place approved by the Administrator by 
general or sp ecial order and the animal shall thereupon be detained there until its production before a 
Metropolitan Magistrate, or  
(c) take the animal to an infirmary appointed under section 35 of the said Act for treatment and 
detention therein, pending direction of a Magistrate under sub -section ( 2) of that section, or  
(d) when the animal is in such physical condition that it cannot be taken to a veterinary officer or 
a Metropolitan Magistrate, draw up a report of the condition of the animal in the presence of two or  
more respectable persons describing such wound, sores, fractures, bruises, or other marks of injury as 
may be found on the body of the animal:  
Provided that the police officer may take the animal for detention in a dispensary or any suitable place 
approve d by the Administrator by general or special order and the animal shall thereupon be detained 
there until its production before a Metropolitan Magistrate.  
(2) Where an animal is detained in a dispensary, infirmary or other place under sub -section ( 1), the 
animal shall be produced before a Metropolitan Magistrate with the least possible delay and in any case 
within a period not exceeding three days from the date on which it was so detained.  
74. Powers of Metropolitan Magistrate to return animal to person fro m whose possession it was 
taken .—When the animal is brought before a Metropolitan Magistrate under section 73, the Magistrate 
may direct the animal to be returned to the person from whose possession it was taken on such person 
giving security to the satisf action of the Metropolitan Magistrate binding himself to produce the animal 
when required or may direct that the animal shall be sent for treatment and ca re to an infirmary and be 
detained there as provided in section 35 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Ani mals Act, 1960 (59 of 1960) 
or may make such order as he thinks fit regarding the disposal or custody or production of the animal.  31 
 75. Veterinary officer to examine the animal .—The veterinary officer before whom an animal is 
brought under section 73 shall with all convenient speed examine the same and draw up a report of such 
examination and a copy of the report of such examination shall be delivered free of charge to the accused 
person if he applies for it.  
76. Animal to be dealt with under Act 59 of 1960 .—When under section 73, a police officer takes 
an animal for detention in a dispensary or infirmary or other place before its production before a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate directs its further detention in an infirmary,          
sub-sections ( 3) to ( 7) (both inclusive) of section 35 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals                
Act, 1960 shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the detention of animal (including the cost of 
transport, maintenance and treatment of the animal) in the dispensary, infirmary or other place.  
77. Power of police officer to unsaddle animal or to unload it .—When a police officer in good 
faith suspects that any animal being employed in any work or labour is, by reason of any sore, unfit to be 
so employed, he may require the person in charge of such animal to unsaddle or unload it for the purpose 
of ascertaining whether any sore exists and, if any person refuses to do so, such police officer may 
himself unsaddle or unload the animal or may cause t he same to be unsaddled or unloaded.  
78. Arrest without warrant in case of certain offences under Act 59 of 1960 .—Any police officer 
may arrest, without a warrant from a Magistrate, any person committing in his presence any offence 
punishable under clauses  (a) to ( m) (both inclusive) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11 of the Prevention of 
Cruelly to Animals Act, 1960.  
79. Provisions of Chapter to be in addition to the provisions of Act 59 of 1960 .—The provisions 
of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and no t in derogation of, the provisions of the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.  
CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS  
80. Disregarding the rules of the road .—No person shall — 
(a) when driving a vehicle along a street (except in cases of actual necessity  or of some other 
sufficient reason for deviation) fail to keep on the left side of such street and when passing any other 
vehicle proceeding in the same direction fail to keep on the right side of such vehicle; or  
(b) leave in any street or public place i nsufficiently tended or secured any animal or vehicle.  
81. Causing obstruction or mischief by animal .—No person shall cause obstruction, damage, 
injury, danger, alarm or mischief  in any street or public place — 
(i) by misbehaviour, negligence or ill -usage i n the driving, management, treatment or care of any 
animal or vehicle; or  
(ii) by driving any vehicle or animal laden with timber, poles or other unwieldy articles through a 
street or public place contrary to any regulation made in that behalf.  
82. Exposin g animal for hire, sale, etc .—No person shall in any street or public place expose for 
hire or sale any animal or vehicle, clean any furniture or vehicle, or clean or groom any horse or other 
animal except at such times and places as the competent authorit y permits, or shall train or break in any 
horse or other animal or make any vehicle or any part of a vehicle or (except when as a result of any 
accident repairing on the spot is unavoidable) repair any vehicle or part of a vehicle, or carry on therein 
any manufacture or operation so as to be a serious impediment to traffic or serious annoyance to residents 
in the vicinity or to the public.  
83. Causing any obstruction in a street .—No person shall cause obstruction  in any street or      
public place — 
(a) by allowing any animal or vehicle, which has to be loaded or unloaded, or take up or set down 
passengers, to remain or stand in the street or the public place longer than may be necessary for such 
purpose; or  32 
 (b) by leaving any vehicle standing or fastening a ny cattle in the street or the public place; or  
(c) by using any part of a street or public place as a halting place for vehicles or cattle; or  
(d) by leaving any box, bale, package or other things whatsoever in or upon a street for an 
unreasonable length of time or contrary to any regulation; or  
(e) by exposing anything for sale or setting out anything for sale in or upon any stall, booth, 
board, cask, basket or in any other way whatsoever.  
84. Obstructing a footway .—No person shall drive, ride, load, prop el or leave on any footway any 
animal or vehicle other than a perambulator or fasten any animal in such a way that the animal can stand 
across or upon such footway.  
85. Causing obstruction and annoyance by performances, etc .—No person shall, in contraventi on 
of any regulation made by the Commissioner of Police, — 
(a) exhibit any mimetic, musical or other performances of such a nature as may attract crowds; or  
(b) carry or place bulky advertisements, pictures, figures or emblems  in any street or public place,  
whereby any obstruction to passengers or annoyance to the residents in the vicinity may be occasioned.  
86. Doing offensive acts in or near  a street or public place .—No person shall slaughter any animal, 
clean a carcass or hide, or bathe or wash his person in or near to and within sight of a street or public 
place, except at a place set apart for the purpose, so as to cause annoyance to the neighbouring residents 
or to passers -by. 
87. Letting loose horse , etc., and suffering ferocious dogs to be at large .—No person shall  in any 
street or public place — 
(a) negligently let loose any horse or other animal, so as to cause danger, injury, alarm or 
annoyance; or  
(b) suffer a ferocious dog to be at large without a muzzle; or  
(c) set on or urge a dog or other animal to attack, worry or put in fear any person or horse or other 
animal.  
88. Bathing or washing in places not set apart for those purposes .—No person shall bathe or wash  
in, or by the side of, a public well, tank or reservoir not set apart for such purpose by order of the 
competent authority, or in, or by the side of, any pond, pool, aqueduct, part of a river, stream, nullah  or 
other source or means of water supply in which such bathing or washing is forbidden by order of the 
competent authority.  
89. Defiling water in public wells, etc .—No person shall defile or cause to be defiled the water in 
any public well,  tank, reservoi r, pond, pool, aq ueduct or part of a river, stream, nullah or other source or 
means of water supply, so as to render the same less fit for any purpose for which it is set apart by the 
order of the competent authority.  
90. Obstructing bathers .—No person sha ll obstruct or incommode a person bathing at a place set 
apart for the purpose by the order of the competent authority under section 88 by wilful intrusion or by 
using such place for any purpose for which it is not so set apart.  
91. Behaving indecently in public .—No person shall wilfully and indecently expose his person in 
any street or public place or place of public resort or within sight of, and in such manner as to be seen 
from, any street or public place or place of public resort, whether from within a ny house or building or 
not, or use indecent language or behave indecently or riotously or in a disorderly manner in a street or 
public place or place of public resort or in any office, police station or station house.  
92. Obstructing or annoying passenger s in the street .—No person shall wilfully push, press, hustle 
or obstruct any passenger in a street or public place or by violent movements, menacing gestures, wanton 
personal annoyance, screaming, shouting, wilfully frightening horses or cattle or otherwi se, disturb the 
public peace or order.  33 
 93. Misbehaviour with intent to provoke a breach of the peace .—No person shall use in any street 
or public place any threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour with intent to provoke a breach 
of the peace or  whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned.  
94. Prohibition against flying kites , etc.—No person  shall  fly a kite or any other thing so as to cause 
danger, injury or alarm to persons, animals or property.  
95. Committing nuisance in or near street, etc.—No person shall in or near to any street, public 
place or place of public resort — 
(a) commit a nuisance by easing himself; or  
(b) having the care or custody of any child under seven years of age, suffer such child to commit 
a nuisance as aforesaid; or  
(c) spit or throw any dust, ashes, refuse or rubbish so as to cause annoyance to any passer -by. 
96. Disregard of notice in public building .—No person shall, in any court, police station, police 
office or building occupied by Government or building occupie d by any local body, smoke, or spit in 
contravention of a notice, by the competent authority in charge of such place, displayed in such court, 
police station, police office or building.  
97. Penalties for offences under sections 80 to 96 .—Any person who con travenes any of the 
provisions of sections 80 to 96 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees, or, in default of payment of such fine, with imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding eight days.  
98. Pena lty for failure to keep in confinement cattle, etc .—(1) Whoever allows any cattle which 
are his property or in his charge to stray in any street or to trespass upon any public or private property 
shall on conviction be punished — 
(a) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with 
fine which may extend to three hundred rupees, or with both; and  
(b) for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months , or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) The Metropolitan Magistrate trying an offence u nder sub -section ( 1) may order — 
(a) that the accused shall pay such compensation not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees as 
such Magi strate considers reasonable to any person for any damage proved to have been caused to his 
property or the produce of his land by the cattle under the control of the accused trespassing on his 
land; and  
(b) that the cattle in respect of which the offence h as been committed shall be forfeited to the 
Government.  
(3) Any compensation awarded under sub -section ( 2) may be recovered as if it were a fine imposed 
under this section.  
(4) It shall be the duty of every police officer and it shall be lawful for any other person to seize and 
take to any cattle pound for confinement therein any cattle found straying in any street or trespassing 
upon any private or public property.  
(5) Any fine imposed under this section may, without prejudice to any other means of reco very 
provided by law, be recovered by sale of all or any of the cattle in respect of which the offence was 
committed, whether they are the property of the person convicted of the offence or were only in his 
charge when the offence was committed.  
(6) Notwit hstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable.  
  34 
 99. Punishment for cruelty to animals .—Whoever in any place cruelly beats, goads, overworks,   
ill-treats or tortures or causes, or procures to be cruelly beaten, goaded, overworked, ill -treated or 
tortured, any animal shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment which may extend to one 
month, or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with bo th. 
100. Wilful trespass .—Whoever without satisfactory excuse wilfully enters or remains in or upon 
any dwelling -house or premises or land or ground attached thereto, or on any ground, building, 
monument or structure belonging to Government or used for pub lic purposes, or on any vehicle, shall, on 
conviction, whether he causes any actual damage or not, be punished with imprisonment which may 
extend to seven days or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both.  
101. False alarm of fire or d amage to fire alarm .—Whoever knowingly gives or causes to be given 
a false alarm of fire to the fire brigade of the Government or the Corporation or a municipality or to any 
officer or fireman thereof, whether by means of a street fire alarm, statement, me ssage or otherwise, or 
with intent to give such false alarm wilfully breaks the glass of, or otherwise damages, a street fire alarm, 
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with 
fine which may exte nd to one hundred rupees, or with both.  
102. Being found under suspicious circumstances between sunset and sunrise .—Whoever is 
found between sunset and sunrise — 
(a) armed with any dangerous instrument with intent to commit an offence; or  
(b) having his fac e covered, or otherwise disguised with intent to commit an offence; or  
(c) in any dwelling -house or other building, or on any vehicle, without being able satisfactorily to 
account for his presence there; or  
(d) lying or loitering in any street, yard or oth er place, being a reputed thief and without being 
able to give a satisfactory account of himself; or  
(e) having in his possession without lawful excuse (the burden of proving which excuse shall be 
on such person) any implement of house breaking,  
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months.  
103. Possession of property of which no satisfactory account can be given .—Whoever has in his 
possession or conveys in any manner, or offers for sale or pawn, anything w hich there is reason to believe 
is stolen property or property fraudulently obtained, shall , if he fails to account for such possession or act 
to the satisfaction of the Metropolitan Magistrate, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which  may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with 
both.  
104. Omission by pawn -brokers , etc., to report to police possession or tender of property 
suspected to be stolen .—Whoever  being a pawn -broker, dealer in  second h and property, or worker in 
metals, or reasonably believed by the Commissioner of Police to be such a person, and having received 
from a police officer written or printed information in relation to any property suspected to have been 
transferred by any offe nce mentioned in section 410 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or by any 
offence punishable under section 417, section 418, section 419 or section 420 of the said Code, is found 
in possession, or, after the receipt of such information, comes into posse ssion or has an offer, either by 
way of sale, pawn, exchange , or for custody, alteration or otherwise, howsoever, made to him, of property 
answering the description contained in such information, shall , unless — 
(i) he forthwith gives information to the Com missioner of Police, or at a police station of such 
possession or offers and takes all reasonable means to ascertain and to give information as aforesaid 
of the name and address of the person from whom the possession or offer was received, or  
(ii) the prop erty, being an article of common wearing apparel or otherwise, is incapable of 
identification from the written or printed information given and has been in no way concealed after 
the receipt of such information,  35 
 on conviction, be punished with fine which m ay extend to fifty rupees in respect of each such article of 
property so in his possession or offered to him.  
105. Melting, etc ., of property referred to in section 104 .—Whoever having received such 
information as is referred to in section 104 alters, melt s, defaces or puts away or causes or suffers to be 
altered, melted, defaced or put away, without the previous permission of the police, any such property as 
is referred to in that section shall, on proof that the same was stolen property within the meaning  of 
section 410 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or property in respect of which any offence punishable 
under section 417, section 418, section 419 or section 420 of the said Code has been committed, be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine, or with both.  
106. Taking pledge from child .—Whoever takes from any child, not appearing to be above the age 
of fourteen years, any article whatsoever as a pawn, pledge or security for any sum of money lent, 
advanced or delivered to such child or without the knowledge and consent of the owner of the article buys 
from such child any article whatsoever, shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees.  
107. Suffering disorderly conduct at p laces of public amusement , etc.—Whoever, being the 
keeper of any place of public amusement or public entertainment, knowingly permits or suffers 
drunkenness or other disorderly behaviour or any gambling whatsoever, in such place, shall, on 
conviction, be p unished with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
108. Cheating at games and gambling in street .—(1) Whoever by any fraud or unlawful device or 
malpractice in playing at or with cards, dice or other game or in taking part in the stakes or wagers, or in 
betting on the sides or hands of the players, or in wagering on the event of any game, sports, pastime or 
exercise, wins from any other person, for himself or any other or others, any sum of money or valuable 
thing, shall be deemed to have committed the offence of cheating within the meaning of section 415 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and be liable to punishment accordingly.  
(2) Whoever assembles with others, or joins any assembly, in a street assembled for the purpose of 
gambling or wagerin g shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees or 
may be released after a due admonition.  
109. Penalty for disobedience to order under section 27 .—Whoever contravenes, disobeys, 
opposes, or fails to conform to an order under  section 27 requiring him to vacate any premises, shall, on 
conviction be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees or with both.  
110. Penalty for contravening regulations, etc., under section 28 .—Save as provided in        
section 112, whoever contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any regulation made under section 28 or 
any of the conditions of a licence issued under such regulation sha ll, on conviction, be punished — 
(a) if the regulation was made under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 28 providing for the 
prohibition of the sale, or exposure for sale, of any goods on any street or portion thereof so as to 
cause obstruction to traffic or inconvenience to the public — 
(i) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or 
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both, and  
(ii) for any subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months and with f ine which may extend to five hundred rupees;  
(b) if the r egulation was made under clause  (d), (h), (i), or ( j), sub -clause ( i) or (ii) of clause ( s) or 
clause ( v) of sub -section ( 1) of section 28, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to eight 
days, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both;  
(c) if the regulation was made under clause ( o) or ( p) of sub -section ( 1) of section 28, with fine 
which may extend to two hundred rupees; and  
(d) if the regulation was made under any clause of  sub-section ( 1) of section 28 and for the 
contravention of which no penalty is provided under clause ( a), (b) or ( c) of this section, with fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees.  36 
 111. Liability of licensee of place of public amusement or entertainment for acts of servants .—
The holder of a licence granted under this Act in respect of a place of public amusement or public 
entertainment shall be responsible, as well as the actual offender for any offence under section 110 
committed by his servant or other agen t acting with his express or implied permission on his behalf as if 
he himself had committed the same, unless he establishes that all due  and reasonable precautions were 
taken by him to prevent the commission of such offence.  
112. Penalty for not obtaining  licence in respect of place of public entertainment or certificate of 
registration in respect of eating house or for not renewing such licence or certificate within 
prescribed period .—(1) Whoever fails to obtain a licence under this Act in respect of a pl ace of public 
entertainment or a certificate of registration thereunder in respect of any eating house, or to renew the 
licence or the certificate, as the case may be, within the prescribed period shall, on conviction, be 
punished with fine which may exten d to fifty rupees.  
(2) Any court trying any such offence shall in addition direct that the person keeping the place of 
public entertainment, or the eating house, in respect of which the offence has been committed shall close 
such place, or eating house unt il he obtains a licence or fresh licence, or a certificate of registration or 
fresh certificate of registration, as the case may be, in respect thereof and thereupon such person shall 
forthwith comply with such direction.  
(3) If the person fails to comply with any such direction, he shall, on conviction, be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees or with both.  
(4) Without prejudice to any action taken under sub -section ( 3), on t he failure of such person to 
comply with the direction of the court, any police officer authorised by the Commissioner of Police, by an 
order in writing, may take or cause to be taken such steps and use or cause to be used such force as may, 
in the opinion  of such officer, be reasonably necessary for sec uring compliance with the court’ s direction.  
113. Penalties for contravention of orders, etc., under sections 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 and              
34.—(1) Whoever contravenes, disobeys, opposes or fails to co nform to any order given by a police 
officer under section 29 shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees.  
(2) Whoever contravenes a notification or an order made under section 30, section 32, section 33 or 
section 34  or abets the contravention thereof sha ll, on conviction, be punished — 
(a) if the said notification or order was made under sub -section ( 1) of section 30 or under    
section 33 or section 34, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be le ss than four months but 
which may extend to one year, and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and sufficient reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than four months;  
(b) if the s aid order was made under sub -section ( 2) of section 30, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both;  
(c) if the said notification was made under sub -section ( 3) of section 30 , with fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees; or  
(d) if the said order was made under section 32, with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(3) Whoever opposes o r fails to conform to any direction given by a police officer under section 31, 
shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.  
114. Penalty for contravention of regulations, etc., made under sections 35, 36 and                
37.—Whoever contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any regulation, notice or order made under       
section 35, section 36 or section 37 shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.  
  37 
 115. Penalty for contravention of directions under section s 46, 47 or 48 .—Whoever opposes or 
fails to conform to any direction issued under section 46, section 47 or section 48 or abets the opposition  
to, or the failure to conform to, any such direction shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment 
which shall not be less than four months but which may extend to one year and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than four months.  
116. Penalty for entering without permission area from which a person is directed to remove 
himself or overstaying when permitted to  return temporarily .—Without prejudice to the power to 
arrest and remove a person in the circumstances, and in the manner provided  in section 53, any person 
who— 
(a) in contravention of a direction issued to him under section 46, section 47 or section 48 e nters 
or returns without permission to Delhi, or any part thereof, as the case may be, from which he was 
directed to remove himself; or  
(b) enters or returns to Delhi or any part thereof with permission granted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 54, but fail s, contrary to the provisions thereof, to remove himself outside such area at the 
expiry of the temporary period for which he was permitted to enter or return or on the earlier 
revocation of such permission , or having removed himself at the expiry  of such temporary period or 
on revocation of the permission, enters or returns thereafter, without fresh permission,  
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months 
but which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months.  
117. Penalty for contravention of orders under section 57 .—Whoever contravenes any order made 
under section 57 shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both.  
118. Penalty for opposing or not complying with direction given under clause ( b) of                
sub-section ( 1) of section 59 .—Whoever opposes or fails forthwith to comply with any reasonable 
requisition made by a police officer under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 59, or abets the 
opposition thereto or failure to comply ther ewith, shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for 
a term which shall not be less than four months but which may extend to one year and shall also be liable 
to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than four months.  
119. Penalty for contravening directions under section 65 .—Whoever opposes or fails to conform 
to any direction given by any police officer under section 65 or abets th e opposition or failure to conform 
to such direction shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
120. Dangerous performances .—(1) No person shall without the previous permission of the 
Commissioner of Police and except in accordance with any conditions subject to which such permission 
is granted, hold or give in any place which is likely to cause an assembly of persons, any performance in 
which or during which he buries himself under ground or seals himself in any room or r eceptacle or other 
thing, in such manner as to prevent all access of air to him and for such time as would ordinarily result in 
death by suffocation.  
(2) If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall, on 
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or with 
both.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
offence punishable under this section shall be cogn izable.  
  38 
 121. Neglect or refusal to serve as special police officer .—(1) Any person, who having been 
appointed to be a special police officer under section 17 shall without sufficient cause neglect or refuse to 
serve as such or to obey any lawful order or  direction that may be given to him for the performance of his 
duties as such special police officer, shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees.  
(2) Such punishment shall automatically cancel the certificate of appointmen t of such a special police 
officer.  
122. Penalty for making false statement, etc., and for misconduct of police officers .—(a) Any 
person who makes a false statement or uses a false document for the purpose of obtaining employment or 
release from employment  as a police officer, or  
(b) any police officer who — 
(i) is guilty of cowardice, or  
(ii) being a police officer of subordinate rank, resigns his office or withdraws himself from duties 
thereof in contravention of section 25, or  
(iii) is guilty of any wilful breach or neglect of any provision of law or of any rule or regulation or 
any order which he is bound to observe or obey, or  
(iv) is guilty of any violation of duty for which no punishment is expressly provided by any other 
law in force,  
shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both.  
Explanation. —A police Officer who being absent on  leave fails without reasonable cause to report 
himse lf for duty on the expiration of such leave shall, for the purpose of sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b), be 
deemed to withdraw himself from the duties of his office within the meaning of section 25.  
123. Penalty for failure to deliver up certificate of appoint ment or other article .—Any police 
officer, who wilfully neglect s or refuses to deliver up his certificate of appointment or of office or any 
other article, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 26  shall, on conviction, be 
punished  with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
two hundred rupees, or with both.  
124. Vexatious entry, search, arrest, etc., by police officer .—Any police officer who — 
(a) without lawful authority or reasonabl e cause enters or searches, or causes to be entered or 
searched, any building, vessel, tent or place; or  
(b) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the property of any person; or  
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily detains, searches or arrests any person; or  
(d) offers any unnecessary personal violence to any person in his custody; or  
(e) holds out any threat or promise not warranted by law,  
shall, for every such offence, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or  with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
125. Penalty for vexatious delay in forwarding a person arrested .—Any police officer who 
vexatiously and unnecessarily delays the forwarding of any person arrested to a Magistrate or to any other 
authority to whom he is legally bound to forward such person, shall, on conviction, be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both.  
126. Penalty for unauthor ised use of police uniforms .—If any persons n ot being a member of the 
Delhi p olice wears, without the permission of an officer authorised by the Administrator in this behalf by 
general or special o rder, the uniform of the Delhi p olice or any dress having t he appearance or bearing 39 
 any of the distinctive marks of that uniform, he shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees.  
127. Power to make regulations regarding carrying weapons without authority .—(1) The 
Commissioner of Police may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations to provide that no 
person, other than a member of the armed forces of the Union acting as such or a police officer, shall go 
armed with any sword, spear, bludgeon, gun or other offensive weapon or with any explosive or corrosive 
substance in any street or public place unless so authorised by such authority as may be specified in such 
regulations.  
(2) Any regulation made under sub -section ( 1) may provide that any pers on who goes armed in 
contravention of such regulation shall be liable to be disarmed by any police officer and the weapon or 
substance so seized shall be forfeited to the Government, unless redeemed within two months by payment 
of such fine, not exceeding five hundred rupees, as the Commissioner of Police imposes.  
128. Prosecution for certain offences against this Act to  be in the discretion of Delhi        
police .—It shall not, except in obedience to a rule, regulation or order made by the Administrator or  by 
the Commissioner of Police, be incumbent on the Delhi police to prosecute for an offence punishable 
under section 97, section 104, sub -section ( 1) of section 113, section 114, section 119 or section 121 
when such offence has not occasioned serious misc hief and has been promptly desisted from on a warning 
being given.  
129. Summary disposal of certain cases .—(1) A court taking cognizance of an offence punishable 
under section 97, or under clause ( a), (b) or ( c) of section 110 may state upon the summons to  be served 
on the accused person that he may, by a specified date, prior to the hearing of the charge plead guilty to 
the charge by registered letter and remit to the court such sum not exceeding one hundred rupees in the 
case of an offence punishable unde r section 97 and in any other case rupees fifty, as the court may 
specify.  
(2) Where an accused person pleads guilty and remits the sum specified in the summons, under     
sub-section ( 1), no further proceedings in respect of the offence shall be taken against him.  
130. Prosecution for offences under other enactment s not affected .—Subject to the provisions 
contained in section 300 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), nothing in this Act shall be 
construed to prevent any person from being prosecuted and punished under any other law for anything 
made punishable by this Act or from being prosecuted and punished under this Act for anything made 
punishable under any other law.  
131. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence a nd shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has bee n committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secret ary or other 
officer shall a lso be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of       
individ uals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
  40 
 CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
132. Disposal of fees, rewards, etc .—All fees paid for licences  or permissions granted under this 
Act, and all sums paid for the service of processes by police officers and all rewards, forfeitures and 
penalties or shares thereof, which are by law payable to police officers as informers shall, save in so far as 
any su ch fees or sums belong under the provisions of any enactment for the time being in force to any 
local authority be credited to the Government:  
Provided that with the sanction of the Administrator or under any rule made by the Administrator in 
that behalf, the whole or any portion of any such reward, forfeiture or penalty may for special services, be 
paid to a police officer or be divided amongst two or more police officers.  
133. Method of proving orders and notifications .—Any order or notification published  or issued 
by the Administrator or by the Commissioner of Police or any other police officer under any provision of 
this Act, and the due publication or issue thereof may be proved by the production of a copy thereof in the 
Official Gazette, or of a copy t hereof signed by the Administrator or Commissioner of Police or other 
police officer, as the case may be, and by him certified to be a true copy of an original published or issued 
according to the provisions of this Act applicable thereto.  
134. Rules, regu lations or orders not invalidated by defect of form or irregularity in 
procedure .—No rule, regulation, order, direction, adjudication, inquiry or notification made or published 
and no act done under any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation made under this Act, or in 
substantial conformity with the same, shall be deemed illegal, void, invalid or insufficient by reason of 
any defect of form or any irregularity of procedure.  
135. Presumption in prosecutions for contravention of order made under sect ion 46, 47 or 48 .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, in a prosecution for an offence 
for the contravention of an order made under section 46, section 47 or section 48 on the production of an 
authentic copy of the ord er, it shall, until the contrary is prov ed by the accused, be presumed — 
(a) that the order was made by the authority competent under this Act to make it;  
(b) that the authority making the order was satisfied that the grounds on, or the purpose for, which 
it was made existed, and that it was necessary to make the same; and  
(c) that the order was otherwise valid and in conformity with the provisions of this Act.  
136. Officers holding charges of, or succeeding to, vacancies  competent to exercise powers .—
Whenever in consequence of the office of the Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of 
Police or any police officer becoming vacant, any officer holds charge of the post of such Commissioner 
of Police, Additional Commissioner of Police or other po lice officer or succeeds, either temporarily or 
permanently, to that post , such officer shall be competent to exercise all the powers and perform all the 
duties respectively conferred and imposed by or under this Act on the Commissioner of Police or on suc h 
Additional Commissioner of Police or other police officer, as the case may be.  
137. Forfeiture of bond entered into by person under sub -section ( 1) of section 54 .—If any 
person permitted to enter or return to the area from which he was directed to remove  himself under      
sub-section ( 1) of section 54, fails to observe any condition imposed under that sub -section or by the bond 
executed by him thereunder, his bond shall be forfeited and any person bound thereby shall pay the 
penalty thereof or show cause  to the satisfaction of the court why such penalty should not be paid.  
138. No police officer to be liable to penalty or damage for act done in good faith in pursuance 
of duty .—No police officer shall be liable to any penalty or to payment of any damages o n account of an 
act done in good faith in pursuance of or purported to be done in pursuance of any duty imposed or any 
authority conferred on him by any provision of this Act or any other law for the time being in force or any 
rule, regulation, order or di rection made or given thereunder.  
  41 
 139. No public servant liable as aforesaid for giving effect in good faith to any rule, regulation, 
order or direction issued with apparent authority .—No public servant or person duly appointed or 
authorised  shall be liable to any penalty or to payment of any damages for giving effect in good faith to — 
(a) any order or direction issued with apparent authority by the Administrator or by a person 
empowered in that behalf under this Act; or  
(b) any rule or regul ation made under this Act.  
Explanation. —In this section, the expression “public servant ” has the meaning assigned to it in 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
140. Bar to suits and prosecutions .—(1) In any case of alleged offence by a police officer or other 
person, or of a wrong alleged to have been done by such police officer or other person, by any act done 
under colour of duty or author ity or in excess of any such dut y or authority, or wherein it shall appear to 
the court that the offence or wrong if committed or done was of the character aforesaid, the prosecution or 
suit shall not be entertained and if entertained shall be dismissed if it is instituted, more than three months 
after the date of the act complained of:  
Provided that any such  prosecution against a police officer or other person may be entertained by the 
court, if instituted with the previous sanction of the Administrator, within one year from the date of the 
offence.  
(2) In the case of an intended suit on account of such a wro ng as aforesaid, the person intending to sue 
shall give to the alleged wr ongdoer not less than one month’ s notice of the intended suit with sufficient 
description of the wrong complained of, and if no such notice has been given before the institution of th e 
suit, it shall be dismissed.  
(3) The plaint shall set forth that  a notice as aforesaid has been  served on the defendant and the date 
of such service and shall state what tender or amends, if any, has been made by the defendant and a copy 
of the said noti ce shall be annexed to the plaint endorsed or accompanied with a declaration by the 
plaintiff of the time and manner of service thereof.  
141. Licences and written permissions to specify conditions, etc., and to be signed .—(1) Any 
licence or written permiss ion granted under the provisions of this Act shall specify the period and locality 
for which, and the conditions and restrictions subject to which, the same is granted, and shall be given 
under the signature of the competent authority.  
(2) Any licence or w ritten permission granted under this Act may at any time be suspended or 
revoked by the competent authority if any of its conditions or restrictions are infringed or evaded by the 
person to whom it has been granted, or if such person is convicted of any of fence with respect to any 
matter to which such licence or permission relates.  
(3) When any such licence or written permission is suspended or revoked, or when the period for 
which the same was granted has expired, the person s to whom the same was granted s hall, for all 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be without a licence or written permission, until the order for 
suspending or revoking the same is cancelled, or until the same is renewed, as the case may be.  
(4) Every person to whom any such licence or wr itten permission has been granted shall, while the 
same remains in force, at all reasonable times, produce the same, if so required by a police officer.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section any such infringement or evasion by , or conviction of, 
a servant or other agent acting on behalf of the person to whom the licence or written permission has been 
granted shall be deemed to be infringement or evasion or, as the case may be, conviction of, the person to 
whom such licence or written permission has been granted.  
142. Public notice s how to be given .—Any notification which may be publicly promulgated, public 
notice required to be given, order required to be notified publicly or proclamation required to be issued 
under any of the provisions of this Act shall be in writing, under the signature of a compe tent authority 
and shall be published in the locality to be affected thereby, by affixing copies thereof in conspicuous 
public places, or by proclaiming the same with beat of drums or by advertising, the same in such local 42 
 newspapers in Hindi, Urdu and Eng lish, as the competent authority may deem fit, or by any two or more 
of these means and by any other means it may think suitable.  
143. Consent, etc., of a competent authority may be proved by writing under its signature .—
Whenever under this Act, the doing or the omitting to do anything or the validity of anything depends 
upon the consent, approval, declaration, opinion or satisfaction of the competent authority, a written 
document signed by the competent authority, purporting to convey or set forth such con sent, approval, 
declaration, opinion or satisfaction sh all be sufficient evidence  thereof.  
144. Signature on notices, etc., may be stamped .—Every licence, written permission, notice or 
other document, not being a summons or warrant or search warrant, requi red by this Act or by any rule or 
regulation made thereunder, to bear the signature of the Commissioner of Police , shall be deemed to be 
properly signed if it bears a facsimile of his signature stamped thereon.  
145. Persons interested may seek to annul, re verse or alter any rule or order .—(1) In the case of 
any rule or order made by the Administrator under an authority conferred by this Act and requiring the 
public or a particular class of persons to perform some duty or act, or to conduct or order themselves or 
those under their control in a manner therein described, it shall be competent for any person interested to 
apply to the Administrator by a memorial to annul, reverse, or alter the rule or order aforesaid on the 
ground of its being unlawful, oppressive or unreasonable.  
(2) After such an application as aforesaid and rejection thereof wholly or in part or after the lapse of 
four months without an  answer to such application or a decision thereon published by the Administrator, 
it shall be compete nt for the person interested and deeming the rule or order to be contrary to law to 
institute a suit in the principal civil court of original jurisdiction against the Administrator for a 
declaration that the rule or order is unlawful either wholly or in pa rt. 
(3) Where in any suit instituted under sub -section ( 2) or on appeal therefrom, the court adjudges a 
rule or order to be unlawful, the rule or order shall be annulled or so altered as to make it conformable to 
law. 
146. Powers of Commissioner of Police under other Acts .—(1) The Commissioner of Police shall 
exercise all powers and discharge all functions which may be exercised or discharged by a District 
Magistrate under the Acts mentioned in Schedule I including the rules made thereunder.  
(2) The Commiss ioner of Police may authorise any Additional Commissioner of Police, Deputy 
Commissioner of Police or Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police to exercise any of the powers or 
discharge any of the functions of the Commissioner of Police mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in accordance 
with the general or special orders of the Administrator.  
(3) The powers and functions of a District Magistrate under the Sarais Act, 1867 (22 of 1867), shall 
be exercised and discharged by the Administrator or such officer as the Ad ministrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf.  
147. Power to make rules .—(1) The Administrator may make rules for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) recruitment to, and the pay, allowance and all other conditions of servic e of the members of, 
the D elhi p olice under clause ( b) of section 5;  
(b) the manner of publication, under sub -section ( 2) of section 17, by the Commissioner of Police, 
of the names of special police officers appointed under that section;  
(c) awarding of any of the punishments refer red to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of    
section 21 to any police officer of subordinate rank;  
(d) procedure for awarding punishments under section 22;  
(e) form of Discharge Certificate under sub -section ( 8) of section 25;  43 
 (f) determination of th e cost of employing additional police under sub -section ( 2) of section 38;  
(g) manner of taking measurements and photographs under section 55 of a person against whom 
an order has been made under section 46, section 47 or section 48;  
(h) manner  of constituting Defence Societies under sub -section ( 1) of section 58;  
(i) form of receipt to be given in respect of any article detained under section 62;  
(j) the authority to whose satisfaction claims are to be established under sub -section ( 2) of  
section 69 and the form and manner in which claims may be made under that sub -section, the 
procedure for dealing with such claims and all other matters connected therewith under                  
sub-section ( 3) of that section;  
(k) payment to any police office r or division among two or more police officers the whole or any 
portion of any reward, forfeiture or penalty, under the proviso to section 132;  
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed, or provided for by rules, under this 
Act. 
148. Notification of rules and regulations in the Official Gazette and laying of rules and 
regulations .—(1) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be made by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
(2) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the sess ion 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation 
should not be made, the rule or regulat ion shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect , as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
(3) Every rule and regulation made under this Act shall also be laid before the Metropolitan Council 
of Delhi.  
149. Cesser of operation of certain enactments and savings .—(1) On the commencement of this 
Act the enactments specified in Schedule II shall ceas e to be in force in Delhi;  
Provided that — 
(i) all rules and standing orders made (including the Punjab Police Rules, as in force in Delhi), 
appointments made, powers conferred, orders made or passed, directions and certificates issued, 
consent, permit, per mission or licence given, summons or warrants issued or served, persons arrested 
or detained or discharged on bail or bond, search warrants issued , bonds forfeited and penalties  
incurred under any such enactment shall, in so far as they are consistent with this Act, be deemed to 
have been respectively made, conferred, passed, given, issued, served, arrested, detained, discharged, 
forfeited or incurred under this Act;  
(ii) all ref erences in any enactment to any of the provisions of the enactments so ceasing to be in 
force shall, in relation to Delhi, be construed as references to the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(2) The cesser of operation under sub -section ( 1) of an enact ment specified in Sch edule II shall       
not affect — 
(a) the validity, invalidity, effect or consequence of anything done or suffered to be done 
thereunder before the commencement of this Act;  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability already acqu ired, accrued or incurred thereunder 
before such commencement;  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or inflicted in respect of any act thereunder 
before such commencement;  44 
 (d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of such r ight, privilege, obligation, 
liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; or  
(e) any legal proceeding thereunder pending in any court or before any officer immediately before 
such commencement or anything done or suffered to be done in the course of such proceedings,  and 
any such proceeding or any appeal or revisional proceedings arising out of such proceeding shall, 
save as otherwise expressly provided in section 150 be instituted, continued or disposed of, as the 
case may be, as if this Act had not been enacted.  
150. Police force functioning in Delhi immediately before the commencement of this Act to be 
deemed to be police force constituted under this Act .—Without prejudice to the provis ions contained 
in section 149, — 
(a) the police force functioning in Delhi immediately before the commencement of this Act 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the existing police force) shall, on such commencement , be 
deemed to be police force constituted under this Act and every member of the existing police force 
holding the office mentioned in column ( 1) of Schedule III, immediately before such commencement, 
shall be deemed to be appointed, on such commencement, to the office mentioned in the 
corresponding entry in column ( 2) of that Schedule;  
(b) all proceedings (including proceedings by way of investigations) pending before any police 
officer of the existing police force, immediately before the commencement of this Act shall on such 
commencement be deemed to be proceedings pending before him in his capacity as th e holder of the 
office to which he is deemed to be appointed under clause ( a) and shall be dealt with accordingly;  
(c) where any power or function which may be exercised or discharged under any law by a 
District Magistrate or Executive Magistrate immediate ly before the commencement of this Act has 
been conferred on the Commissioner of Police or any other police officer by or under this Act, all 
proceedings in relation to or arising from the exercise of such power or the discharge of such function 
pending im mediately before such conferment before the District Magistrate, or the Executive 
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall, on the conferment of such power or function on the 
Commissioner of Police or other police officer stand transferred to the Commissioner  of Police or 
other police officer, as the case may be, and the officer to whom such proceedings stand so 
transferred shall either proceed de nov o or from the stage of such transfer.  
151. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving  effect to the provisions of 
this Act in consequence of the transition to the said provisions from the provisions of the enactments 
mentioned in Schedule II, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions as appea r to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such notification shall be issued after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every notification issued under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  
152. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Delhi Police Ordinance, 1978 (Ord. 2 of 1978) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repeale d 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  45 
  
SCHEDULE I  
[See section 146( 1)] 
PART I  
CENTRAL ACTS 
1. The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867.  
2. The Indian Explosives Act, 1884.  
3. The Indian Lunacy Act, 1912.  
4. The Poisons Act, 1919.  
5. The Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act, 1922.  
6. The Cinematograph Act, 1952.  
7. The Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956.  
8. The Arms Act, 1959.  
9. The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.  
 
 
PART II  
DELHI ACT AND ACTS EXTENDED TO DELHI  
1. The Madras Restriction of Habitual Offenders Act, 1948, as in force in Delhi.  
2. The Punjab Security of State Act, 1953, as in force in Delhi.  
3. The Madras Dramatic Performance Act, 1954, as in force in Delhi.  
4. The Delhi Public Gambling Act, 1955.  
5. The Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959, as in force in Delhi.  
__________  
 
 
SCHEDULE II  
(See section 149)  
 
Year  No. Short title  
1861  V The Police Act, 1861.  
1872  IV Section 40 of the Punjab Laws Act, 1872, as in      
force in Delhi.  
1951  XXII  The provisions of the Bombay Police Act, 1951, as in 
force in Delhi.  
 
 
 46 
 SCHEDULE III  
(See section 150)  
 
Desig nation of officer in the Delhi p olice  Posts to w hich the officers of the Delhi p olice shall 
be deemed to be appointed  
(1) (2) 
1. Inspector General of Police . Commissioner of Police.  
2. Deputy Inspector General of Police . Additional Commissioner of Police.  
3. Superintendent of Police.  Deputy Commissioner of Police.  
4. Assistant Inspector General of Police.  Deputy Commissioner of Police.  
5. Additional Supe rintendent of Police.  Additional Deputy Commissioner  of Police.  
6, Assistant Superintendent of Police . Assistant Commissioner of Police.  
7. Deputy Superintendent of Police . Assistant Commissioner of Police.  
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE HIGH  DENOMINATION BANK NOTES (DEMONE TISATION) ACT, 1978  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. High denomination bank notes to cease to be legal tender . 
4. Prohibition of transfer and receipt of high denomination bank notes . 
5. Declaration of high denomination bank notes by banks and Government treasuries . 
6. Exchange of high denomination bank notes held by banks and Government treasuries . 
7. Exchange of high denomination bank notes held by other person s. 
8. Exchange of notes after the time limit specified in section 7 . 
9. Closing of banks and Government treasuries . 
10. Penalties . 
11. Special provisions relating to offences . 
12. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
13. Removal of difficulties . 
14. Power to make rules . 
15. Repeal  and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE HIGH  DENOMINATION BANK NOTES (DEMONE TISATION) ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 11 OF 1978  
[30th March, 1978 .] 
An Act to provide in the public interest for the demonetisation  of certain high denomination bank 
notes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the availability of high denomination bank notes facilitates the illicit transfer of money for 
financing transactions which are harmful to the natio nal economy or which are for illegal purposes and it 
is therefore necessary in the public interest to demonetise high denomination bank notes;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent  and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the High Denomination 
Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Act, 1978.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of January, 1978.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “bank ” means— 
(i) a banking company as defined in clause ( c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949 (10 of 1949);  
(ii) the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1 955 (23 of 1955);  
(iii) a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act,1959 (38 
of 1959);  
(iv) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970);  
(v) a regional rural bank established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Regional Rural 
Banks Act, 1976 (2 1 of 1976);  
(vi) a co -operative bank as defined in section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934             
(2 of 1934);  
and in cludes every branch thereof;  
(b) “bank notes ” means the bank notes issued by the Reserve Bank of India under section 22 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(c)“distinctive number ” in relation to a high denomination bank note means the number including 
the alphabetical and numerical pr efixes ap pearing on the face of the note ; 
(d) “high denomination bank note ” means a bank note of the denominational value of one 
thousand rupees, five thousand rupees or ten thousand rupees, 1[issued  by the Reserve Bank  
immediately before the commencement of this Act ]; 
(e) “public sector bank ” means a bank referred to in sub -clause ( ii), (iii) or ( iv) of clause ( a); 
(f) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(g) “scheduled bank ” mean s a public sector bank or any other bank, being a bank included in the 
Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(h) “State Bank ” means the State Bank of India constitute d under the State Bank of India  Act, 
1955 (23 of 1955).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1999, s. 2 , for “issued by the Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 2 -1-1999).  3 
 3. High denomination bank notes to cease to be legal tender. —On the expiry of the 16th day of 
January, 1978, all high denomination bank notes shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 26 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) , cease to be legal tender in payment or on account at 
any place.  
4. Prohibition of transfer and receipt of high denomination bank notes. —Save as provided by or 
under this Act, no person shall, after the 16th day of January, 1978, transfer to the possession of anothe r 
person or receive into his possession from another pe rson any high denomination bank note.  
5. Declaration of high denomination bank notes by banks and Government treasuries. —(1) 
Every bank and Government treasury shall prepare and send to the Reserve Bank  in the manner provided 
in this section a return showing separately under each denominational value the total value of high 
denomination bank notes of that value held by it at the close of business on the 16th day of January, 1978 
and distinctive numbers o f high denomination bank notes of that value:  
Provided that a bank or a Government treasury in which the currency chest of the Issue Department of 
the Reserve Bank has been established shall also submit a separate return showing separately under each 
denom inational value the total value of high denomination bank notes held in such currency chest at the 
close of business on the 16th day of January, 1978 and the distinctive numbers of high denominatio n bank 
notes of that value.  
(2) Every such return shall be prepared and presented as provided in sub -section ( 3) in triplicate and 
shall be signed by the Manager of the bank or other person in charge of the bank or the Government 
treasury.  
(3) Every return under sub -section ( 1) shall be presented for forwarding to  the Reserve Bank to the 
Manager of the sub -office, office or branch of the Reserve Bank at the places specified under sub -section 
(2) of section 7, or to the District Magistrate , or to the Sub -divisional Magistrate or, if such Manager or 
Magistrate is not  available, to the senior -most Revenue or Police Officer a vailable not later than  3.00 P.M. 
on the 17th day of January, 1978:  
Provided that if it is not feasible to present the return to any such person as aforesaid, it may be 
presented by handing two copi es thereof not later than 3.00 P.M. on the 17th day of January, 1978 to a 
telegraph office, one copy for despatch by express telegram to the Reserve Bank at Bombay at the 
expense of the bank or the Government treasury, as the case may be, and the other cop y for return to the 
person presenting it in the manner provided in sub -section ( 4), and by despatching the third copy required 
by sub -section ( 2) by registered post on the same day  to the Reserve Bank at Bombay.  
(4) The officer to whom the return is presented shall give back to the person presenting it one copy 
thereof under his signature and seal of office in acknowledgement of receipt on which shall also be 
recorded the time and date of receipt, and such officer shall without delay forward one copy of the return 
to the Reserve Bank at Bombay.  
(5) The Manager or other person in charge of every bank or Government t reasury shall, immediately 
after the preparation of the returns required to b e submitted under this section, cause  the high 
denomination bank notes mentioned ther ein to be kept in a separate receptacle and seal the same with his 
seal and of the officers having custody of such receptacle.  
6. Exchange of high denomination bank notes  held by banks and G overnment treasuries. —(1) 
A bank other th an a public sector bank may obtain from the Reserve Bank or a public sector bank an 
equivalent amount in exchange for the high denomination bank notes declared by it in the return referred 
to in section 5 by credit to an account maintained with the Reserve  Bank or a public sector bank or in 
bank notes.  
  4 
 (2) A public sector bank may obtain from the Reserve Bank an equivalent amount in exchange for the 
high denomination bank notes declared by it in the return referred to in section 5 or the high denomination  
bank notes received by it in exchange under sub -section ( 1) by credit to an account with the Reserve Bank 
or in bank notes.  
(3) A Government treasury may obtain from the Reserve Bank an equivalent amount in exchange for 
the high denomination bank note s declared by it in the return referred to in section 5 in bank notes or by 
credit to Government account.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), where the return referred to in 
section 5 is presented in the manner provided in the proviso to sub -section ( 3) of that section, the 
exchange referred to in this section may be effected only by the Reserve Bank at Bombay.  
(5) Every application for the exchange of high denomination bank notes under this section shall be 
accompanied by t he copy of the return received under sub -section ( 4) of section 5 which contains the 
distinctive numbers of such bank notes.  
7.Exchange of high denomination bank notes held by other persons. —(1) Notwithsta nding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Res erve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), any high 
denomination bank note owned by a person other than a bank or Government treasury may be exchanged 
after the 16th day of January, 1 978, only on tender of the note — 
(a) where  the high denomination bank note is owned by an individual, by the individual himself; 
or where the individual. is absent from India, by the indi vidual concerned or some person  duly 
authorised by him in this behalf ; or where the individual is mentally inca pacitated from attending to 
his affairs, by his guar dian or by any other person  competent to act on his behalf ; 
(b) where the high denomination bank note is owned by a Hindu undivided family, by the karta,  
and, where the karta  is absent from India or is me ntally incapacitated from attending to his affairs, by 
any o ther adult member of his family ; 
(c) where the high denomination bank note is owned by a company, by the managing director 
thereof, or, where for any unavoidable reason such managing director is n ot able to tender the note, 
or; where there is no managing director, by any director thereof ; 
(d) where the high denomination bank note forms part of the assets of a firm, by the managing 
partner thereof, or, where for any unavoidable reason such partner i s not able to tender the note, or 
where there is no managing partner as such, by any partner thereof not being a minor;  
(e) where the high denomination bank note is owned by any other association of persons , by any 
member of the associa tion or the principa l officer thereof; and  
(f) where the high denomination bank note is owned by any other person, by that person or by 
some person competent to act on his behalf;  
and within the time and in the manne r provided in this section.  
(2) Every person desiring to te nder for exchange a high denomination bank note under this section 
shall prepare in the form set out  in the Schedule three copies of a declaration signed by him giving in full 
the particulars required by that form and shall,  not later than the 19th day of Ja nuary, 1978, deliver such 
copies  in person together with the high denomination ba nk notes he desires to exchange — 
(a) to either of the offices of the Reserve Bank at Bombay or to the sub -office, office or branch, 
as the ca se may be, of that bank at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Calcutta, Gauhati, 
Hyderabad, Jaipur, Kanpur, Madras, Nagpur, New Delhi and Patna; or  
(b) to the main office or branch of the State Bank at the headquarters of a district; or  
(c) to any other office of a public sector bank notified in this behalf by the Reserve Bank : 
Provided that if such person resides in a place not within convenient reach of any such office or 
branch, or if, by reason of age, infirmity or illness he is unable to attend thereat, he may forward the high 
denomination bank notes he desires to exchange together with three copies of the declaration in respect 
thereof by insured post to the Reserve Bank at Bombay not later than the 19th day of January, 1978.  5 
 (3) Every  declaration under this section shall, for the purpose of identifying the person making it, be 
attested by the manager or other person in charge of the bank, if any, with which he maintains an account, 
or by a salaried M agistrate or a Justice of the Pe ace or a police officer not below the  rank of an Inspector 
of Police.  
(4) Unless it appears that the declaration has not been complete in all material particulars, the Reserve 
Bank, the State Bank or any bank notified under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), as th e case may be, to 
which an application for exchange of high denomination bank notes is made under this section, shall pay 
the exchange value of the said notes for credit to a properly introduced account of t he owner or the 
declarant, as the case may be, wi th any scheduled bank : 
Provided that if the owner or declarant, as the case may be, does not have a bank account, the 
exchange value of the said notes shall be paid only on proper identification and until payment is so made, 
the amount shall remain in the custody of the Reser ve Bank or the bank, as the case  may be, to which the 
high denomi nation bank notes were tendered.  
(5) Where it appears that the declaration has not been completed in all material particulars, the 
Reserve Bank, the State Bank or the notified bank, as the case may be, to which such application as 
aforesaid is made  shall, unless the declarant is able to supply the omission without delay, refuse to accept 
and pay for the bank notes to which the declaration relates, and where it does so r efuse, shall return one 
copy of the declaration to the declarant after entering therein the date on which it is presented and shall 
refer the matter to the Central Government to which it shall forward a copy of the declaration with a brief 
statement of the  reasons for refusing to pay for the bank notes.  
(6) The Central Government may require any declarant referred to in sub -section ( 5) to amplify his 
declaration to such extent and in respect of such particulars as it thinks fit and may, unless the declarant  is 
able to fully comply with such requirement, refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, to sanction the 
exchange of the high denomination bank notes to which the declaration relates.  
(7) The Central Government or any person or authority authorised b y it in this behalf may, by order in 
writing and for reasons to be recorded therein, extend in any case or class of cases the period during 
which high denomination bank notes may be tendered for exchange under this section.  
8.Exchange of notes after the ti me limit specified in section 7. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 7, any person who fails to apply for exchange of any high denomination bank notes 
within the time provided in that section may tender the notes together with the declaration  required under 
that section to the Reserve Bank at any of the places specified in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of that 
section, not later than the 24th day of January, 1978 together with a statement explaining the reasons for 
his failure to a pply within the said time limit : 
Provided that if such person resides in a place not within convenient reach of the sub -office, office or 
branch of the Reserve Bank at any of the said places or if, by reason of age, infirmity or illness, he is 
unable to attend thereat , he may forward th e high denomination bank notes h e desires to exchange 
together with three copies of the decl aration required under section 7 by insured post to the Reserve Bank 
at Bombay not later than the 24th day of January, 1978, along with a statement explaining the reasons for 
his failure to apply within the time specified in section 7.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may , if satisfied after making such inquiries as it may consider necessary that 
the reasons for the failure to submit the notes for excha nge within the time provided in section 7 are 
genuine, pay the value of the notes in the manner specified in sub -section ( 4) of that section.  
(3) Any person a ggrieved by the refusal of the R eserve Bank to pay the value of the notes under sub-
section (2) may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within fourteen days of the communic ation of 
such refusal to him.  
9.Closing of banks and Government treasuries. —(1) All banks and Government treasuries shall be 
closed on the 17th day of January, 1978 for the tr ansaction of all business except the preparation and 
presentation or, as the case may be, receipt of the returns referred to in section 5.  
(2) Subject to  the provisions of  sub-section ( 1), the 17th day of January , 1978 shall , for the purposes 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (2 6 of 1881), be deemed to be a public holiday notified under 
that Act.  6 
 10.Penalties. —(1) If any bank fails to prepare and present within the time and in the manner 
provided by section 5 any return referred to in that section, or presents any return under that section which 
is false in any material particular, the manager or other person in charge of the bank shall, unless he 
proves that the failure took place , or the false return was presented, with out his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the same, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) Whoever knowingly makes in any declaration under section 7 any stateme nt which is false or only 
partially true or which he does not believe to be true or contravences any provision of this Act or the rules 
made th ereunder shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine or with bo th. 
(3) An officer of a scheduled bank who makes payment out of the amount, being the exchange value 
of a high denomination bank note credited under sub -section ( 4) of section 7 to an account maintained 
with such bank shall  unless such account is an accoun t which has been opened after proper introduction, 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
11.Special provisions relating to offences. —(1) No prosecution for an offence punishable under this 
Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
court of a Magistrate of the first class or the court of a Metropolitan  Magistrate trying an offence 
punishable under this Act may impose a fine exceeding five thousand rupees.  
12.Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Gov ernment or against the Reserve Bank or any public 
sector bank or any officer of such bank for anything done or intended to be done in good faith under this 
Act. 
13.Removal of difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this  Act, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make any order, not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act, which appears to it to be necessary for the purpose  of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that every such order shal l, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
14. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may make rules for giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2)In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the custody and disposal of high denomination bank notes tendered for exchange under this 
Act and of the declarations in respect thereof;  
(b) the time within which a pplications referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 6 may be made; 
and 
(c) the time within which and the manner in which the State Bank and public sector banks 
notified under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 7 may claim reimbursement from the Reserve 
Bank of payments made by them in respect of high denomination bank notes accepted by them under 
that section.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of P arliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such 
modificatio n or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  7 
 15.Repeal and saving. —(1) The High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Ordinance,  1978 
(1 of 1978)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repe al, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the correspo nding provisions of this Act.  
___________  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 7 (2)] 
FORM OF DECLARATION  
(To be fil led in triplicate)  
1. Name of the owner of the bank notes  
(In block letter s) 
2. Address: Office  
Residence  
3. Status, i,e., whether individual, Hindu undivided family, company, firm, etc.  
4.(a) Whether assessed to income -tax; 
(b) If so, name of the Income -Tax Circle/Ward/District where last assessed;  
(c) Permanent Account Number.  
5. If engaged in business, profession or vocation, name in which such business is carried on.  
6. Principal place of business, profession or vocation, and location and style of each bra nch. 
7. In the case of a firm, name and address of each partner.  
8. In the case of partner in a firm, name and address of each firm or firms in which he is a partner.  
9. In the case of a salaried person, amount of salary per annum.  
10. In the case of a Gov ernment employee, Government Department and post held.  
11. In the case of  a retired Government employee , last post held, Government Department under 
which such post was held and date of retirement.  
12. In the case of a retired employee of a non -Government employer, particulars of last post held.  
13. In the case of any other person, particulars of profession or vocation or, as the case may be, 
former profession or vocation.  
14. Particulars of high denomination bank notes tendered.  
 
Denomination  Number of Notes  Distinctive 
Numbers*  Total value  
Rs. 1000     
Rs. 5000     
Rs. 10000     
  Rs. Rupees (in words)  
*Distinctive numbers of bank notes tendered should be furnished indicating alphabetical and 
numerical prefixes of the notes.  Attach a statement if space is not adequate.  
 
  8 
 15. Reasons for keeping the amount in cash in notes of such high denominations  
16. When and from what source did the bank notes come into possession?  
17. If any of the notes tendered represent borrowings, the name(s) and address  (es) of the persons 
from whom borrowed and the dated on which borrowed.  
18. Manner in which payment of value of the bank notes is desire d; i.e., in cash or payment to bank, 
etc. 
19. If payment is to be made into a bank account, full  details of the bank account.  
20. Has any other declaration been made in respect of other bank notes of the owner? If so, state full 
particulars.  
21. If the declarant is not the owner of the bank notes, capacity in which declaration is signed.  
I, _________ ____ _________ _, son/daughter/wife of ______ ____________hereby solemn ly declare  
(name in block letters)(name of father/husband)  
that the particulars  furnished above are full, true and correct to the best of my knowledge and  belief.  
I further declare that t he bank notes tendered herewith belong to me ___________ ___ 
to __________ _____________ and are not held benami.  
name of owner of bank notes  
not filed any other declaration under this Act. 
I also solemnly affirm that I have __ ______ _____________ __________________ ___________  
filed another/other declaration(s) as per particulars  attached.  
 
I further decl are that I am making this declaration in my capacity as 
________ ______ __________ ____and that I am  competent to make this declaration and verify it,  
designation, etc.  
Place: ____________  
Date: ____________  
.....................................  
(Signature of declarant)  
______________________________________________________ ______________________________  
I, _________________________________ hereby testify that I know the declarant and certify that the  
(name in block letters)  
above declaration was signed in my presence.  
Place: ______________  
Date: ______________  
.....................................  
(Signature and designation)  
SEAL  
--------------------------The Hindustan Tractors Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE HINDUSTAN TRACTORS LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF  
UNDERTAKING S) ACT, 1978  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to and vesting in the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities.  
6. Vesting of the undertakings of the Company in the State Government of Gujarat.  
7. Power of State Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in a 
Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount.  
9. Payment of further amount . 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
11. Duty to deliver possession of property acquired and documents relating thereto.  
12. Accounts to be rendered by the Company or any other person.  
13. Accounts.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
14. Employment of certain employees to continue.  
15. Provident fund and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
16. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
17. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
18. Certain powers of the Central Government or State Government or Government company.  
19. Claims to be made to the  Commissioner.  
20. Priority of claims . 
21. Examination of claims.  
22. Admission or rejection of claims.  2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Disbursement of amount by the Commissioner to claimants . 
24. Disbursement of amounts to the Company.  
25. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account.  
26. Assumption of liability.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Act to have over riding effect.  
28. Provision relating to contracts.  
29. Transfer of assets, etc. , to be void in certain cases.  
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
31. Penalties.  
32. Offences by companies.  
33. Delegation of powers.  
34. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
35. Power to remove difficulties . 
36. Declaration as to t he policy of the State.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
 
  3 
 THE HINDUSTAN TRACTORS LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF  
UNDERTAKING S) ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 13 OF 1978  
[31st March , 1978.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertaking s of Hindustan Tractors 
Limited, Vishwamitri, Vadodara, for the purpose of ensuring the continuity of production of 
goods which are vital to meet the needs of the general public and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Hindustan T ractors Limited, Vishwamitri, Vadodara, are engaged in the manufacture and 
distribution of tractors which are vital to meet the needs of the general public;  
AND WHEREAS  the management of the undertakings of Hindustan Tractors Limited was conducted in 
a man ner highly detrimental to the public interest and had suffered heavy losses;  
AND WHEREAS  the management of the undertakings of Hindustan Tractors Limited was taken over by 
the Central Government under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulati on) Act, 1951            
(65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of Hindustan Tractors Limited to ensure the 
continuance of the production of goods which are vital to meet the needs of the general public.  
BE it enacted by Parli ament in the Twenty -ninth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Hindustan Tractors Limited 
(Acquisition and Trans fer of Undertakings) Act, 1978.  
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1978.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context oth erwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of April, 1978;  
(b) “Authorised Controller ” means the Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation Limited, Ahmedabad, 
which took over the management of the undertakings of the Company by virtue of the Order of the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Industrial Development No. S.O 137(E) /18A/IDRA/73, dat ed 
the 12th March, 1973, made under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 18A of the Industries 
(Development and Regu lation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951);  
(c) “bank” means— 
(i) the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank o f India Act, 1955 (23 of  1955 ); 
(ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary  Banks) Act, 1959              
(38 of 1959);  
(iii) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Unde rtaking s) Act,  1970 (5 of 1970);  
(iv) any other bank, being a scheduled bank as defined  in clause ( e) of section 2 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(d) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payme nts appointed under section 16;  
(e) “Company ” means H industan Tractors Limited, being a company as define d in the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), and having its registered office at Vishwamitri, Vadodara;  
(f) “Custodian ” means the  Custodian appointed under sub -section ( 3) of section 10 to take over, 
or carry on, the management of t he undertakings of the Company;  
(g) “date of taking over ” means the date on which the management of the undertakings of the 
Company was taken ove r by the Authorised Controller;  4 
 (h) “Government company ” has the meaning assigned to it by section 617 of the C ompanies           
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(i) “notification ” means a notification publ ished in the Official Gazette;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any 
provision of this Act, by notification, specify and different dates may be specified for different 
provisions of this Act;  
(l) “State Government ” means t he State Government of Gujarat;  
(m) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956) , shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transf er to and vesting in the Central Government of the undertakings of the               
Company .—On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of 
the Company in relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest  
in, the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company referred to in section 3 shall be 
deemed to include all assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges,  and all property, 
movable and immovable, including, lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and 
equipment, bank balances, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and book debts and all 
other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed day 
in the ownership, possession, power or control of the Company, whether within or outside India, and all 
books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature relati ng thereto and shall be 
deemed to include the liabilities and obligations specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(2) All property as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and dis charged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other encumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court, tribunal, 
officer or other authority restricting the use of such property in any manner shal l be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  
(3) Where any licence or other instrument in relation to the undertakings of the Company had been 
granted at any time before the appointed day, to the Company by the Central Government, a State 
Government or any other au thority, the Central Government, the State Government of Guj arat or , as the 
case may be, the Government company in which the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
its undertakings have vested under section 7, shall, on and from the appoin ted day, be deemed to be 
substituted in such licence or other instrument in place of the Company referred to therein as if such 
licence or other instrument had been granted to it and shall hold such licence or the undertakings or any 
part thereof specified  in such other instrument for the remainder of the period for which the Company 
would have held such licence or undertakings or any part there of under such other instrument.  
(4) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central  Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or othe r interest.  
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 4) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount s specified in section 8, and also out of the 
monies determined under section 9, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or ot her interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has ve sted in the Central Government.  5 
 (6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
matter specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5 in respect of the undertakings of the Company instituted or 
preferred by or against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any 
way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued,  prosecuted or enforced 
by or against the Central Government, or the State Government, or where the undertakings of the 
Company are directed, under section 7, to vest in a Government compa ny, that Government company.  
5. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities. —(1) Every liability, other than the liability 
specified in sub -section ( 2), of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be 
the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and not against the Central Government, 
or the State Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 7, to vest 
in a Government company, a gainst that Gover nment company.  
(2) Any li ability arising in respect of — 
(a) loans advanced by the Central Government or the State Government, or both, to the Company 
(together with interest due thereon), on or after the after of taking over;  
(b) loans advanced by a bank t o the Company (together with interest due thereon) on or after the 
date of taking over 1[, but excluding loans advanced, on or after such date, by a bank to the Company 
to the extent such loans have been util ised by the Company for the re -payment of, or th e payment of 
interest on, secured loans advanced to the Company by a bank  at any time before such date];  
(c) loans advanced by the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited to the Company 
(together with interest due thereon) on or after the da te of taking ove r; 
(d) wages, salaries and other dues of employees of the Company and the dues on account  of any 
deduction made from wages and salaries and other dues of employees, relating to any period 
commencing on an d from the date of taking over;  
(e) any debt incurred by the Company during any period commencing on and from the date of 
taking over, not being a debt falling under clause ( a), clause ( b), clause ( c) or clause ( d) or specified 
in Category I of the Schedule,  
shall, on and from the appointed  day, be the liability of the Central Government, or the State Government, 
or the Government company aforesaid and shall be discharged by the Central Government or the State 
Government, or the Government company aforesaid as and when repayment of such loan s becomes due 
or as and when such wages, salaries and other dues a nd debt become due and payable.  
(3) For the removal of doubt s, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other provision of this Act, no  
liability, including any liability arising out of any guarantee given by the State Government in respect 
of any loan or advance given to the Company but not including the liability specified in                          
sub-section ( 2), of the Company in r elation to its undertaking s in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day, shall be enf orceable against the Central Government, or the State Government, or 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 7, to vest in a Government 
company, a gainst that Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order or any court, tribunal, officer or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute, not being matter, claim or dispute in relation to any matter referred to in sub -section ( 2), 
which arose before that day, shall be enfroceable against the Central Government, or the State 
Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under secti on 7, to vest in a 
Government company, a gainst that Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central G overnment, or 
the State Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 7, to 
vest in a Government company, against that Government company.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1980, s.  2 (w.e.f.  1-4-1978).  6 
 6. Vesting of the undertakings of the Company in the State Government of                     
Gujarat .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central Government shall, as 
soon may be, after the commencement of this Act, direct, by notification , that the undertakings of the 
Company, and the right, title a nd interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings, which have 
vested in the Central Government under section 3  and such of the liabilities of the Company as are 
specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the  Central Government, 
vest in the State Government of Gujarat either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later 
date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the  right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings and the liabilities 
of the Company specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5 vest in the State Government under                  
sub-section ( 1), the State Government shall, on and from the date of su ch vesting, be deemed to have 
become the owner in relation to such undertakings, and all the rights and liabilities of the Central 
Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to 
have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the State Government.  
7. Power of State Government  to direct vesting of the undertakings of the C ompany in a 
Government company.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section s 3, 4 and 6, the State 
Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with 
such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of the Comp any, and the right, title and interest of the Company as relation to its 
undertakings and such of the liabilities of the Company as are specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, 
which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 and thereafter in  the St ate Government 
under section 6  shall, instead of continuing to vest in the State Government, vest in the Government 
company either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than 
the ap pointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest, and the liabilities specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, of the 
Company in relation to its undertakin gs vest in a Government company  under sub -section ( 1), the 
Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner 
in relation to such undertakings, and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government or the State 
Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and fr om the date of such vesting, be deemed to 
have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company . 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount. —For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under                  
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash and in the 
manner specified in Chapter V I, an amount of rupees one hundred and fifty lakhs.  
9. Payment of further amount .—(1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 
undertaking s, there shall be given to the Company by the Central Government an amount calculated at the 
rate o f rupees fifty thousand per annum for the period commencing on the date of taking over a nd ending 
on the appointed day.  
(2) The amount specified in section 8 and the amount determined under sub -section ( 1) shall carry 
simple interest at the rate of four pe r cent. per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day 
and ending on the date on which payment of such amounts is made by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner.  
(3) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -section s (1) and ( 2) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 8.  
  7 
 CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—(1) The State Government in which 
the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings vested under section 6 shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such things as 
the Company is authorised to  exercise and do i n relation to its undertakings.  
(2) The general superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the 
undertakings of the Company, the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested under sectio n 3 
in the Central Government and, under section 6, in  the State Government, shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been made by the State Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, 
vest in the Government company specified in such direction; or  
(b) where  no such direction has been made by the State Government, vest in one or more 
Custodians appointed under sub -section ( 3), 
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian so appointed shall be entitled to 
exercise all such powers and do a ll such things as the Company is authorised to exercise and do in 
relation to its unde rtakings.  
(3) The State Government may appoint one or more individuals or a Government company as the 
Custodian of the undertakings of the Company in relation to which no  direction  has been made by it 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7.  
11. Duty to deliver possession of property acquired and documents relating thereto. —(1) On the 
vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in the State Government under sec tion 6, 
every person in whose possession or custody or under whose control any property referred to in                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 may be, shall deliver the property to the State Government forthwith.  
(2) Any person, who on the appointed  day has in his possession or under his control an y books, 
documents or other papers relating to the undertakings of the Company which has vested in the State 
Government under section 6 and which belong to the Company, or, would have so belonged if the 
undertakings of the Company had not vested in the State Government, shall be liable to account for the 
said books, documents or other papers or the State Government and shall deliver t hem up to the State 
Government.  
(3) The State Government may take  or cause to be taken, all necessary steps for securing possession 
of all properties which have vested in that Government under this Act.  
(4) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the State Gove rnment as to its powers and duties and the State Government may also, if it 
so desires, apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the 
management of the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted by it or in relation to any other 
matter arising in  the course of such management.  
(5) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in a Government company 
or in the Custodian, the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 4) shall apply to, or in re lation to, the 
Government company or the Custodian, as the case may be, as they apply to, or in relation to, the State 
Government, subject to the modification that the references to the State Government shall be construed as 
references to the Government comp any or the Custodian, as the case may be.  
12. Accounts to be rendered by the Company or any other person .—(1) Where, in pursuance of 
any decree, order or injuncti on of any court or otherwise, — 
(a) the Authorised Controller was, after the date of taking over an d before the appointed day; and  
(b) the Central Government, the State Government, or the Government company, as the case may 
be, is  on or after the appointed day,  
prevented from taking over the ma nagement of any part of the undertakings of the Company, the 
Company, or any other person in possession, custody or control of such part, shall, within sixty days from 
the appointed day, render accounts to the State Government or the Government company in relation to the 
period commencing on the date of taking over and ending on the date on which such part was or is handed 8 
 over to the Authorised Controller or, as the case may be, the Central Government, the State Government, 
or the Governme nt company, with regard to the — 
(i) assets and stores of the undertakings or any part thereof, acquired, utilised or s old during 
the said period; and  
(ii) income derived by the Company or any other person from the undertakings or any part 
thereof during the said period.  
(2) If, on examination of the accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1), any income or moneys is or are 
found to have been derived by the Company or any other person from such undertakings or any part 
thereof during the period referred to in that sub -section o r any other moneys are found to be payable, such 
income or other moneys shall be recoverable by the Central Government, the State Government or the 
Government company from the Company or such other person, as the case may be, and from the amount 
payable un der this Act to the Company and the debt due to the Central G overnment, the State 
Government or the Government company on this account s hall rank as an unsecured debt.  
(3) If no account is rendered by the Company or such other person in respect of the unde rtakings or 
any part thereof within the period referred to in sub -section ( 1) or if the Central Government, the State 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, has any reason to believe that the account 
rendered by the Company or such other  person is incorrect or false in any material particular, the Central 
Government, the State Government or the Government company may refer the matter to the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner shall determine the income derived by the Company or 
such other person from such undertakings or any part thereof during the period referred to in                        
sub-section ( 1) and take steps to recover the said income or other moneys from the Company or such 
other person and from the amount payable to the Company under this Act as if the debt due to the Central 
Government, the State Government  or the Government  company on this account were an unsecured debt.  
(4) No mortgage, charge, lien or other encumbrance in relation to the undertakings of the Company or 
any part thereof shall be binding on the Central Government, the State Government or the Government 
company, if such mortgage, charge, lien or other encumbrance was created, at any time during the period 
in which the Authorised Controller was, and the Central Government, the State Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, is, prevented, by any decree, order or injunction of any court 
or otherwis e, from taking over the management  of the undertakings or any part thereof.  
13. Accounts. —The Custodian shall maintain accounts of the undertakings of the Company in 
accordance with the provisions of the Companie s Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ). 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
14. Employment of certain employees to continue .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately 
before the appointed day, employed in any of the undertakings of the Company shall become, on and 
from the appointed day or such later date, as the case may be, an employee of the State Government or, as 
the cas e may be, of the Government company in which the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings, have vested under this Act, and shall hold office or service under the State 
Government, or the Government company, as the case may b e, with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such 
vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until  his employment under the State Government, or the 
Governme nt company, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other 
conditions of service are duly altered by the State Government, or by the Governme nt company, as the 
case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industria l Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any of the undertakings of the Company to the State Government  or the Government company, shall 
not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for 
the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  9 
 (3) Where, under the terms of any contract of ser vice or otherwise, any person, whose services 
become transferred to the State Government, or the Government company, by reason of the provisions of 
this Act, is entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any payment for any leave not availed of or any 
other payment, not being payment by way of gratuity or pension, such person may, except to the extent to 
such liability which has been taken over by the Central Government or the State Government or the 
Government company under sub -section ( 2) of section 5,  enforce his claim against the Company, by 
which he was employed immediately before such transfer but not against the Central Government, or the 
State Government, or the Government company.  
15. Provident fund and other funds .—Where moneys representing prov ident fund, superannuation 
fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of the undertakings of the 
Company have vested in an authority established under any law for the time being in force, such moneys 
shall continue to v est in such authority for the benefit of the said persons.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
16. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company under sections 8 and 9, by notification, 
appoint  a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise a ll or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise  different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the power s exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those p owers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act a nd not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall b e defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
17. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner. —(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commission er, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an amount equal to the amo unt specified in section 8, and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the C ompany under section 9.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India,  and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and thereafter the said deposit account shall b e 
operated by the Commissioner.  
(3) The interest accruing on the amounts standing t o the credit of the deposit account referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the Company.  
18. Certain powers of the Central Government or State Government or Government                 
company. —(1) The Central Government, or the State G overnment, or the Government company, as the 
case may be, shall be entitled to receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any 
money due to the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Governmen t, 
or the State Government, or the Government company, re alised after the appointed day notwithstanding 
that the relisation pertains to  a prior  to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government, or the State Government , or the Government company, as the cas e may 
be, may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed 
day for discharging any liability of the Company, not being any liability specified in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5, the relation to any period prior  to the appointed day; and every such claim shall have priority in 
accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which such liability 
has been discharged by the Central Government, or the State Government, or the Go vernment company.  10 
 (3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the 
liabilities of the Company.  
19. Claims to be made to the  Commissioner. —Every person having a claim against the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was pr evented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
20. Priority of claims. —The claims arising out of the matters specified in th e Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with the following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other Categories and Category II shall have 
precedence  over Category III, and so, on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of t he Categories, except Category III, shall rank equally and be 
paid in full, but, if the amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal 
propo rtions and be paid accordingly;  
(c) the liabilities specified in Category III shall b e discharged, subject to the priorities specified in 
this section, in accordance with the terms of the secured loans and the priority, inter se , of such loans; 
and  
(d) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower Category 
shall arise only if a  surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
Category.  
21. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made and under section 19, the 
Commissioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the 
same in accordance  with such order of priorities.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that  the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower Category, he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower Category.  
22. Ad mission or rejection of claims. —(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioners shall fix a date on or before which every claimant 
shall file the proof of his claim failing which he will be excluded from the benefit of the disburs ement 
made by the C ommissioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of a daily newspaper in the English language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the 
regional language as the Commissioner may co nsider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the 
claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in t he 
advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified b y the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disburse ments made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after givi ng the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject  the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, includ ing the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, i n respect of t he following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any wit ness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material  object producible as 
evidence;  11 
 (c) the recep tion of evi dence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission fo r the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 18 60) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purpose s of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered off ice of the Company is sit uated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High court is appointed to be the Commissioner, the 
appeal shall lie to the High Court of Gujarat, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
than two Judges of that High Court.  
23. Di sbursement of amount by the Commissioner to claimants. —After admitting a claim under 
this act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such sums are due, and, on such payment, the liability  of the Company in respect of 
such claim shall stand discharged.  
24. Disbursement of amounts to the Company. —(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to 
the undertakings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as spec ified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disbur es such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property, has vested in the Central 
Government, or the State Government, or the Government company, under this  Act, but such machinery, 
equipment or other property does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government, or the State Government, or the Government company to continue to possess such 
machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which they were 
possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day.  
25. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account. —Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbur sed or unclaimed for a period of three years 
from the last day on which the disbursement was made shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money so transfered may be 
preferred to the Central Government by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if 
such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for 
the refund of the revenue.  
26. Assumption of liability .—(1) Where any liability of the Company arising out of any item 
specified in Category I, Category II and Category III of the Schedule is not discharged fully by the 
Commissioner out of the amount paid to him under this Act, the Commissioner shall intimate in  writing 
to the Central Government the extent to that liability which remains undischarged and that liability shall 
be ass umed by the Central Government.  
(2) On the vesting of the undertakings of the Company in the State Government or the Government 
compan y under this act, the liability assumed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
the liability of the State Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Act to have over riding effect .—The provision s of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court,  tribunal or 
other authority.  
28. Provision relating to contracts. —(1) Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to 
its undertakings before the date of taking over for any service, sale or supply and in force immediately 
before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from the 
appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, in 
writing, by the Central Government, or the State Government, or the Government  company, and, in 12 
 ratifying such contract, the Central Government, the State Government, or the Government company, as 
the case may be, may make such alterations or modificatio ns therein as it may think fit.  
(2) Every contract entered into by the Company, or the Author ised Controller on behalf of the 
Company, in relation to its undetakings, on or after the date of taking over for any service, sale or supply 
and in force immediately before the appointed day shall remain in force, unless such contract is 
terminated or modified or altered by the Central Government, the State Government or the Government 
company, as the case may be, within a period of one hundred and eigh ty days from the appointed day.  
(3) The Central Government, the State Government or the Gove rnment company, as the case may be, 
shall not refuse to ratify, terminate, modify or alter a contract under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2)—  
(a) unless  it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the undertakings of the Company; and  
(b) except after giving to the parties to such contract a reasonable opportunity of bein g heard and 
recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for terminating the contract or for 
making any alteration or modification therein.  
29. Transfer of assets, etc. , to be void in  certain cases. —(1) Except with the prior appro val of the 
Central Government, the State Government or the Government company, neither the Company nor any 
other person in possession of the undertakings of the Company or any part thereof the management or the 
possession of which could not be taken over b y the Authorised Controller or the Central Government or 
the State Government or the Government company by reason of any decree, order or injunction of any 
court or otherwise shall, on and from the appointed day, transfer by sale, mortgage or otherwise any  
property or other assets forming part of the undertakings of the Company and any such transfer, without 
such prior approval,  shall be void and inoperative.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with 
imprisonm ent for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
30. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government, or the Custodian, or the State 
Government, or the Government company, or any officer of the State Government or the Government  
company , or other person authorised by the Central Government, or  the State Government, or the 
Government company, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be do ne under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other 
employee of that Government, or the State Government, or the Custodian or the Government company, or 
any officer or other employee of the State Government or of the Government company or other person 
authorised by the State Government , or the Government company, for any damage caused or likely to be 
caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
31. Penalties. —Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property fro m the Central Government, or the State 
Government , or the Government company; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of any unde rtaking of 
the Company or wilfu ly withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Governmen t, or the State 
Government or the Government company, or any person or body of persons specified by that 
Government, or the State Government, or the Government company, any document relating to such 
undertaking which may be in his possession, custody or co ntrol or fails to deliver to  the Central 
Government, or the State Government, or the Government company or any person or body of persons 
specified by the Central Government, or the State Government, or the Government company, any 
assets, books of account,  registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control, relating to 
the undertaking of the Company; or  
  13 
 (c) wrongfull y removes or destroys any property forming part of any undertaking of the Company 
or prefers any claims under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false or 
grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
32. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was commit ted was in charge of and was res ponsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing co ntained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding a nything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, m anager, secretary, or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this  section,— 
(a) “company” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or other association of          
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in re lation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
33. Delegation of powers. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the power conferred by section 34, may also be 
exercised by such person or persons as may be  specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power  is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
34. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely :— 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation shall be given to the 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 4) of section 4;  
(b) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such mo dified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
35. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in g iving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of t his Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointe d 
day.  
36. Declaration as to the policy of the State .—It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect 
to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause ( b) of article 39 of the 
Constitution.  
Explanation .—In this secti on, “State” has the same meaning as in article 12 of the Constitution.  14 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 5, 20, 21, 22, 24 and 26)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY  
PART  A 
Post-take-over management period  
Category I  
Loans advances by the Gujarat Agro Industries Corporation for carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
PART B 
Pre-take-over management period  
Category II  
Arrears in relation to the provident fund, salaries, wages and other amounts due to the employees of 
the Company.  
Category III  
Secured loans 1[“, Including loans advances, on or after the date of taking over, by a bank to the 
Company to the extent such loans have been utilised by the Company for the re -payment of, or the 
payment of interest  on, secured loans advance d to the Company by a bank at any time before the date of 
taking over ”.]  
Category IV  
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Government, a State Government,         
a Local Authority or a State Electricity  Board.  
Category V  
(i) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
(ii) Any other dues . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1980, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1978).  
--------------------------The Interest Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE INTEREST ACT, 1978  
 _________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power of court to allow interest . 
4. Interest payable under certain enactments . 
5. Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to  apply . 
6. Repeal and saving.  
  2 
 THE INTEREST ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 14 OF 1978  
[31st March, 1978.]  
An Act to c onsolidate and a mend the law relating to the allowance of i nterest in certain cases . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Interest Act, 1978.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central  Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “court ” includes a tribunal and an arbitrator;  
(b) “current rate of interest ” means the highest of the maximum rates  at which interest may be 
paid on different classes of deposits (other than those maintained in savings account or those 
maintained by charitable or religious institutions) by different classes of scheduled banks in 
accordance with the directions given or issued to banking companies generally by the Reserve Bank 
of India under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949).  
Explanation. —In this clause, “scheduled bank ” means a bank, not being a co -operative bank, 
transacting any business authorised by the Ba nking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(c) “debt” means by liability for an ascertained sum of money and includes a debt payable in 
kind, but does not include a judgment debt;  
(d) “personal injuries ” includes any disease  and any impairment of a person’ s physical or mental 
condition;  
(e) all other words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Power of court to allow inte rest.—(1) In any proceedings for the recovery of any debt or 
damages or in any proceedings in which a claim for interest in respect of any debt or damages already 
paid is made, the court may, if it thinks fit, allow interest to the person entitled to the d ebt or damages or 
to the person making such claim, as the case may be, at a rate not exceeding the current rate of interest, 
for the whole or part of the fol lowing period, that is to say, — 
(a) if the proceedings relate to a debt payable by virtue of a writ ten instrument at a certain time, 
then, from the date when the debt is payable to the date of institution of the proceedings;  
(b) if the proceedings do not relate to any such debt, then, from the date mentioned in this regard 
in a written notice given by t he person entitled or the person making the claim to the person liable that 
interest will be claimed, to the date of institution of the proceedings:  
Provided that where the amount of the debt or damages has been repaid before the institution of the 
proceed ings, interest shall not be allowed under this section for the period after such repayment.  
(2) Where, in any such proceedings as are  mentioned in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) judgment, order or award is given for a sum which, apart from interest on damages, exceeds 
four thousand rupees, and  
(b) the sum represents or includes damages in respect of personal injuries to the plaintiff or any 
other person, or in respect of a person ’s death,  
then, the power conferred by that sub -section shall be exercised so as to include in that sum interest on 
those damages or on such part of them as the court considers appropriate for the whole or part of the 3 
 period from the date mentioned in the notice to the date of institution of the proceedings, unless the court 
is satisfied that there are special reasons why no interest should be given in respect of those damages.  
(3) Nothing in this section, — 
(a) shall apply in relation to — 
(i) any debt or damages upon  which interest is payable as of right, by virtue of any 
agreement; or  
(ii) any debt or damages upon which payment of interest is barred, by virtue of an express 
agreement;  
(b) shall affect — 
(i) the compensation recoverable for the dishonour of a bill of e xchange, promissory note or 
cheque, as defined in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881); or  
(ii) the provisions of rule 2 of Order II of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908);  
(c) shall empower the court to award i nterest upon interest.  
4. Interest payable under certain enactments .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
3, interest shall be payable in all cases in which it is payable by virtue of any enactment or other rule of 
law or usage having the force of law.  
(2) Notwithstanding as aforesaid, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -
section ( 1), the court shall, in each of the following cases, allow interest from the date specified below to 
the date of institution of the pr oceedings at such rate as the court may consider reasonable, unless the 
court is satisfied that there are special reasons why interest should not be allowed, namely: — 
(a) where money or other property has been deposited as security for the performance of a n 
obligation imposed by law or contract, from the date of the deposit;  
(b) where the obligation to pay money or restore any property arises by virtue of a fiduciary 
relationship, from the date of the cause of action;  
(c) where money or other property is ob tained or retained by fraud, from the date of the cause of 
action;  
(d) where the claim is for dower or maintenance, from the date of the cause of action.  
5. Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to apply .—Nothing in this Act shall affect the 
provisions of section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
6. Repeal and saving .—(1) As from the commenc ement of this Act, the Interest                            
Act, 1839 (32 of 1839) and any other law corresponding thereto in force in any St ate immediately before 
such commencement shall stand repealed.  
(2) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any suit or other legal proceeding pending at the 
commencement of this Act and the provisions of the corresponding law applicable immediately b efore 
such commencement shall, notwithstanding the repeal of such law by sub -section ( 1), continue to apply to 
such suit or other legal proceeding.  
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
genera l application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with regard to the effect of 
repeal.  
 
--------------------------The Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978--------------------------
1 THE METRO RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS) ACT, 1978  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION  
3. General Manager.  
4. Constitution of Advisory Board.  
5. Committees.  
CHAPTER III  
ACQUISITION  
6. Power to acquire land, etc.  
7. Publication of notification for acquisition.  
8. Power to enter for survey, etc. 
9. Hearing of objection.  
10. Declaration of acquisition.  
11. Power to take possession  of acquired land, etc . 
12. Right to enter into the land where right of user, etc., is vested in the Central Government.  
13. Determination of amount payable for acqui sition.  
14. Deposit and payment of amount.  
15. Competent authority to have certain powers of civil court.  
15A. Power to inspect property under acquisition.  
16. Competent authority and appellate authority.  
16A. Powers of the appellate authority.  
16B. Competent authority, etc., to have certain inherent powers.  
16C. Enforcement of the orders of the competent authority and appellate authority.  
17. Land Acquisition Act 1 of 1894 not to apply.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS  
18. Functions of metro railway administration.  
19. Powers of metro railway administration.  
 20. Development over metro alignment.  
21. Power to prohibit or regulate construction of buildings and excavation.  
22. Payment of amount for prohibition of construction, etc.  
23. Power to underpin  building or otherwise strengthen it.  2 SECTIONS  
24. Power to enter, etc.  
25. Amount payable for damage, loss or injury.  
26. Right to claim for damages.  
CHAPTER V  
INSPECTION OF METRO RAILWAY  
27. Appointment and duties of commissioner.  
28. Powers of commissioners.  
29. Facilities to be afforded to commissioner.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Surplus land to be sold or otherwise disposed of.  
31. Notice of accidents and enquiries.  
32. Power to alter the entries in the Schedule.  
33. Prohibition of obstructio n. 
34. Local authorities to assist.  
35. Prohibition of removal of marks.  
36. Penalty for failure to comply with directions issued under section 21.  
37. General provision for punishment of offences.  
38. Offences by companies.  
39. Bar of jurisdiction.  
40. Ef fect of Act and rules, etc., inconsistent with other enactments.  
41. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
42. Power to remove difficulties.  
43. Application of the Indian Railways Act, 1890.  
44. Power to make rules.  
45. Saving.  
      THE SCHEDULE.   3 THE  METRO RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS) ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1978  
[21st August, 1978.]  
An Act to provide for the construction of works relating to metro railways in the metropolitan 
cities and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the Metro Railways 
(Construction of Works) Act, 1978.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(3) It applies in the first instance to the metropolitan city of Calcutta; and the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, de clare that this Act shall also apply to 2[the National Capital 
Region, such other metropolitan city and metropolitan area, after consultation with the State Government, 
and with effect from such date as may be specified in that notification and thereupon t he provisions of 
this Act shall apply to the National Capital Region, such metropolitan city or metropolitan area 
accordingly .] 
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Advisory Board ” means the Advisory Board constituted under section 4;  
(b) 3[“appellate authority ”] means the appellate authority appointed under section 16;  
(c) “building ” means a house, outhouse, stable, latrine, urinal, shed, hut or wall or any other 
structure or erect ion, whether of masonry bricks, wood, mud, metal or any other material or any part 
of a building, but does not include a plant or machinery installed in a building or any part thereof or 
any portable shelter;  
(d) “commissioner ” means a commissioner of metr o railway appointed under section 27;  
4[(e) “competent authority ” means the competent authority appointed under section 16;]  
 (f) “development ” with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of building, 
engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land or the making of any material 
change in any building or land or planting of any t ree on land and includes redeve lopment;  
(g) “land” includes any right or interest in land;  
(h) “metro alignment ”, in relation to any 5[metropolitan city,  metropolitan area and the National 
Capital Region]  means such alignment of the metro railway as is specified in the Schedule under that 
city and includes the metro railway;  
6[(ha) “metropolitan area” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( c) of article 243P of 
the Constitution ;] 
                                                           
1. 1st February, 1979, vide notification No. S.O. 412( E), dated 20th January, 1979, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,          
     Part II, sec. 3 (ii).  
2. Subs. by Act 34 of 2009 , s. 2, for  certain words  (w.e.f. 7-9-2009 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982 , s. 2, for “ arbitrator ” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
5. Subs by Act 34 of 2009, s. 3, for “metropolitan city” (w.e.f. 7 -9-2009).  
6. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -9-2009).   4 (i) “metro railw ay” means a metro railway or any portion thereof for the public carriage of 
passengers, animals or goods and includes, — 
(a) all land within the boundary marks indicating the limits of the land appurtenant to a metro 
railway,  
(b) all lines of rails, sidings, yards or branches worked over for the purposes of, or in 
connection with, a metro railway,  
(c) all stations, offices, ventilation shafts and ducts, warehouses, workshops, manufactories, 
fixed plants and machineries, sheds, depots and other works c onstructed for the purpose of, or in 
connection with, a metro railway;  
(j) “metro railway administration ”, in relation to any metro railway, means the General Manager 
of that metro railway;  
(k) “metropolitan city ” means the metropolitan city of Bombay, Cal cutta, Delhi or Madras;  
(l) “metropolitan city of Bombay ” means the area covered by Greater Bombay as defined in the 
Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 (Bombay Act III 1888);  
(m) “metropolitan city of Calcutta ” means the area described under the headin g “l. Calcutta 
Metropolitan District ” in the Schedule to the Calcutta Metropolitan Planning Area (Use and 
Development of Land) Control Act, 1965 (West Bengal Act XIV of 1965);  
(n) “metropolitan city of Delhi ” means the entire area of the Union territory of  Delhi;  
(o) “metropolitan city of Madras ” means the area covered by the City of Madras as defined in the 
Madras City Municipal Act, 1919 (Madras Act IV of 1919);  
1[(oa) “National Capital Region” means the  National Capital Region as defined in clause ( f) of 
section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985  (2 of 1985) ;] 
(p) “prescribed”  means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(q) “rolling stock ” includes locomotives, engines, carriages (whether powered or not), wagons, 
trollies and v ehicles of all kinds movin g or intended to move on rails;  
(r) “to erect ”, in relation to any building , includes — 
(i) any material alteration o r enlargement of such building,  
(ii) conversion, by structural alteration, into a place for human habitation of such building not 
originally co nstructed for human habitation,  
(iii) conversion into more than one place for human habitation of such building originally 
constructed as one such place,  
(iv) conversion of two or more places of human habitation in such build ing into a  greater 
number of such places,  
(v) such alteration of such building as would alter the drainage or sanitary arrangements 
therein or would mate rially affect its security, and  
(vi) the addition  of any rooms in such building.  
(2) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian Railways 
Act, 1890 (9 of 1890) , shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION  
3. General Manager. —The Central Government ma y, for the purposes of this Act, appoint a General 
Manager for every metro railway.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 7 -9-2009) . 5 4. Constitution o f Advisory Board. —(1) The Central Government may constitute an Advisory 
Board,  for every metro railway for the purpose of assisting or advising that Government on — 
(a) the formulation and co -ordination of plans for the development of metro railway and its 
expansion;  
(b) the financing and execution of any project for the con struction of the metro railway;  
(c) such other matters as may be referred to it for carrying out the purposes of this Act and in 
particular for the purpose of ensuring that the functions of the metro railway administration are 
exercised with due regard to the circumstances or conditions prevailing in, and requirements of, the 
1[metrop olitan city , metropolitan area and the National Capital Region] . 
(2) The Advisory Board shall consist of such number of members (being  officers of the Government) 
not exceeding nine as may be appointed to it by the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Gover nment shall appoint one of the members of the Advisory Board as its 
Chairman.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all the members of the 
Advisory Board and the Chairman thereof.  
(5) The Advisory Board shall meet at  such times and places and shall observe such procedure in 
regard to the transaction of its  business as may be prescribed.  
(6) The members of the Advisory Board shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed.  
5. Committees. —(1) The Advisory Board may  constitute as many committees as it deems necessary 
consisting wholly of members of such Board or wholly of other persons or partly of members of the 
Board and partly of other persons for suc h purposes as it may think fit.  
(2) Every committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be prescribed.  
(3) There shall be paid to the members of the committee who are not members of the Advisory Board,  
such fees and allowances for attendance at the meetings of the committee and such travelling allowances 
as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
ACQUISITION  
6. Powe r to acquire land, etc. —Where it appears to a metro railway administration that for the 
construction of any metro railway or any other work connected therewith — 
(a) any land, building, street, road or passage, or  
(b) any right of user, or any right in the nature of easement, therein,  
is required for such construction or work, it shall apply to the Central Government in such form as may be 
prescribed for acquiring such land, building, street, road or passage or such right of user or easement.  
7. Publication o f notification for acquisition. —(1) On receipt of an application under section 6, the 
Central Government, after being satisfied that the requirement mentioned therein is for a public purpose 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare its intention to acquire the l and, building , street, road 
or passage , or the right of user, or the right in the nature of easement, therein referred to in the 
application.  
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall give a brief description of the land, build ing, street, 
road or  passage.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 2009, s. 3, for “metropolitan city” (w.e.f. 7-9-2009).  6 (3) The competent authority shal l cause the substance of the notification to be published in such 
places and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
8. Power to enter for survey, etc. —On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, 
it shall be lawful for the metro railway administration or any officer or othe r employee of the metro 
railway— 
(a) to enter upon and survey and take level of the land, building, street, road or passage specified 
in the notification;  
(b) to dig or bore i nto the sub -soil; 
(c) to set out the intended work;  
(d) to mark such levels, boundaries or lines by plac ing marks and cutting trenches;  
(e) to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the metro railway can be laid upon or under 
the land, building, street, road or passage, as the ease may be:  
Provided that while exercising any power under this section the metro railway administration or such 
officer or other employee shall cause as little damage or injury as possible to such land, building, street, 
road or passage, as the case may be.  
9. Hearing of objection. —(1) Any person interested in the land, building , street, road or passage 
may, wi thin twenty -one days from the 1[date of publication under sub -section ( 3) of section 7 of the 
substance of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of that section] object to the construction of the metro 
railway or any other work connected therewith upon or under the land, building, street, road or passage, 
as the case may be.  
2[Explanation .—For the purposes of this  sub-section, where the substance of the notification under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 is published on different dates at different places, the last of such dates shall 
be deemed to be the date on which substance of the notification  has been published.]  
(2) Every objection under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the competent authority in writing and 
shall set out the grounds thereof and the competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity of 
being heard,  either in person or  2[by an agent or] by a legal practitioner, and may, after hearing all such 
objections and after making such further enquiry, if any, as the competent authority thinks necessary, by 
order, either al low or disallow the objections.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -sectio n “legal practitioner ” has the same meaning as in 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961).  
(3) Any order made by the competent authority under sub -section ( 2) shall be final.  
10. Declaration of acquisition. —(1) Where no objection under sub -section ( 1) of section 9 has been 
made to the competent authority within the period specified therein or where the competent authority has 
disallowed the objection under sub -section ( 2) of that section, the competent authority shall, as soon as 
may be, submit a report accordingly to the Central Government and on receipt of such report, the Central 
Government shall declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, that the land, building, street, road or 
passage, or the right of user, or the right in the nature of easement, therein for laying the metro railway 
should be acquired.  
(2) On the publication of the declaration under sub -section ( 1), the land , building, street, road or 
passage, or the right of user, or the right in the nature of easement, therein shall vest absolutely in the 
Central Governm ent free from all encumbrances.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 4, for certain words , brackets and figures  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  7 (3) Where in respect of any land, building, street, road or passage, a not ification has been published 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 either for its acquisition or for the acquisition of the right of user, or any 
right in the nature of easement, therein, but no declaration under this section has been published within a 
perio d of one year from the date of publication of that notification, the said notification shall cease to 
have any effect:  
1[Provided that in computing the said period of one year, the period or periods during which any 
action or proceeding to be taken in purs uance of the n otification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 
[including any such action or proceeding pending immediately before the commencement of the Metro 
Railways (Construction of Works) Amendm ent Act, 1987  (42 of 1987) ] is stayed by an order o f a Court, 
whether granted before or after such commencement, shall be excluded.]  
(4) A declaration made by th e Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall not be called in 
question in any court or by any other authority.  
11. Power to take possession  of acquired land, etc .—(1) 2[Where any land, building, street, road or 
passage has  vested under sub -section ( 2) of section 10 and the amount determined by the competent 
authority under section 13 with respect to such land, building, street, road or passag e has been deposited, 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 14, with the competent authority by the Central Government], the 
competent authority may by notice in writing direct the owner  as well as any other person who may be in 
possession of such land, buildin g, street, road or passage to surrender or deliver possession thereof to the 
competent authority or any person duly authorised by it in this behalf within sixty day s of the service of 
the notice.  
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with any direction made under sub -section ( 1), the 
competent authority shall apply, — 
(a) in the case of any land, building, street, road or passage situated in any area  falling within the 
Presidency -town of Bombay, Calcutta or Madras,  to the Commissioner of Police;  
(b) in the ease of any land, building, street, road or passage situated in any area other than the area 
referred to in clause ( a), to the Executive Magistrate,  
and such Commissioner or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall enforce the surrender of the lan d, 
building, street, road or passage to the competent authority or to the person duly authorised by it.  
12. Right to enter into the land where right of user, etc., is v ested in the Central                
Government. —Where the right of user in, or any right  in the nature of easement on, any land, building, 
street, road or passage has vested in the Central Government under section 10, it shall be lawful for the 
metro railway administration or any officer or other employee of the Central Government to enter an d do 
any other act necessary upon the land, building, street, road or passage for carrying out the construction of 
the metro railway or any other work connected therewith.  
13. Determination of amount payable for acquisition. —(1) Where any land , building, street, road 
or passage is acquired under this Act, there shall be paid an am ount which shall be determined 3[by an 
order of the competent authority ]. 
(2) Where the right of user in, or any right in the nature of an easement on, any land, buildi ng, street, 
road or passage is acquired under this Act, there shall be paid an amount to the owner and any other 
person whose right of enjoyment in that land, building , street, road or passage has  been affected in any 
manner whatsoever by reason of such ac quisition an amount calculated at ten per cent . of the amount 
determined under sub -section ( 1) for that land, bui lding, street, road or passage.  
4[(2A) Before proceeding to determine the amount under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the 
competent author ity shall give a public notice published in the prescribed manner inviting claims from all 
persons interested in the land, building, street, road or passage, or the right of user or the right in the 
nature of e asement therein to be acquired.  
                                                           
1. Proviso added by Act 42 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 5, for certain words, brackets and figures  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
3. Subs . by s. 6, ibid., for “by the competent authority” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  8 (2B) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land, building, street, road or passage acquired, or 
the right of user or the right in the nature of easement therein acquired and shall require all persons 
interested in such land, building, street, road or passag e or right of user or right in the nature of easement 
therein, to appear in person, or by an agent or by a legal practitioner referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 9, before the competent authority, at a time and place therein mentioned (such time not being 
earlier than fifteen days after the date of the publication of the notice) and to state the nature of their 
respective interests in such land, building, street, road or passage or right of user or right in t he nature of 
easement therein.]  
(3) If the amount determined by the competent authority under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) is 
not acceptable to either of the parties the amount shall, 1[on an appeal preferred by either of the parties to 
the appellate authority, within a period of sixty days f rom the date of the order appealed against, be 
determined by an ord er of the appellate authority ]. 
(4) The competent authority or the 2[appellate authority ] while determining the amount under                 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be,  shall take into consideration — 
(a) the market value of the land, building, street, road or passage on the date of publication of the 
notification under section 7;  
(b) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the 
land, by reason of the severin g of such land from other land;  
(c) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the 
land, building, street, road or passage by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other 
immovable property in any other manner, or his earnings;  
(d) if, in consequence of the acquisition of the land, building, street, road or passage, the person 
interested is compelled to change his residence or place of busine ss, the reasonable expenses, if any, 
incidental to such change.  
14. Deposit and payment of amount. —(1) The amount determined 3*** under section 13 shall be 
deposited by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed with the competent authority  
4[with in such time as m ay be fixed by that authority].  
(2) As soon as may be after the amount has been deposited under sub -section ( 1), the competent 
authority shall on behalf of the Central Government pay the amount to the perso n or persons entitled 
thereto: 
5[Provided that where an appeal has been or is likely to be preferred under section 13 against the 
order by which such amount was determined and the competent authority is satisfied for reasons to be 
recorded in writing that it is necessary or expedient so to do, he may by order in writing — 
(a) require the person claiming payment of such amount to furnish as a condition of receiving 
such payment such security as may be specified in the or der; or  
(b) if such person fails  to furnish such security,  withhold the payment of the whole or any part of 
such amount for such period as may be specified in the order.]  
(3) Where several persons claim to be interested in the amount deposited under sub -section ( 1), the 
competent authority shall deter mine the per sons who in its opinion are entitled to receive the amount 
payable to each of them.  
(4) If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the amount or any part thereof or to any person to 
whom the same or any part thereof is payable, the competent authorit y shall refer the dispute to the 
decision of the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the limits of whose jurisdiction the land, 
building, street, road or passage is situated.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 6, for “on an application by either of the parties, to the a rbitrator, be determines by the   
arbitrator”  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983) . 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “arbitrator” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
3. The words “by the competent authority” o mitted by s. 7, ibid, (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “before taking possession of the land, building , street , road or passage ” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
5.  Proviso added by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).   9 (5) Where the amount determined under section 13 by the 1[appel late authority ] is in excess                  
of the amount determined by the competent authority, the 1[appellate authority] may award interest at               
six per cent . per annum on such excess amount from the date of taking possession under section 11 till the 
date of the actual deposit thereof.  
(6) Where the amount determined by the 1[appellate authority] is in excess of the amount determined 
by the competent authority , the excess amount together  with interest, if any, awarded  unde r                             
sub-section ( 5) shall be deposited by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed with 
the competent autho rity and the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4) shall apply to such deposit.  
15. Competent authority to have certain powers of c ivil court. —The competent authority shall 
have, for the purposes of this Act, all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commission for examination of witnesses.  
2[15A.  Power to insp ect property under acquisition. —The competent authority may, with or 
without assistants or workmen, enter into or upon any land , building, street, road or passage, for the 
purpose of performing his functions under this Act and make such enquiry, inspection, measurement and 
take such photographs and prepare such memorandum thereof as he may con sider necessary:  
Provided that — 
(i) no such entry shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset and without givi ng 
reasonable notice to — 
(a) the owner of, or the person interested in, the land, building, street, road or passage; or  
(b) the person whose right of user in or right in the nature of easement on the land, building, 
street, road or passage is acquired; or  
(c) the person who sustains any loss or damage to the land, building, street, road or passage in 
consequence of any direction given by the Central Government or any po wer exercised by the 
metro railway  administration under this Act;  
(ii) sufficient opportunity shall in every instance be given to enable women, if any, to withdraw 
from such land, bui lding, street, road or passage;  
(iii) due regard shall always be had, so far as may be compatible with the exigencies of the 
purpose for which the entry is made , to the social and religious usage of the person to whom notice as 
aforesaid is given;  
(iv) the competent authority making the entry shall cause as little damage or inj ury as possible, to 
the land, build ing, street, road or passage.]  
3[16. Competent aut hority and appellate authority. —(1) For every metro railway, the Central 
Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, by notification i n the Official Gazette, appoint — 
(i) a competent authority; and  
(ii) an appellate authority,  
for such area as may be specified in the notification.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 2, for “arbitrator” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).   
2. Ins. by s. 8 , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for section 16 (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).   10 (2) A person shall not be qualif ied for appointment as a compe tent authority unless he is holding, or 
has held, a judicial office, not lower in rank th an that of a subordinate judge.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as an appellate authority unless he is holding, or 
has held, a judicial office, not lower in rank than that of a district judge.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of t his section, — 
(a) “district judge ” includes an additional district judge;  
(b) “subordinate judge ” means subordinate judge in the judicial service of West Bengal, and 
includes any judicial officer (by whatever name called) of an equivalent rank in the judi cial service of 
any other State .] 
1[16A. Pow ers of the appellate authority. —(1) The appellate authority may admit an appeal filed 
after the expiry of the period referred to in section 13 or section 22 or section 25, as the case may be, if he 
is satisfied t hat there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within that period.  
(2) For the disposal of an appeal under this Act, the appellate authority shall have the same powers 
(including the powers under sections 15 and 15A), and shall, subject to the provis ions of this section, 
perform as nearly as may be the same duties as are conferred or imposed by this Act on the competent 
authority in respect of the matters un der Chapter III and Chapter IV.  
(3) The appellate authority may, if he thinks it expedient so t o do, call in his aid one or more assessors 
and hear the appeal wholly or partly with the aid of such assessors.  
(4) For the purpose of determining the amount under any appeal before him, the appellate authority 
may, after making such further enquiry or af ter taking such additional evidence, as may be necessary, 
pass such order as he thinks fit, determining the amount, by confirming, modifying or annull ing the order 
appealed against.  
(5) An order of the appellate authority determining the amount under this Act shall be final.  
16B. Competent authority, etc., to  have certain inherent powers. —The competent authority and 
the appellate authority may exercise powers of the nature referred to in section 151 of the Code  of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , to the same extent and for the same purposes as such powers are exercisable 
by civil courts.  
16C.  Enforcement of the orders of the competent autho rity and appellate authority. —(1) Any 
order made by the competent authority or the appellate authority deter mining any amount payable under 
this Act may be enforced in the same manner as if such order were a decree made by a civil court in a suit 
pending therein, and it shall be lawful for such authority to send, in the case of his inability to execute, 
such ord er, to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the order was made.  
(2) Where any order under sub -section ( 1) is required to be enforced by the principal civil court of 
original jurisdiction, a certif ied copy of the order shall be produced to the proper officer of the court 
required to enforce the order.  
(3) The production of such certified copy shall be sufficient evidence of the order.  
(4) Upon the production of such certified copy, the principal civ il court of original jurisdiction shall 
take the requisite steps for enforcing the order, in the same manner as if it had been a decree made by 
itself.]  
17. Land Acquisiti on Act 1 of 1894 not to apply. —Nothing in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, 
shall apply  to an acquisition under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  11 CHAPTER IV  
CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS  
18. Functions of  metro railway administration. —Subject to the control of the Central Government, 
the metro railway administration shall, for the purpose of constructing any metro railway or any other 
work connected therewith, — 
(a) make or construct in, upon, across, under or over any lands, buildings, streets, roads, railways 
or tramways or any rivers, canals, brooks, streams or other waters or any drains, water -pipes,                   
gas-pipes, electric lines or telegraph lines, such temporary or permanent inclined planes, arches, 
tunnels, culverts, e mbankments, aqueducts, bridges, ways or passages, as the metro railway 
administration thinks proper;  
(b) alter the course of any rivers, canals, brooks, streams or water -courses for the purpose of 
constructing tunnels, passages or other works over or under  them and divert or alter as well 
temporarily as permanently, the course of any rivers, canals, brooks, streams or water -courses or any 
drains, water -pipes, gas -pipes, electric lines or telegraph lines or raise or sink the level thereof in 
order the more c onveniently to carry them over or under, as the metro railway administration thinks 
proper;  
(c) make drains or conduits into, through or under, any lands adjoining the metro railway for the 
purpose of conveying wate r from or to the metro railway;  
(d) erect  or construct se arch houses, ware houses, offices  and other buildings and such yards, 
stations, engines, machinery, apparatus and other works and conveniences, as the metro railway 
administration thinks proper;  
(e) alter, repair or discontinue such building s, works and conveniences as aforesaid or any of 
them, and su bstitute others in their stead;  
(f) draw, make or conduct such maps, plans, s urveys or tests , as the metro railway administration 
thinks proper;  
(g) do all other acts necessary for making, maintaining, altering or repairing and using the metro 
railway . 
19. Powers o f metro railway administration. —(1) The metro railway administra tion shall, for the 
purpose of 1[performing its functions under sec tion 18] have power — 
(a) to enter into contracts and leases and to execute all  instruments necessary therefor ; 
(b) to make such number of rail tracks as the Central Government may think necessary upon, 
under, along or across any land, canal, river, street or road on or in the metro alignment and all other 
works and conveniences in connection therewith;  
(c) 2[to open, divert or temporarily close], as the case may be, any street, road , cable, trench, drain 
(including a sewer), channel, ditch, culvert or any other device (whether for carrying of sullage, 
sewage, offensive matter, polluted water, trade effluent, rain water, sub -soil water or any other 
object), elect ric or gas supply line or tele -communication line, or telegraph installation, over, across 
or under any land, building, st reet, road, railway or tramway;  
(d) to burrow tunnels;  
(e) to lay down signalling and other communication facilities , electric sub -stations, supply lines 
and other works;  
(f) to regulate drilling of tubewells  or sinking of wells, public or private, in the proximate vicinity 
of the metro alignment;  
(g) to do all other things necessary or expedient for the exercise of any of the aforesaid powers.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 11, for certain words  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).   
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “to open or divert” (w.e.f. 15-5-1983).   12 (2) While exercising any powers under sub -section ( 1), the metro r ailway administration shall take 
such precautionary measures as are necessary, shall do as little damage as possible and shall be liable 
only for the damage or cost actually suffered or incurred by any person as a result of the exercise of such 
powers.  
 20. Development over metro al ignment.—(1) Any person who proposes to develop any land or 
building along or on the metro alignment shall, before commencing such development and without in any 
way limiting his obligation under any other Act to obtain any appro val or consent, submit to the metro 
railway administration details of the proposed development and shall comply with any conditions 
imposed by the metro railway adm inistration in respect thereof.  
(2) The metro railway administration shall, while imposing a ny condition under sub -section ( 1), have 
regard to— 
(a) the safety of the metro railway;  
(b) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
21. Power to prohibit or regulate construction of buildings and excavation. —(1) If the Central 
Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for facilitating the construction of any 
metro railway or for ensuring the safety of any metro railway, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette,— 
(a) direct that no building or any such development as may be specified in the notification shall 
be constructed or made above the metro alignment or on any land within such distance, not exceeding  
1[twenty metres] on either side of the metro alignment, as may be specified in the notification and 
where there is an y building on such land also direct the owner of, or the person having control over, 
such building to demolish such building or to make such additions or alterations to such building as 
may be specified in the notification or to desist from making any such  development and within such 
period as may be  specified in the notification;  
(b) direct temporary evacuation of all persons together with any movable property or animal that 
may be in the custody, control or possession of such persons from any building sit uated above the 
metro alignment or in any area within a distance not exceeding twenty metres on either side of such 
alignment and within such period as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any notification under this clause, t he Central Government shall provide 
every such person temporarily with alternative accommodation, which in its opinion is suitable, free of 
cost, or an amount, which in its opinion is sufficient, to procure a temporary alternative accommodation.  
(2) Where any property is needed or likely to be needed for providing any alternative accommodation 
under the proviso to clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), such property shall be deemed to be needed for                           
a public purpose under section 3 of the R equisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act,                
1952 (30 of 1952), and the competent authority under that Act shall requisition the property in accordance 
with the provisions of that Act and such provisions shall, in relation to suc h requisition, apply 
accordingly.  
(3) In specifying the distance under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have 
regard to— 
(a) the nature and the re quirement of the metro railway;  
(b) the safety of the building;  
(c) such other matte rs as may be prescribed . 
(4) Where any notification has been issued under sub -section ( 1) directing the owner or the person 
having control over any building to demolish such building or to make additions or alterations to such 
building or to desist from ma king any development specified in such notification, a copy of the 
notification containing such direction shall be served on the owner of, or the person having control over, 
such building, as the case may be, — 
(i) by delivering or tendering it to such owne r or person; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 12, for “ten metres” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  13 (ii) if it cannot be delivered or tendered, by delivering or tendering it to the agent of such owner 
or person or any adult male member of the family of such owner or person or by affixing a copy 
thereof on the outer door or on some conspicuous part of the premises in which such owner or person 
is known to have last resided o r carried on business or personally worked for gain; or failing service 
by these means;  
(iii) by post.  
(5) Every person shall be bound to comply with any direction contained in any notification issued 
under sub -section ( 1). 
22. Payment of amount for pro hibition of construction, etc. —(1) If in consequence of any 
direction contained in any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 21 any person sus tains any 
loss or damage, such person shall be paid an am ount which shall be determined 1[by an order of the 
competent au thority] in the first instance.  
(2) If the amount determined by the competent authority is not acceptable to either of the parties, the  
amount shall , 2[on an appeal preferred by either of the parties, within sixty days from the date of the order 
of the competent authority, to the appellate authority, be determined by an ord er of the appellate 
authority].  
(3) The competent authority or the 3[appellate authority], while determining the amount under                   
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be,  shall take into consideration — 
(i) the loss or damage sustained by such person in his earnin gs; 
(ii) the diminution, if any, of the market value of the land or building immediately after the date 
of publication of such notification;  
(iii) where in pursuance of any direction any building has been demolished or any additions or 
alterations to such building have been made or any development has been desisted by such person, 
the damage sustained by him in consequence of such demolition or the making of such additions or 
alterations or the desisting from making such development and the expenses incurre d by such person 
for such demolition or additions or alterations:  
Provided that the expenses incurred for such demolition or additions or alterations shall not be taken 
into consideration if such demolition or additions or alterations has or have been done  by the metro 
railway administration under  sub-section ( 2) of section 36;  
(iv) if any such person is compelled to change his residence or place of business the reasonable 
expenses, if any, that may have to be incurred by him incidental to such change.  
23. Power to underpin buildi ng or otherwise streng then it.—(1) If the metro railway 
administration is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for facilitating the construction of 
any metro railway or for ensuring the safety of any metro railway, it may, underpin or otherwise 
strengthen any building within such radius not exceeding fifty metres from the metro alignment.  
(2) The metro railway administration shall give to the owner or occupier of such building at least ten 
days notice  in writing befo re undertaking the work of underpinning or otherwise strengthening the 
building:  
Provided that where  the metro railway administrati on is s atisfied that an emergency exists, no such 
notice shall be necessary.  
(3) Where the underpinni ng or strengthening was  executed in con nection with — 
(a) the carrying out of the works upon the land whe re any building is situated, or  
(b) the construction or operation of any metro railway,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 13, for “by the competent authority” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
2. Subs by s. 13, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).   
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 2, for “arbitrator” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  14 the metro railway administration may, at any time after the underpin ning or strengtheni ng of such 
building is completed and before the expiration of a period of twelve months, — 
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), from the completion of such works; and  
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), from the date on which traffic w as opened in  the metro 
railway,  
enter upon and survey such building and do such further underpinning or strengthening thereon as it may 
deem necessary.  
24. Power to enter, etc. —(1) With a view to making survey, or to ascertaining the nature or 
condition, of any land or building for the purpose of construction of any metro railway or any other work 
connected therewith, the metro railway administration or any person authorised by that administration 
may, at any reasonable hour in the day time and after giving reasonable  notice to the owner or occupier of 
such land or building, enter upon or into such land or building in, along, over or near the metro alignment 
to— 
(a) inspect the same;  
(b) make measurements and drawings and take photographs thereof and such other suitable 
measures as may be necessary to explore and check up, by digging trial pits or otherwise, the 
foundation of any building in the vicinity of the metro alignment;  
(c) take such other measures as the said administration deems necessary and proper.  
(2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on it under section 19, the metro railway administration 
may, by writing, request any person or body of persons controlling any sewer, storm water drain, pipe, 
wire or cable to carry out at the expense of the met ro railway administration any alterations thereto which 
that administration is authorised or may be required to carry out to meet any particular situation for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(3) If any difference or dispute arises between the metro railway administration and the person or 
body of persons referred to in sub -section ( 2) in relation to any such alterations or the cost thereof, such 
difference or dispute shall be determined by the Central Gover nment in consultation (wherever  necessary) 
with the State Government and the decision of the Central Government in this regard shall not be called 
in question in any court.  
25. Amount paya ble for damage, loss or injury. —(1) Where the metro railway administration 
exercises any power conferred on it b y or under this Act and in consequence thereof any damage, loss or 
injury is sustained by any person interested in any land, building, street, road or passage, the metro 
railway administration shall be liable to pay to such person for such damage, loss or injury such amount 
as may be determined by the competent authority.  
(2) If the amount determined by th e competent authority under sub -section ( 1) is not acceptable to 
either of the parties, the amount pay able shall, 1[on a n appeal preferred by either of the parties, within 
sixty days from the date of the order of the competent authority, to the appellate authority, be determined 
by an order of the appellate authority].  
(3) The competent authority or the 2[appellate authority ] while determining the amount under                
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be, shall have due regard to the damage, loss or injury 
sustained by any person interested in the land, building, street, road or passage by reason of — 
(i) the removal of trees or standing crops, if any;  
(ii) the temporary severance of the land, building, street, road or passage;  
(iii) any injury to any other property whether movable or im movable.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 14, for certain words  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 2,  ibid., for “arbitrator” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  15 1[(4) The procedure and the manner of deposit and payment of the amount payable for acquiring any 
land, building, street, road or passage or any right of user in or any right in the nature of easement on any 
land, building, street, road or passage shall be followed in the case of the procedure and the manner of 
deposit and payment of the amount determined by the competent authority or the appellate authority 
under this section.]  
26. Right to claim for d amages.—No claim in respect of any damage, loss or injury alleged to have 
been caused as a consequence of construction of any metro railway or any other work connected 
therewith under this Act shall lie against the metro railway administration unless such claim is made 
within a period of twelve months from the date of completion of the construction of such met ro railway or 
other work in the area in which such damage, loss or injury is caused.  
CHAPTER V  
INSPECTION OF METRO RAILWAY  
27. Appointment and duties of commissioner. —(1) The Central Government may appoint as many 
persons as it thinks fit by name or by vir tue of their office to be commissioners of metro railway.  
(2) Every commissioner shall — 
(a) inspect the metro railway with a view to determining whether it is fit to be opened for public 
carriage of passengers and report the reon to the Central Government;  
(b) make such periodical or other inspections of any metro railway or of any rolling stock used 
thereon as the  Central Government may direct;  
(c) perform such other duties as may be imposed on him by or under this Act or any other 
enactment for the time being in force relating to railways or required by the Central Government.  
28. Powers of commissioners. —Subject to the control of the Central Government every 
commissioner shall have the power — 
(a) to enter upon and inspect any metro railway or any rolling  stock used thereon;  
(b) to make any enquiry or to take any measurement as he thinks fit for the performance of his 
duties under this Act;  
(c) by an order in writing under his hand and official seal addressed to any metro railway 
administration, to require  the attendance before him of any officer or other employee of the metro 
railway and to require answers or returns,  to such enquiries as he thinks  fit to make, from such officer 
or other employee o r from the said administration;  
(d) to require the producti on of any book or other documents belonging to, or in the possession or 
control of, any metro railway administration which it appears to him to be necessary to inspect for the 
performance of his duties by or under this Act.  
29. Facilities to be afforded to  commissioner. —Every metro railway administration shall afford to 
every commissioner all reasonable facilities for performing the duties or exercising the powers imposed 
or conferred upon him by or under this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Surplus land to be sold or otherwise disposed of. —Every metro railway administration may, 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, sell or otherwise dispose of any land vested in the 
Central Government under the provisions of this Act when suc h land is no longer required for the 
purposes of the metro railway.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983).  16 31. Notice of accidents and enquiries. —(1) If any accident occurs during the construction of any 
metro railway or at any stage subsequent thereto as a consequence of such construction and the accident 
results in, or is likely to have resulted in, loss of human being or animal or damage to any property, it 
shall be the duty of the metro railway administration to give notice to the Central Government of the 
occurrence of any such loss or dama ge in such form and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of a notice under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, appoint 
a commission to enquire into the accident and report as to — 
(a) the cause of such accident;  
(b) the manner in which and the extent to which the provisions of this Act or any other Act for the 
time being in force in so far as those provisions regulate and govern the safety of any person, animal 
or property, have been complied with.  
(3) The commissi on appointed under sub -section ( 2), while holding an enquiry, shall have all the 
powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , in respect 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery or production of any document;  
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commission for e xamination of  witnesses.  
32. Power to alter the entries in the Schedule. —(1) The Central Government may, by notifi cation 
in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) add to the Schedule the metro alignment in respect of a 1[metropolitan city , metropolitan area 
and the National Capital Region]  to which this Act is made applicable under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 1;  
(b) alter any metro alignment specified in the Schedule if it is of opinion that such alteration is 
necessary for the construction and maintenance of the metro railway  to which such alignment relates.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  
33. Prohibition of obstruction. —No person shall, without any reasonable cause or exc use, obstruct 
any person with whom the metro railway administration has entered into a contract, in the performance or 
execution by such person of such contract.  
34. Local authorities to assist. —Every local authority shall render such help and assistance a nd 
furnish such information to the metro railway administration as that administration may require for 
discharging its functions and shall make available to the said administration for inspection and 
examination such records, maps, plans and other document s as may be necessary for the discharge of 
such functions.  
35. Prohibition of removal of marks. —No person shall remove any marks placed or fill up any 
trench cut for the purpose of marking levels, boundaries or lines by the metro railway administration.  
36. Penalty for failure to comply with directio ns issued under section 21. —(1) If any person 
wilfully fails to comply with any direction contained in any notification issued under section 21, he shall 
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend  to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by A ct 34 of 2009, s. 3, for “metropolitan city” (w.e.f. 7 -9-2009).  17 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), if any person fails to demolish any building 
or make additions or alterations thereto in pursuance of any direct ion contained in any notification issued 
under section 21 within the period specified in the notification, then, subject to such rules as the Central 
Government may make in this behalf, it shall be competent for any officer authorised by the metro 
railway administration in this behalf to demolish such building or make necessary additions or alterations 
thereto.  
1[(2A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), if any person fails to vacate tempor arily 
any building together with any movable property or animal that may be in his custody, control or 
possession in pursuance of any direction contained in any notification issued under section 21 within the 
period specified in the notification, the competent authority may enforce the direction of t emporary 
evacuation physically by taking such police help, as may be considered by him necessary, and for this 
purpose the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 shall, as far as may be, apply.]  
37. General provis ion for punishment of offences. —Whoeve r contravenes any provision of this 
Act or of any rule made thereunder shall, if no other penalty is provided for such contravention elsewhere 
in this Act or the rules, be punis hable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fi ne which may extend to five hundred rupees, or wit h both.  
38. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the c ompany for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render  any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), wh ere any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of th e company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or ot her association of               
individuals; and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
39. Bar of jurisdiction. —No suit or application for injunction shall lie in any court against the 
Centr al Government or the metro railway administration or an y officer or other employee of that 
Government or the metro railway or any person working for or on behalf of the metro railway 
administration, in respect of any work done or purported to have been don e or intended to be done by it or 
the said administration or such officer or other employee or such person in connection with the 
construction of any metro railway or any other work connected therewith.  
40. Effect of Act and rules, etc ., inconsistent with other enac tments.—The provisions of this Act 
or any rule made or any notification issued thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument having effect 
by virtu e of any enactment other than this Act.  
41. Protection  of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government, the metro railway administration or any officer or other 
employee of that Gov ernment or the metro railway for anything which is in good faith done or intende d to 
be done under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1982, s. 15 (w.e.f. 15 -5-1983). 18 (2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the 
metro railway administration or any officer or o ther employee of that Government or the metro railway 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act.  
42. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to  the provisions of                  
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions,           
which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no su ch order shall, in relation to any metropolitan city, be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date on which this Act applies or is made applicable to such metropolitan 
city under sub -section ( 3) of section 1.  
43. Application of  the Indian Railways Act, 1890. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act,           
the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Indian Railways                    
Act, 1890 (9 of 1890).  
44. Power to make rules .—(1) The Ce ntral Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the times and places at which the Advisory Board shall meet and the procedure in regard to 
transaction of business by the Advisory Board under sub -section ( 5) of section 4;  
(b) the term of office of the members of the Advisory Board under sub -section ( 6) of section 4;  
(c) the times and places at which the committees shall meet and the procedure in regard to 
transaction of business by the committees under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(d) the payment of fees, allowances and travelling allowances to the members of the committee 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 5;  
(e) the form in which an application for acquisition shall be made under section 6;  
(f) the places at which and the manner in which the substance of the notification shall be 
published under sub -section ( 3) of section 7;  
(g) the manner in which the amount shall be deposited with the competent authority under                  
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 6) of section 14;  
(h) the matters to be specified under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 20;  
(i) the matters to be specified under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 21;  
(j) the form in which and the time within which a notice shall be given under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 31;  
(k) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed . 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter ha ve effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
45. Saving.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act any proceeding, for the acquisition of 
any land, under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), for the purpose of any metro railway, 
pending immediately before the commencement of this Act before any court or other authority shall  be 
continued and be disposed of under that Act as if this Act had not come into force . 
 19  

--------------------------The Press Council Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE PRESS COUNCIL ACT, 1978                                                                                                                                      
______  
ARRAN GEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                               
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Rule of construction respecting enactments not extending to the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
or Sikkim.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRESS COUNCIL  
4. Incorporation of the Council.  
5. Composition of the Council.  
6. Term of office and retirement of members.  
7. Conditions of service of members.  
8. Committees of the Council.  
9. Meetings of the Council and committees.  
10. Vacancies among members or defect in the constitution not to invalidate acts and proceedings 
of the Council.  
11. Staff of the Council.  
12. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Council.  
CHAPTER III 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
13. Objects and functions of the Council.  
14. Power to censure.  
15. General powers of the Council.  
16. Levy of fees.  
17. Payments to the Council.  
18. Fund of the Council.  
19. Budget.  
20. Annual report.  
21. Interim reports.  
22. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Protection of action taken in good faith.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Members, etc., to be public servants.  
25. Power to make rules.  
26. Power to make regulations.  
27. Amendment of Act 25 of 1867.  
  3 
 THE PRESS COUNCIL ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1978  
[7th September, 1978 .] 
An Act to establish a Press Council for the purpose of preserving the freedom of the Press and of 
maintaining and improving the standards of newspaper s and news agencies in India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Press Council Act, 1978.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Council;  
(b) “Council” means the Press Council of India established under section 4;  
(c) “member” means a member of the Co uncil and includes its Chairman ; 
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) the expressions “editor” and “newspaper ” have the meaning s respectively assigned to them in 
the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867), and the expression “working journalist ” 
has the meaning assigned to it in the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees 
(Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955).  
3. Rule of construction respecting enactments not extending to the State of Jammu and 
Kash mir or Sikkim .—Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir or Sikkim shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if 
any, in force in that State.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRESS COUNCIL  
4. Incorporation of the Council .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established a Council by the name of the 
Press Council of Indi a. 
(2) The said Council shall be a body corporate having per ptual succession and a common seal and 
shall by the said name sue  and be sued.  
5. Composition of the Council .—(1) The Council shall consist of a Chairman and twenty -eight other 
members.  
(2) The Chairman shall be a person nominated by a Committee consisting of the Chairman of the 
Council of States (Rajya Sabha), the Speaker of the House of the People (Lok Sabha) and a person elected 
by the members of the Council under sub -section ( 6) and the nomin ation so made shall take effect from 
the date on which it is notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.  
(3) Of the other member s— 
(a) thirteen shall be nominated in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed from 
among the working  journalists, of whom six shall be editors of newspapers and the remaining seven 
shall be working journalists other than editors; so, however , that the number of such editors and 
working journalists other than editors in relation newspapers published in In dian languages shall be 
not less than three and four respectively;  4 
 (b) six shall be nominated in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed from among 
persons who own or carry on the business of management  of newspapers, so, however, that  there sh all 
be two representatives from each of the categories of big newspapers, medium newspapers and small 
newspapers;  
(c) one shall nominated in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed from among 
persons who manage news agencies;  
(d) three shall be  persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of 
education and science, law, and literature and culture of whom respectively one shall be nominated by 
the University Grants Commission, o ne by the Bar Council of India and one by the S ahitya Academy;  
(e) five shall be members of Parliament of whom three shall be nominated by the Speaker from 
among the members of the House of the People (Lok Sabha) and two shall be nominated by the 
Chairman of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) from amo ng its members:  
Provided that no working journalist who owns, or carries on the business of management of, any 
newspaper shall eligible for nomination under clause ( a): 
Provided further that the nominations under clause ( a) and clause ( b) shall be so made that among 
the persons nominated there is not more than one person interested in any newspaper or group of 
newspaper s under the same control of management.  
1[Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( b), a “newspaper ” shall be deemed to be categorised  
as big, medium or small newspaper on the basis of its circulation per issue, as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, notify from time to time.]  
(4) Before making any nomination under clause ( a), clause ( b) or clause ( c) sub -section ( 3), the 
Central Government in the case of the first Council and the retiring Chairman of the previous Council in 
the case of any subsequent Council shall, in the prescribed manner, invite panels of names comprising 
twice the number  of members  to be nominated from such associations of persons of the categories 
referred to in the said clause ( a), clause ( b) or clause ( c) as may be notified in this behalf by the Central 
Government in the case of the first Council and by the Council itself in the case  of subsequent Councils:  
Provided that where there is no association of persons of the category referred to in the said         
clause ( c), the panels of names shall be invited from such news agencies as may be notified as aforesaid.  
(5) The Central G overnment shall notify the names of persons nominated as members under           
sub-section ( 3) in the Official Gazette and every such nomination shall take effect fro m the date on which 
it is notified . 
(6) The members of the Council notified under sub -section ( 5) shall elect from among themselves in 
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed, a person to be a member of the Committee referred 
to in sub -section ( 2) and a meeting of the members of the Council for the purpose of such election shall b e 
prescribed over by a person chosen from among themselves.  
6. Term of office and retirement of members .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the 
Chairman and other members shall hold office for a period of three years:  
Provided that the Chairman shall continue to hold such office until the Council is reconstituted in 
accordance with the provisions of section 5 or for a period of six months whichever is earlier.  
(2) Where a person nominated as a member under clause ( a), clause ( b) or claus e (c) of                  
sub-section ( 3) of section 5 is censured under the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, he shall 
cease to be a member of the Council.  
(3) The term of office of a member nominated under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of sect ion 5 shall 
come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the House from which he was nominated.  
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without excuse, sufficient in the 
opinion of the Council, from three consecutive meetings of the Council.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1994, s. 2 , for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 3 -6-1994).  5 
 (5) The Chairman may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the Central Government, and 
any other member may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the Chairman, and upon such 
resignation  being accepted by the C entral G overnment, or as the case may be, the Chairman or the 
member shall be deemed to have vacated his office.  
(6) Any vacancy arising under sub -section ( 2), sub -section ( 3), sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or 
otherwise shall be filled, as soon as may  be, by nomination in the same manner in which the member 
vacating office was nominated and the member so nominated shall hold office for the remaining period in 
which the member in whose place he is nominated would have held office.  
(7) A retiring member shall be eligible for re -nomination for not more than one term.  
7. Conditions of service of members .—(1) The Chairman shall be a whole -time officer and shall be 
paid such salary as the Central Government may think fit ; and the other members shall receive s uch 
allowances of fees for attending the meetings of the Council, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the condition s of service of members shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) It is hereby declared that the office of a member of the Council shall not disq ualify its holder for 
being chosen  as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliament.  
8. Committees of the Council .—(1) For the purpose of performing its functions under this Act, the 
Council may constitute from  among its members such Committees for general or special purposes as it 
may deem necessary and every Committee so constituted shall perform such functions as are assigned to 
it by the Council.  
(2) The Council shall have the pow er to co -opt as members of a ny committee constituted under     
sub-section ( 1) such other number of persons, not being members of the Council, as it thinks fit.  
(3) Any such member shall have the right to attend any meeting of the Committee on which he is so 
co-opted and to take part  in the discussions thereat, but shall not have the right to vote and shall not be a 
member for any other purpose.  
9. Meetings of the Council and c ommittees .—The Council or any c ommittee thereof shall meet at 
such times and places and shall observe such ru les of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at 
its meetings as may be provided by regulations made under this Act.  
10. Vacancies among members or defect in the constitution not to invalidate acts and 
proceedings of the Council .—No act or proceeding of the Council shall be deemed to be invalid by 
reason merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council.  
11. Staff of the Council .—(1) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in 
this behalf, the Council may appoint a Secretary and such other employees as it may think necessary for 
the efficient performan ce of its functions under this A ct. 
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the employees shall be such as may be determined b y 
regulations.  
12. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Council .—All orders and decisions of 
the Council shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by 
the Council in this behalf and other instrum ents issued by the Council shall be authenticated by the 
signature of the Secretary or any other officer of the Council authorised in like manner in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
13. Objects and functions of the Council .—(1) The objects of the Council shall be to preserve the 
freedom of the Press and to  maintain and improve the standards of newspapers and news agencies in 
India.  
  6 
 (2) The Council may, in furtherance of its objects, perform th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) to help newspapers and news agencies to maintain their independence;  
(b) to build up a code of conduct for newspapers, news agencies and journalists in accordance 
with high professional standards;  
(c) to ensure on the part of newspapers, news agencies and  journalists, the maintenance of high 
standards of public taste and foster a due sense of both the rights and responsibilities of citizenship;  
(d) to encourage the growth of a sense of responsibility and public service among all those 
engaged in the profes sion of journalism;  
(e) to keep under review any development likely to restrict the supply and dissemination of news 
of public interest and importance;  
(f) to keep under review cases of assistance received by any newspaper or news agency in India 
from any foreign source including such cases as are referred to it by the Central Government or are 
brought to its notice by any individual, association  of persons or any other organis ation:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall preclude the Central Government  from dealing with any 
case of assistance received by a newspaper or news agency in India from any foreign source in any 
other manner it thinks fit;  
(g) to undertake studies of foreign newspapers, including those brought out by any embassy or 
other represe ntatives in India of a foreign State, their circulation and impact.  
Explanation. —For the purpose s of this clause, the expression “foreign State ” has the meaning 
assigned to it in section 87A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908);  
(h) to promote a proper fu nctional relationship among all  classes of persons engaged in the 
production or publication of newspapers or in news agencies:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to confer on the Council any functions in 
regard to disputes to w hich the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , applies;  
(i) to concern itself developments such as concentration of or other aspects of ownership of 
newspapers and news agencies which may affect the independence of the Press;  
(j) to undertake such studies as may be entrusted to the Council and to express its opinion in 
regard to any matter referred to it by the Central Government;  
(k) to do such other acts as may be incidental or conductive to the discharge of the above 
functions.  
14. Power to censure .—(1) Where, on receipt of a complaint made to it or otherwise, the Council has 
reason to believe that a newspaper or news agency has offended against the standards or journalistic 
ethics or public taste or that an editor or a working jou rnalist has committed any professional misconduct, 
the Council may, after giving the newspaper, or news agency, the editor or journa list concerned an 
opportunity of  being heard, hold an inquiry in such manner as may be provided by regulations made 
under this Act and, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, the news agenc y, the editor or the journalist or 
disapprove the conduct of the editor or the journalist, as the case may be:  
Provided that the Council may not t ake cognizance of a compliant if  in the opinion of the Chairman, 
there is no sufficient ground for holding an inquiry.  
(2) If the Council is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to d o, it 
may require any newspaper  to publish therein in such manner as the Council thinks fit, any particulars 
relating to any inquiry under this se ction against a newspaper or news agency, an editor or a journalist 
working therein, including the name of such newspaper, news agency, editor or journalist.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to empower the Council to hold an inquiry into any 
matter in respect of which any proceeding is pending in a court of law.  7 
 (4) The decision of the Council under sub -section ( 1), or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be, shall be 
final and shall not be questioned in any court of law.  
15. General powers of the  Council .—(1) For the purpose of performing its functions or holding any 
inquiry under this Act, the Council shall have the same powers throughout India as are vested in a civil 
court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copi es thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witness es or documents; and  
(f) any other matter, which may be prescribed.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to compel any newspaper, news agency, editor or 
journalist to disclose the source of any news or information published by that newspaper or received or 
reported by that news agency, editor or journalist.  
(3) Every inquiry held by the Council shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning 
of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) The Council may, if it  considers it necessary for the purpose of carrying out its objects or for the 
performance of any of its functions under this Act, make such observations, as it may thi nk fit, in any of 
its decisions or reports, respecting the conduct of any authority, including Government.  
16. Levy of fees .—(1) The Council may, for the purpose  of performing its functions under this Act, 
levy such fees, at such rates and in such manner, as m ay be prescribed, from registered newspapers and 
news agencies and different rates may be prescribed for different newspapers having regard to their 
circulation  and other matters.  
(2) Any fees payable to the Council under sub -section ( 1) may be recovered as an arrear of land 
revenue.  
17. Payments to the Council .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to t he Council by way of grants such sums of money as the Central 
Government may consider necessary for the performance of the functions of the Council under this Act.  
18. Fund of the Council .—(1) The Council shall have its own fund, and the fees collected by it, all 
such sums as may, from time to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all grants and advances 
made to it by any other authority or person shall be credited to the Fund and all payments by the Council 
shall be made therefrom.  
(2) All mone ys belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may, subject to the approval of the Central Government, be decided by the Council.  
(3) The Council may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act, and 
such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund of the Council.  
19. Budget .—The Council shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be 
prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year  next ensuing showing the estim ated receipts and 
expenditure, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government.  
20. Annual report .—The Council shall prepare once every year, in such form and at such time as 
may be prescribed, an annual repor t, giving a summary of its activities during the previous year, and 
giving an account of the standards of newspapers and news agencies and factors affecting them, and 
copies thereof, together with the statement of account s audited in the manner prescribed under section 22 
shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Government shall cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  8 
 21. Interim reports .—Without prejudice to the provisions of section 20,  the Council may prepare at 
any time d uring the course o f a year, a report giving a summary of such of its activities during the year as 
it considers to be of public importance and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government 
and the Government shall cause the same to be laid be fore both Houses of Parliament.  
22. Accounts and audit .—The accounts of the Council shall be maintained and audited in such 
manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit or other legal pr oceeding shall lie against 
the C ouncil or any member thereof or any person acting under the direction of the Council in respect of 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any newspaper in respect of the publication of 
any matter therein under the authority of the Council.  
24. Members, etc., to be public servants .—Every member of the C ouncil and every officer or o ther 
employee appointed by the C ouncil shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of     
section 21 of the Indian Pe nal Code (45 of 1860).  
25. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central G overnment may, b y notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to car ry out the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that when the Council has been established , no such rules shall be made without consulting 
the Council.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure fo r nomination of members of the C ouncil under clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of    
sub-section ( 3) of section 5;  
(b) the manner in which panels of names may be invited under sub -section ( 4) of section 5;  
(c) the procedure f or election of a member of the C ommittee referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5 under sub -section ( 6) of that section;  
(d) the allowances of fees to  be paid to the members of the C ouncil for  attending the meetings of 
the C ouncil, and other conditions of service of such members under sub -section ( 1) and (2) of     
section 7;  
(e) the appointment of the S ecretary and  other employees of the Council under section 11;  
(f) the matters referred to in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(g) the rates at w hich fees may be levied by the C ouncil under section 16 and the manner in 
which such fees may be levied;  
(h) the form in which, and the time within which, the budget and annual report are to be prepared 
by the Council under section s 19 and 20 respectively;  
(i) the manner in which the accounts of the Council are to be maintained and audited under 
section 22.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, an d if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have ef fect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  9 
 26. Power to make regulations .—1[(1)] The Council may  2[by notification in the Official Gazette] 
make regulations not inconsistent with this Act thereof and  the rules made thereunder, for — 
(a) regulating the meeting s of the C ouncil or any committee thereof and the procedure for 
conducting the busi ness thereat under section 9;  
(b) specifying the terms and conditions of service of the employees, appointed by the Council, 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(c) regulating the manner of holding any inquiry under this Act;  
(d) delegating  to the Chairman or the Secretary of the Council, subject to such conditions as it 
may think fit to impose, any of its powers under sub -section ( 3) of section 18;  
(e) any other matter for which provision may be mad e by regulations under this Act:  
Provided that the regulations made under clause ( b) shall be made on ly with the prior  approval of the 
Central Government.  
2[(2) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House  of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session s aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be 
made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that regulation.]  
27. [Amendment of Act 25 of 1867. ]  Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1988  (19 of 1988 ),     
s. 2 and the First  Schedule  (w.e.f. 31-3-1988).  
                                                           
1. Section 26 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 2  and the Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
--------------------------The Prize Chits and Money Circulation Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
 THE PRIZE CHITS AND MONEY CIRCULATION SCHEMES (BANNING) ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1978  
[12th December, 1978.]  
An Act to ban the promotion or conduct of prize chits and money circulation schemes and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act  may be called the Prize Chits a nd Money Circulation 
Schemes (Banning) Act, 1978.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “conventional chit ” means a transaction whether called chit, chit fund , kuri or by any other 
name by or under which a person responsible for the conduct of the chit enters into an agreement with 
a specified number of persons that every  one of them shall subscribe a certain sum of money (or 
certain quantity of grain instead) by way  of periodical insta lments for a definite period and that each 
such subscriber shall, in his turn, as determined by lot or by auction or by tender or in such other 
manner as may be provided for in the chit agreement, be entitled to a priz e amount.  
Explanat ion.—In this clause “prize amount ” shall mean the amount, by whatever name called, 
arrived at by deducting from out of the total amount  paid or payable at each instal ment by all the 
subscribers,  
(i) the commission charged as service charges as a promoter o r foreman or an agent; and  
(ii) any sum which a subscriber agrees to forego, from out of the tot al subscriptions of each 
instal ment, in consideration of the balance being paid to him;  
(b) “money” includes a cheque, postal order, demand draft, telegraphic transfer or money order;  
(c) “money circulation scheme ” means any scheme, by whatever name called, for the making of 
quick or easy money, or for the receipt of any money or valuable thing as the consideration for a 
promise to pay money, on any event or con tingency relative or applicable  to the enrolment of 
members in to the scheme, whether or not such money or thing is derived from the entrance money of 
the members of such scheme or periodical subscriptions;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made un der this Act;  
(e) “prize chit ” includes any transaction or arrangement by whatever name called under which a 
person collects whether as a promoter, foreman, agent or in any other capacity, mon ies in one lump 
sum or in insta lments  by way of contributions or subscriptions or by sale of units, certificates or other 
instruments or in any other manner or as membership fees or admission fees or service charges to or 
in respect of any savings, mutual benefit, thrift , or any other scheme or arrangement by whatever 
name called, and utilis es the monies so collected or any part thereof or the income accruing from 
investment or other use of such monies for all or any of the following purposes , namely:— 
(i) giving or awarding periodically or ot herwise to a specified number of subscribers as 
determined by lot, draw or in any other manner, prizes or gifts in cash or in kind, whether or not 
the recipient of the prize or gift is under a liability to make any further payment in respect of such 
scheme  or arrangement;  
(ii) refunding to the subscribers or such of them as have not won any prize or gift, the whole 
or part of the subscriptions, contributions or other monies collected, with or without any bonus, 
premium, interest or other advantage by whatev er name called, on the termination of the scheme 
or arrangement, or on or after the expiry of the period stipula ted therein,  
but does not include a conventional chit;  2 
 (f) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) . 
3. Banning of priz e chits and money circulation scheme s or enrolment as members or 
participation therein .—No person shall promote or conduct any prize chit or money circulation scheme, 
or enroll as  a member to any such chit or scheme , or participate in it otherwise, or receive or remit any 
money in pursuance of such chit or scheme.  
4. Penalty for contravening the provisions of section 3 .—Whoever contravenes the provisions of 
section 3 shall be punisha ble with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court , the imprisonment shall not be less than one year and the fine shall not be less than 
one thousand rupees.  
5. Penalty for other offences in connection with prize chits or money circulation schemes .—
Whoever, with a view to the promotion or conduct of any p rize chit or money circulation scheme in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act or in connection with any chit or scheme promoted or 
conducted  as aforesaid, — 
(a) prints or publishes any ticket, coupon or other document for use in the prize chit or mon ey 
circulation scheme; or  
(b) sells or distributes  or offers or advertises for sale or distribution, or has in his possession for 
the purpose of s ale or distribution  any ticket, coupon or other document for use in the prize chit or 
money circulation scheme; or  
(c) prints, publishes or distributes, or has in his possession for the purpose  of publication or 
distribution — 
(i) any advertisement of the prize chit or money circulation scheme; or  
(ii) any list, whether complete or not, of members in the prize chit or money circulation 
scheme; or  
(iii) any such matter descriptive of, or otherwise relating to the prize chit or money 
circulation scheme, as is calculated to act a s an inducement to person s to participate in that prize 
chit or money circulation scheme or any other prize chit or money circulation scheme; or  
(d) brings, or invites any person to send, for the purpose of sale or distribution , any ticket, coupon 
or other  document for use in a prize chit or money circulation scheme or any advertisement of such 
prize chit or money circulation scheme; or  
(e) uses any premises, or causes or knowingly permits any premises to be used, for purposes 
connected with the promotion o r conduct of the prize chit or money circulation scheme; or  
(f) causes or procures or attempts to procure any person to do a ny of the above -mentioned acts,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years , or with fine which m ay 
extend to three thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reason s to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, the imprisonment shall not be less than one year and the fine shall not be less tha n 
one thousand rupees.  
6. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company  for the conduct  of the busi ness of the company,  as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  3 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence  under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, suc h director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company” means any  body  corporate an d includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
7. Power to enter, search and seize .—(1) It shall be lawful for any police officer not below the rank 
of an officer  in charge of a police station, — 
(a) to enter, if necessary by force, whether by day or night with such assistance as he considers 
necessary, any premises which he has reason to suspect, are being used for purposes connected with 
the promotion or conduct of any prize  chit or money circulation scheme in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act;  
(b) to search the said premises and the person s whom he may find therein;  
(c) to take into custody and produce before any Judicial Magistrate all such persons as are 
concerned or against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been received or a 
reasonable suspicion exists of their having been concerned with the use of the said premises for 
purposes connected with, or with the promotion or conduct of , any such prize chit or money 
circulation scheme as aforesaid;  
(d) to seize all things found in the said premises which are intended to be used, or reasonably 
suspected to have been used, in connection with any such prize chit or money circulation scheme as 
aforesaid.  
(2) Any officer authoris ed by the Stat e Government in this behalf may — 
(a) at all reasonable times, enter into and search any premises which he has reason to suspect, are 
being used for the purposes connected with, or conduct of, any prize ch it or money circulation 
scheme in contravention of the provisions of this Act;  
(b) examine any person having the control of, or employed in connection with, any such prize chit 
or money circulation scheme;  
(c) order the production of any documents, books o r records in the possession or power of any 
person having the control of, or employed in connection with, any such prize chit or money 
circulation scheme; and  
(d) inspect and seize any register, books o f account , document s or any other literature found in 
the said premises.  
(3) All searches under this section shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 197 4). 
8. Forfeiture of newspaper and publication containing prize chit or money circulation 
scheme .—Where any newspaper or other publication contains any material connected with any prize chit 
or money circulation scheme promoted or conducted in contravention of the provisions of his Act or any 
advertisement in relation thereto, the State Government may, by no tification in the Official Gazette , 
declare every copy of the newspaper and every copy of the publication containing such material or the 
advertisement to be forfeited to the State Government.  
9. Power to try offences .—No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, or as the 
case may be, Chief Judicial Magistrate, shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
10. Offences under this Act to be cognizable .—All offences punishable under this Act shall be 
cognizable.  4 
 11. Act not to apply to ce rtain prize chits or money circulation schemes .—Nothing contained in 
this Act shall apply to any prize chit or money  circulation scheme promoted by — 
(a) a State Government or any officer or authority on its behalf; or  
(b) a company wholly owned by a State Government which does not carry on any business other 
than the conducting of a prize chit or money circulation scheme whether it is in the nature of a 
conventional chit or otherwise; or  
(c) a banking company as defined in clause ( c) of section 5 of the Ban king Regulation             
Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) , or a banking institution notified by the Central Government under section 51 
of that Act or the State Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of India            
Act, 1955  (23 of 1955) , or a subsidiary bank constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959  (38 of 1959) , or a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 
of the Ban king Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970),  or a 
Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976  (21 of 1976) , 
or a co -operative bank as defined in clause ( bii) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India              
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; or 
(d) any charitable or educational institution notified in this behalf by the State Government, in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank.  
12. Transitional p rovisions .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a person 
conducting a prize chit or money circu lation scheme at the commencement of this Act may continue to 
conduct such chit or scheme for such period as may be necessary for the winding up of the business 
relating to such chit or scheme, so however that such period shall not in any case extend beyon d a period 
of two years from such commencement:  
Provided that the said person shall furnish to the State Government or to  such officer as may be 
authoris ed by it in this behalf and to such office of the Reserve Bank as may be prescribed in such form 
and wi thin such period as may be prescribed, full information regarding the chit or scheme along with a 
winding up plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of any rules that may be made by the State 
Government in this behalf under this Act:  
Provided furth er that if the State Government is satisfied, on an application made by the person 
conducting the prize chit or money circulation scheme, that the chit or scheme cannot be wound up within 
the period fixed in the winding up plan furnished to the State Gover nment unde r the foregoing proviso, it 
may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, permit such person to continue to conduct the business 
relating to the said chit or scheme for such further period as may be considered necessary having regard to 
the circums tances of the case and the interests of the members of the said chit or scheme.  
(2) The State Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, approve the winding up plan 
furnished under sub -section ( 1) with or without modifications or reject the sam e and may grant or refuse 
to grant permission to continue to conduct that chit or scheme:  
Provided that no such winding up plan shall be modified or rejected without giving an opportunity of 
being heard to the person who conducts such prize chit or money circulation scheme.  
(3) If any person fai ls to furnish full information regarding the said chit or scheme along with its 
winding up plan in the form and within the period prescribed, he shall forfeit his right to continue the 
business relating to the said chit or scheme on the expiry of such period.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any agreement or arrangement entered into 
between any person conducting any such chit or scheme and the subscriber, the person conducting the 
chit or sch eme shall, within such period as may be prescribed, refund the monies or the subscriptions 
collected till the date of default referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) If any person fail s to comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 4), he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to three thousand 
rupees, or with both:  5 
 Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, the  imprisonment shall not be less than one year and the fine shall not be less than 
one thousand rupees.  
13. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
and in consultation with the Reserve Bank, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the office of the Reserve Bank to whom full information regarding any prize chit or mo ney 
circulation scheme may be furnished under the first proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 12, and the 
form in which and the period within which such information may be furnished;  
(b) the particulars relating to the winding up plan of the business relat ing to prize chits or money 
circulation schemes.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the 
State Legislature. ] 
14. Repeals and s aving .—(1) The Andhra Pradesh Money Circulation Scheme (Prohibition )        
Act, 1965  (Andhra Pradesh Act 30 of 1956) , as in force in the State of Andhra Pradesh, and in the     
Union territory of Chandigarh and the Madhya Pradesh Dhan Parichalan Skeem (Pratishedh)             
Adhiniyam, 1975  (Madhya Pradesh Act 19 of 1975),  are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of any Act referred to in sub -section ( 1), anything done or any action 
taken under the provisions of any such Act shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsis tent with 
the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act as if the 
said provisions were in force when such thing was done or such action was taken and shall continue in 
force accordingly until superseded b y anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Public Sector Iron and Steel Companies (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1978--------------------------
1 THE PUBLIC SECTOR IRON AND STEEL COMPANIES (RESTRUCTURING)  
AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1978  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. “Undertaking ”— meaning of.  
CHAPTER II 
DISSOLUTION, TRANSFER AND VESTING OF UNDERTAKINGS OF CERTAIN COMPANIES  
 
4. Dissolution, transfer and vesting of undertakings of certain companies in Integral Company.  
5. Transfer and vesting of Kiriburu Iron Ore Mines, etc., in Integral Company.  
6. Transfer and vesting of Refractory Plant, etc., in the Bharat Refractories Limited.  
7. Transfer of immovable properties of Hindustan Steel Limited to Metallurgical and Engi neering 
Consultants (India) Limited.  
CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF SHARES  
 
8. Transfer of shares held by Bok aro Steel Limited to Central Government.  
9. Transfer of shares held by Integral Company to Central Government.  
10. Transfer of shares held by Integral Company to Bharat Refractories Limited.  
11. Transfer of shares held by Central Government to Integral Company.  
12. Centr al Government, etc., deemed to be registered in the register of members of companies . 
13. Power of Central Government to modify amount of paid -up share capital of Integral                   
Company, etc., and issue of shares.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
 
14. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of dissolved companies.  
15. Provisions relating to officers and employees of transferred units.  
16. Provisions relating to directors.  
17. Provision relating to auditors.  
18. Compensation for trans fer not payable . 
19. Provident Fund.  
20. Gratuity, welfare and other funds.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS  
 
21. Provisions with respect to income -tax and surtax.  
22. Taxes, fees and other charges not payable.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
23. Saving of contracts, etc.  
24. Saving of legal proceedings.  
25. Power to remove difficulties.  
26. Act to override the provisions of other laws.  
27. Power to amend memorandum and articles of association.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE .  2 THE PUBLIC SECTOR IRON AND STEEL COMPANIES (RESTRUCTURING)  
AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1978  
ACT NO.16 OF 1978  
[30th April , 1978 .] 
An Act to provide for restructuring of the iron and steel companies in the public sector so as to 
secure better management and gr eater efficiency in their working and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Public Sector Iron and Steel 
Compani es (Restructuring) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1978.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “Companies Act ” means the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(c) “corresponding unit ”, in relation to — 
(i) the Integral Company, means that unit of the Integral Company which corresponds to the 
unit of the dissolved company or the transferred company in which the concerned officer or other 
employee was holding office before the transfer of the said unit;  
(ii) a transferee company, means that unit of a transferee company which c orresponds to the 
unit of the dissolved company in which the concerned officer or other employee was holding 
office before the transfer of the said unit;  
(d) “dissolved company ” means a company specified in the First Schedule;  
(e) “Integral Company ” means the Steel Authority of India Limited, a company formed and   
regis tered under the Companies Act having its registered office at New Delhi;  
(f) “transferee company ” means the company to which the undertakings of a dissolved company 
or of a transferre d unit, as the case may be, stand transferred by virtue of the provisions of this Act;  
(g) “transferred company ” means,— 
(i) Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) Limited, a company formed and     
regis tered under the Companies Act having its registered office at Ranchi in the State of Bihar;  
(ii) National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, a company formed and registered 
under the Companies Act having its registered office at Hyderabad in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh;  
(iii) Hindustan Ste elworks Construction Limited, a company formed and registered under the 
Companies Act having its registered office at Calcutta in the State of West Bengal;  
(iv) Bharat Refractories Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act 
having its  registered office at Bokaro Steel City in the State of Bihar; or  
(v) India Firebricks and Insulation Company Limited, a company formed and registered 
under the Companies Act having its registered office at Bombay in the State of Maharashtra;  
                                                           
1. 1st May , 1978, vide notification No. S.O. 291(E), dated 30th April , 1978, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part I I,                  
             sec. 3( ii). 3 (h) “transfer red unit” means ,— 
(i) Kiriburu Iron Ore Mines, a unit of the National Mineral Development Corporation 
Limited; or  
(ii) Meghahatuburu Iron Ore Project, a unit of the National Mineral Development 
Corporation Limited;  
(iii) Ramgarh Refractory Plant, a unit of  the Hindustan Steel Limited (situated near Ramgarh 
in the State of Bihar);  
(iv) Refractory Project, a unit of the Hindustan Steel Limited (situated at Bhilai in the State of 
Madhya Pradesh); or  
(v) Sillimanite Mines, a unit of the Hindustan Steel Limited (situated in the State of 
Meghalaya).  
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act have the 
meaning respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. “Undertaking ”— meaning of .—For the purposes of this Act, the undertaking of a dissolved 
company or of a transferred unit shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, leaseholds (including 
mining leases, if any), industrial or other licences, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, 
movable and immovabl e, including lands, buildings, works, mines, workshops, projects, smelters, stores, 
instruments , machinery, automobiles and other vehicles, cash or bank balances, cash in hand,                     
invest ments, and book debts and all other rights and inter ests in , or arising out of, such property as were 
immediately before the appointed day in the ownership , possession, power or control of the dissolved 
company or the transferred unit, as the case may be (whether within or without India), and all books of 
account, registers maps, drawings, records of survey and all other documents of whatever nature relat ing 
thereto, and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind of 
the dissolved company or the transferred u nit. 
Explanation .—Reference in this section to an undertaking of a transferred unit shall be deemed to be 
a reference to so much of the undertaking of the company of which that forms a unit as is relatable to it as 
if it were a separate company.  
CHAPTER II  
DISSOLUTION, TRANSFER AND VESTING OF UNDERTAKINGS OF CERTAIN COMPANIES  
4. Dissolution, transfer and vesting of undertakings of certain companies in Integral 
Company .—On the appointed day, the companies specified in the First Schedule shall stand dissolved  
and, subject to the provisions of s ections 6 and 7, all the undertakings of such companies shall stand 
trans ferred to, an d vest in the Integral Company.  
5. Transfer and vesting of Kiriburu Iron Ore Mines , etc., in Integral Company .—On the                    
appointed day, the undertakings of the following transferred units shall stand transferred to, and vest i n, 
the Integral Company, namely :— 
(a) Kiriburu Iron Ore Mines, a unit of the National Mineral Development Corporation                  
Limited, and  
(b) Meghahatuburu Iron Ore Project, a unit of the National Mineral Development Corporation 
Limited.  
6. Transfer and vesting of Refractory Plant , etc., in the Bharat Refractories Limited .—(1) On 
the appointed day, the undertakings of the fo llowing transferred units shall stand transferred to, and vest 
in, the Bhar at Refractories Limited, namely :— 
(a) Ramgarh Refractory Plant of the Hindustan Steel Limited (situated near Ramgarh in the State 
of Bihar),  
(b) Sillimanite Mines of the Hindustan S teel Limited (situated in the State of Meghalaya), and  4 (c) Refractory Project of the Hindustan Steel Limited (situated at Bhilai in the State of Madhya 
Pradesh).  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, as from the appointed day, the 
registered office of the Bharat Refractories Limited may remain at Bokaro Steel City or be transferred to 
Ranchi.  
7. Transfer of immovable properties of Hindustan Steel Limited to Metallurgical and                      
Engi neering Consultants (India) Limi ted.—On the appointed day, the right, title and interest of the 
Hindustan Steel Limited in the immovable properties owned by it in Ranchi District of the State of Bihar, 
together with lia bilities and obligations in relation thereto, shall stand transferred  to, and vest in, the 
Metallurgical and Engineeri ng Consultants (India) Limited.  
CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF SHARES  
8. Transfer of shares held by Bokaro Steel Limited to Central Government .—On the ap pointed 
day, all the shares held by the Bokaro Steel Limited  in the share capital of the Bharat Refractories Limited 
shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government.  
9. Transfer of shares held by Integral Company to Central Government .—On the appointed day, 
all the shares held by the Integral Compan y in the share capital of each of the companies specified in the 
Second Schedule shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government.  
10. Transfer of shares held by Integral Company to Bharat Refractories Limited .—On the 
appointed day, all the shares held by the Integral Company in the share capital of the India Firebricks and 
Insulation Company Limited (a company formed and registered under the Companies Act having its 
registered office at Bombay in the State of Maharashtra) shall stand transfe rred to , and vest in, the Bharat 
Refractories Limited.  
11. Transfer of shares held by Central Government to Integral Company .—On the appointed 
day, all the shares held by the Central Government in the share capital of the Indian Iron and Steel 
Company Limited (a company under the Companies Act having its registered office at Calcutta in the 
State of West Bengal) shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Integral Company.  
12. Central Government, etc., deemed to be registered in the register of members  of 
companies .—The Central Government, the Bharat Refractories Limited or the Integral Company, as the 
case may be, shall be deemed, as from the appointed day, to have been registered in the register of 
members of the companies concerned as the holder of e ach share which stands transferred to, and vested 
in, each of them by virtue of the provisions of section 8, 9, 10 or 11, as the case may be.  
13. Power of Central Government to modify amount of paid -up share capital of Integral 
Company, etc. , and issue of shares .—(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by order 
published in the Official Gazette, specify the amount by which the paid -up share capital of the Integral 
Company, the Bharat Refractories Limited, the Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) 
Limited, and the National Mineral Development Corporation Limited shall stand reduced or increased as 
a result of transfer of shares, undertakings or immovable properties, as the case may be, under the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In spe cifying the amount under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have regard t o the 
following factors, namely :— 
(i) the book value of shares referred to in section 8, 9, 10 or 11, as the case may be, of the 
concerned company, on the appointed day,  
(ii) the net value of the undertakings of the dissolved company and transferred unit, as on the 
appointed day, and  
(iii) the book value of the immovable properties owned by the Hindustan Steel Limited referred 
to in section 7, as on the appointed day,  
as are  transferred to or from the companies referred to in  sub-section ( 1). 5 (3) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be made within a period of one year from the 
appointed day and any such order may take effect prospectively or retrospectively, but not w ith effect 
from a date earlier than the appointed day.  
(4) Any order made by the Central Government under this section may include a direction for the 
issue or cancellation of appropriate number of shares so as to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
14. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of dissolved companies .—(1) Every 
officer (not being a director) or other employee holding office immediately before the appointed day in a 
dissolved company in relation to any undertaking of such company, other than an officer or other 
employee holding such office in relation to transferred units referred to in section 6, shall, as from the 
appointed day, continue to hold office as such in th e corresponding unit of the Integral Company by the 
same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service and with the same rights and privileges as 
to retirement benefits as would have been admissible to him if the company in which he was holding 
office had not been dissolved and shall continue to do so unless and until such tenure and terms and 
conditions are duly altered by the Integral Company.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), rules relating to the conditions of serv ice 
and Standing Orders applicable to the officers or other employees referred to in sub -section ( 1), as 
immediately before the appointed day, shall continue to apply unless and until they are duly altered by the 
Integral Company or other authority, as the c ase may be.  
15. Provisions relating to officers and employees of transferred units .—(1) Every officer or other 
employee holding office immediately before the appointed day in the transferred unit shall, as from the 
appointed day, continue to be an officer or other employee of the corresponding unit of the transferee 
company by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service and with the same rights 
and privileges as to retirement benefits as would have been admissible to him if the trans ferred unit in 
which he was holding office had not been transferred and shall continue to do so unless and until such 
tenure and terms and conditions are duly altered by the transferee company.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), rule s relating to the conditions of serv ice 
and Standing Orders applicable to the officers or other employees referred to in sub -section ( 1), as 
immediately before the appointed day, shall continue to apply unless and until they a re duly altered by the 
transf eree company or other authority, as the case may be.  
16. Provisions relating to directors .—(1) Every person holding office as a director of a dis solved 
company immediately before the appointed day shall, on that day, cease to hold office as such director.  
(2) Every person, being a director in whole -time employment of a dissolved company, immedi ately 
before the appointed day, shall continue to be an employee of the corresponding unit of the Integral 
Company with such designation and on such terms and condi tions as may be determined by the Integral 
Company.  
17. Provision relating to auditors .—Every person appointed under section 619 of the Compa nies 
Act as an auditor of a dis solved company or of a transfer red unit, holding office immediately before the 
appointed day, may continue to hold office as such auditor in the corresponding unit of the Integral 
Company or of any other transferee company, as the case may be , for the duration for which he was so 
appointed, on the same terms and conditions as were ap plicable to him immediately before the ap pointed 
day. 
18. Compensation for transfer not payable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the In dustrial 
Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of servic es of 
any officer or other employee shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under 
that Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no claim for such compensation shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or oth er authority.  6 19. Provident Fund .—Where a provident fund has been established by a dissolved company or any 
other company in respect of a transferred unit for the benefit of the employees and the same stands vested 
in a trust, the moneys and other assets s tanding to the credit of each provident fund shall continue to be 
held in trust with the same objects as were applicable before the appointed day and the trustees of such 
trusts immediately before the appointed day shall, subject to the provisions of the t rust deeds and the rules 
relating to such trusts, continue to function as trustees in respect of such provident fund of the 
corresponding unit of the Integral Company or of other transferee company, as the case may be, as if this 
Act had not been passed:  
Provided that the right to nominate trustees and other rights relating to the trusts vested in the 
dissolved company or other comp any in respect of the transferr ed unit, as the case may be, shall vest in 
the Integral Company or other transferee company, as the case may be.  
20. Gratuity, welfare and other funds .—Where any gratuity, welfare or other fund has been 
established by a dissolved company or any other company in respect of a transferred unit for the benefit 
of its employees and is in existence immedia tely before the appointed day, all moneys and other assets 
standing to the credit of or relatable to such gratuity, welfare or other fund shall vest in the correspond ing 
unit of the Integral Company or other transferee company, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER  V 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS  
21. Provisions with respect to income -tax and surtax .—(1) The Integral Company shall be liable to 
pay any sum under the provisions of the Income -tax Act or the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act which any 
dissolved company would have be en liable to pay if the dissolution had not taken place, in the like 
manner and to the same extent as the dissolved company.  
(2) For the purpose of making an assessment of the income or, as the case may be, the chargeable 
profits of any dissolved company any for the purpose of levying any sum in accordance with the          
provi sions of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) any proceeding taken against any dissolved company before the appointed day shall be 
deemed to have been taken against the Integral Company and may b e continued against the Integral 
Company from the stage at which it stood immediately before the appointed day;  
(b) any proceeding which could have been taken against any dissolved company if the dissolution 
had not taken place, may be taken against the In tegral Company; and  
(c) all the provisions of the Income -tax Act or, as the case may be, the Companies (Profits) Surtax 
Act shall apply accordingly.  
(3) The assessment of the income or, as the case may be, the chargeable profits of the previous year 
of any  dissolved company in which the dissolution took place up to the appointed day shall be made as if 
such dissolution had not taken place, and all the provisions of the Income -tax Act and the Compa nies 
(Profits) Surtax Act shall, so far as may be, apply acc ordingly.  
(4) The transfer to, a nd vesting in, of the undertak ing of any dissolved company in the Integral 
Company under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be an amalgamation in relation to such 
companies and the provisions of the Income -tax Act  shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly as if 
references in the said Act to the amalgamating company and the amalgamated company were references 
to the dissolved company and the Integral Company respectively.  
(5) Where any capital asset forming part of  any undertaking belonging to the transferred unit or, as 
the case may be, the Hindustan Steel Limited is, in pursuance of section 5 or section 6 or section 7, 
transferred to, and vests in, the Integral Company or the Bharat Refractories Limited or, as the  case may 
be, the Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) Limited , such capital asset shall be deemed to 
have been transferred in a scheme of amalgamation and the provisions of the Income -tax Act shall, so far 
as may be, apply accordingly as if r eferen ces in the said Act to the amal gamating company were 
references to the transferred unit or, as the case may be, the Hindustan Steel Limited and the references to 
the amalgamated company, being an Indian company, were references to the Integral Compan y or the 
Bharat Refractories Limited or, a s the case may be, the Metallur gical and Engineering Consultants (India) 
Limited.  7 (6) The accumulated loss and the unabsorbed depreciation, if any, of any dissolved company shall be 
deemed to be the loss or, as the  case may be, allowance for depreciation of the Integral Company for the 
previous year in which the undertaking of the dissolved company vested in the Integral Company, and the 
provisions of the Income -tax Act relating to set off and carry forward of loss and allowance for 
depreciation shall apply accordingly.  
(7) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 6) shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in the Income -tax Act or the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “Income -tax Act” means the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) ; 
(b) “Companies (Profits) Surtax Act ” means the Companies (Profits) Surtax                                      
Act, 1964  (7 of 1964) ; 
(c) words and expressions use d in this section and not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Income -tax Act or the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in the said Acts.  
22. Taxes, fees and other charges not payable .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby de clared 
that no taxes , duties, fees or other charges of whatever nature (including registration charges) , shall be 
payable in respect of any transfer of shares or transfer of any undertakings or transfer of any immovable 
property und er the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Saving  of contracts , etc.—(1) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements and other instruments of 
whatever nature to which the dissolved company is a party subsisting or having effect immediately before 
the appointed day, shall, as from that day , be of full force and effect against, or in favour of the Integral 
Company or other transferee company, as the case may be, and may be enforced as fully and effectually 
as if, instead of the dissolved compa ny, the Integral Company or other transferee company had been a 
party thereto.  
(2) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements and others instruments of whatever nature to which the 
company in respect of a transferred unit is a party if and in so far as it rel ates to matters pertaining to the 
undertakings of the transferred unit , subsisting or having effect immediately before the appointed day, 
shall , as from that day, be of full force and effect against , or in favour of the Integral C ompany or other 
transferee  company, as the case may be, and may be enforced as fully and effectually as if, instead of 
such company, the Integral Company or other transferee company had been a party thereto.  
24. Saving of legal proceedings .—If, on the appointed day, there is pendin g any suit, arbitration, 
appeal or other legal proceeding  of whatever nature by or against a dissolved company, the same shall not 
abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer under the 
provisions of this Act to the Integral Company or any other transferee company, as the case may be , of 
the undertakings of the dissolved company or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, arbitration, 
appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Integral                
Com pany or other transferee company, as the case may be, in the same manner and to the same extent as 
it would or might have been continued , prosecuted and enforced by or against the dissolved company if 
this Act had not been passed.  
25. Power to remove difficulties .—If an y difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, publish ed in the Official Gazette, make such provisions , not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary, for the r emoval of the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the 
appointed day.  8 26. Act to override the provisions of other laws .—The provisions of this Act or of any order made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act or in any other law 
for the time being in force or in any contract, express or implied, or in any rules or regulations having 
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
27. Power to amend  memorandum and articles of association .—(1) For the purpose of giving 
effect to the provisions of this Act , the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make amendments in the memorandum or articles of association, or both, of the Integral Company or 
other transferee company.  
(2) Any amendments in the memorandum or articles of association of the Integral Company or other 
transferee company made in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding any thing 
contained in the Companies Act.   9 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2(1) (d) and 4] 
1. Bhilai Ispat Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act having its 
registered office at Bhilai  in the State of Madhya Pradesh.  
2. Bokaro Steel Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act having its 
registered office a t Bokaro Steel City in the State of Bihar.  
3. Durgapur Mishra Ispat Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act having 
its regis tered office at Durgapur in th e State of West Bengal.  
4. Hindustan Steel Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act having its 
registered office at   Ranchi in the State of Bihar.  
5. Rourkela Ispat Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act ha ving its 
registered office at Rourkela in the State of Orissa.  
6. SAIL International Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act having its 
registered office at Calcutta in the State of West Bengal.  
7. Salem Steel Limited , a company fo rmed and registered under the Companies Act having its 
registered office at Salem in the State of Tamil Nadu.   10 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 9]  
1. Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (India) Limited, a company formed and registered 
under the Compa nies Act having its registered office at Ranchi in the State of Bihar.  
2. Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited, a company formed and registered under the 
Companies Act hav ing its registered office at Calcutta in the State of West Bengal.  
3. National  Mineral Development Corporation Limited, a company formed and registered under the 
Companies Act having its registered office at Hyderabad  in the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
4. Manganese Ore (India) Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act 
having its regis tered office at Nagpur in the State of Maharashtra.  
5. Mandovi Pellets Limited, a company formed and registered under the Companies Act having its 
registered office at  Mormugao Harbour in the Union t erritory of Goa, Daman and  Diu. 
--------------------------The Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1978--------------------------
1 
  
THE SUGAR UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) ACT, 1978  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1978  
[30th December, 1978 .] 
An Act to provide for the temporary taking over, in the public interest, of the management of 
certain sugar undertakings in certain circumstances.  
WHEREAS  for maintaining the continuity of production of sugar, for avoiding undue hardship to cane 
producing farmers and to best sub serve the interests of all sections of the people, it is expedient in the 
public interest to provide for the taking over for a limited period the management of every sugar 
undertaking which fails or ceases to manufacture sugar or which fails to pay promptly amounts due for 
the cane acquired for the purposes of the undertaking;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -ninth Year  of the Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called t he Sugar Undertakings 
(Taking Over of Management) Act, 1978.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 9th day of November, 1978.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ”, in relation to any sugar year, means such day in the year as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify having regard to the agro -climatic conditions prevailing or 
likely to prevail, the quantity of cane available or likely to be available for crushing and other r elevant 
factors : 
Provided that for the sugar year 1978 -79, the appointed day shall  be th e 15th day of      
November, 1978;  
(b) “cane” means sugarcane;  
(c) “date of vesting ”, in relation to a sugar undertaking, means the date on which the management 
of the undertaking vests in the Central Government under section 3;  
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “sugar undertaking ” means an undertaking engaged in the manufacture or production of sugar 
by means of vacuum pans and with the aid  of mechanical power and “notified sugar undertaking ” 
means a sugar undertaking in respect of which a notif ication has been issued under section  3; 
(g) “sugar year ” means the period of twelve months commencing on the 1st day of October and 
ending with the 30th day of September next following;  
(h) words and expressions used but not defin ed in this Act and defined in  the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951)  shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in that Act and for this purpose a sugar undertaking shall be deemed to be an industrial 
undertaking within the meaning of that Act;  
(i) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act or in the  Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951)  but defined in the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956 .  2 
 CHAPTER II  
TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT  
3. Vesting of management of a sugar undertaking in Central Government .—(1) Where the 
Central Government is satisfied — 
(a) that any sugar undertaking has in any sugar year failed to commence the manufacture of sugar 
on or before the appointed day in respect of that year,  or having started the manufacture of sugar on 
or before that day ceased to manufacture sugar before the expiry of the average period of manufacture 
of sugar in relation to that undertaking; or  
(b) that on any date in any sugar year any sugar undertaking h as, in relation to the cane  
1[purchased , at any time (whether in that sugar year or in any earlier sugar year or sugar years and 
whether before or after the commencement of this Act), before that date] for the purposes of the 
undertaking, arrears of cane dues to the extent of more than ten per  cent. of the total price of the cane 
purchased for the purposes of the undertaking during the immediately preceding sugar year; and  
(c) that in either case the effective functioning of the undertaking is necessary for the purposes of 
this Act,  
the Central G overnment may issue a notice in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed to the 
owner or the manager of such sugar undertaking calling upon such owner or manager to report in writing 
within such time, not being less than five days, as may be speci fied in the notice, the circumstances under 
which such undertaking has so failed to commence or ceased to manufacture sugar or, as the case may be, 
clear the said arrears of cane dues and to show cause as to why the management of such undertaking 
should no t be taken over by the Central Government under this Act.  
(2) As soon as may be, after the rece ipt of the report under sub -section  (1) from the sugar 
undertaking, or where the sugar undertaking has failed to make such report within the time specified in 
the notice to that undertaking under sub -section ( 1), after the expiry of such time, the Central Government 
may make such further inquiry ( if any) as it may deem fit, and — 
(a) if the Central Government is satisfied that having regard to all the circumstances  of the case 
and the purposes of this Act that it would be expedient to give further time to the undertaking to 
enable it to commence or resume production of sugar or, as the case may be, clear the arrears of cane 
dues, it may, by order in writing, specify  the date on or before which and the manner in which such 
undertaking shall commence or resume production of sugar or, as the case may be, clear the said 
arrears of cane dues; or  
(b) if the Central Government is not satisfied as provided in clause ( a), dec lare by notification 
that the management of such undertaking shall vest in the Central Government on and from such date 
as may be specified in such notification.  
(3) If a sugar undertaking has failed to comply with an order made under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2), 
or having commenced or resumed the production of sugar on or before the date specified in such order, 
ceased to manufacture sugar before the expiry of the average period of manufacture of sugar in relation to 
that undertaking, and the Cent ral Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to do for the purposes of 
this Act, it may, by notification , declare that the management of such sugar undertaking shall vest in the 
Central Government on and from such date as may be specified in such notification.  
(4) Any failure on the part of the owner or manager of the sugar undertaking to utilise the undertak ing 
for the manufacture of sugar during any period shall not be taken into account for the purpose of issuing a 
notification in respect of that undertaking under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) where 
such failure is attributable to any cir cumstances (other than financial difficulties) beyond his control.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1979, s. 2 , for “purchased before that date” (w.e.f. 31 -3-1979).  
 3 
 (5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) for vesting the management of a 
sugar undertaking in the Central Government shall be in force for such period not ex ceeding three years 
from the date of vesting as may be specified in the notification but if  1* * *  the Central Government is of 
opinion that it is expedient in the public interest that the management of the sugar undertaking should 
continue to vest in the Central Government after the expiry of the period so specified, it may, from  time to 
time, issue, by notification, directions for such continuance for such further period as may  be specified in 
the directions : 
Provided that the total period for which the m anagement of the undertaking may remain vested in the 
Central Government shall in no case exceed  2[seven years] from the date of vesting.  
(6) For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “cane dues ”, in relation to any cane purchased by a sugar undertaking, means  the price 
payable in accordance with the agreement (whether express or implied) or arrangement relating to 
such purchase and where there is no such agreement or arrangement, the price as determined in 
accordance with the law applicable to such purchase;  
(b) any cane dues being the price payable for any cane acquired for the purposes of a sugar 
undertaking shall not be deemed to be in arrears at any time before the expiry of fourteen days from 
the date of delivery of such cane to the undertaking;  
(c) the av erage period of manufacture of sugar in relation to any sugar undertaking with respect to 
any sugar year (hereafter in this clause referred to as the current sugar year) shall be calculated by 
dividing the total number of calendar days during which the und ertaking manufactured sugar during 
the period of three sugar years immediately preceding the current sugar year by the number of sugar 
years in which the undertaking manufactured sugar during the said period of three years.  
4. Assets, etc., of notified sugar undertaking .—(1) The notified sugar undertaking shall be deemed 
to include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges, in relation to the said undertaking and all 
property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, sto res, instruments, machinery, 
automobiles and other vehicles and goods under production or in transit, cash balances, reserve funds, 
investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were, immediately 
before the date of vesting, in the ownership, possession, power or control of that undertaking, whether 
within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature 
relating thereto.  
(2) Any contract, whether express or implied, or other arrangement (whether under any statute or 
otherwise) in so far as it relates to the management of the business and affairs of the notified sugar 
undertaking, and in force immediately before the date of vesting, or any order made by any Court in so fa r 
as it relates to the management of the business and affairs of that undertaking and in force immediately 
before the said date, shall be deemed to have terminated on that date.  
(3) All persons in whom the management of the business and affairs of the noti fied sugar undertaking 
vests immediately before the date of vesting shall, as from t hat date, cease to be so vested.  
(4) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, tribunal or other authority or 
anything c ontained in any law (other than this Act) for the time being in force, every Receiver, Official 
Liquidator or other person in whose possession or custody or under whose control the notified sugar 
undertaking or any part thereof may be immediately before the date of vesting, shall, on tha t date, deliver 
the possession of the said undertaking or such part thereof , as the case may be, to the Custodian, 
appointed under section 5, or, where no Custodian has been appointed, to such other person as the Central 
Government may direct.  
                                                           
1. The words  “the period so specified is less than three years from the date of vesting and”  omitted by Act 44 of 1981,  s. 2   
(w.e.f. 30-11-1981).  
2. Subs. by Act 11 of 1985, s. 2 , for “six years” (w.e.f. 20-11-1984). 4 
 (5) The Central Government may take, or cause to be taken, all necessary steps for securing the 
possession of the notified sugar undertaking.  
5. Appointment of Custodian .—(1) The Central Government may, as soon as it is convenient 
administratively so to do, appoin t an individual or a body of individuals or a Government company as the 
Custodian of a notified sugar undertaking or a group of notified sugar undertakings for the purpose of 
taking over the management of such undertaking or undertakings and the Custodian so appointed shall 
carry on the management of such undertaking or undertakings for and on behalf of the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Central Government may also appoint an individual or a Gove rnment company as the 
Custodian -General for exercising supervisio n and control over all the notified sugar undertakings, and on 
such appointment, every Custodian appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall act under the guidance, control 
and supervision of the Custodian -General.  
(3) On the appointment of a Custodian under sub -section ( 1), the charge of management of the 
notified sugar undertaking or group of notified sugar undertakings, as the case may be, shall vest in such 
Custodian and all persons in charge of the management of such undertaking or undertakings immediately 
before such appointment shall cease to be in charge of such management and shall be bound to deliver to 
the Custodian all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in their custody relating to such 
undertaking or group of undertakings.  
(4) The Central Government may issue such directions (including directions as to in itiating, 
defending or continuing any legal proceedings before any Court, tribunal or other authority) to the 
Custodian or Custodian -General as to his or its powers and duties as the Central Government deems 
desirable and the Custodian -General or, if there is no Custodian -General, the Custodian may apply to the 
Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the Custodian or the 
Custodian -General shall con duct the management of the notified sugar undertaking or in relation to any 
matter arising in the course of such management.  
(5) Any person, who, on the appointed day, has in his possession or under his control any books, 
papers, or other documents relatin g to the notified sugar undertaking, shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, be liable, to account for the books, papers and other 
documents, to the Custodian and shall deliver them up to the Custodian or to such other person as may be 
authorised by the Central Government or the Custodian in this behalf.  
(6) Every person in charge of the management of the notified sugar undertaking, immediately before 
the date of vesting, shall, within ten days from that date or within such further period as the Central 
Government may allow in this behalf, furnish to the Custodian a complete inventory of all the properties 
and assets (including particulars of book debts, investments and belongings) forming part of the 
undertaki ng immediately before the date of vesting and of all liabilities and obligations of the undertaking 
subsisting immediately before that date and also of all agreements entered into by the owner or manager 
of the undertaking, in relation to the said undertak ing, and in force immediately before that date.  
(7) The Custodian -General shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Gover nment and shall 
receive such remun eration as may be fixed by the Central Government.  
(8) Every Custodian or where a body of individuals has been appointed as the Custodian, each such 
individual shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government and shall receive from the 
funds of the sugar undertaking or group of sugar undertakings concerned, such remuneration as m ay be 
fixed by the Central Government.  
Explanation. —The remuneration payable to the Custodian of two or more notified undertakings shall 
be allocated among the funds of the undertakings in such proportion as the Central Government may, 
having regard to the  quantum of work in respect of such undertakings and other relevant circumstances, 
by order determine.  
6. Payment of amount .—(1) The owner of every notified sugar undertaking shall be given by the 
Central Government an amount in cash for vesting in it under section 3 the management of such 
undertaking.  5 
 (2) For every month during which the management of the notified sugar undertaking remains vested 
in the Central Government under this Act, the amount, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be, — 
(a) where the daily cane crushing capacity of the undertaking is five hundred tonnes or less, an 
amount of five hundred rupees; and  
(b) where the daily cane crushing capacity of the undertaking is more than five hundred tonnes , 
an amount computed at the rate of one rupee for each tonne of such capacity or an amount of one 
thousand two hundred and fifty rupees, whichever is less.  
CHAPTER III  
RELIEF TO SUGAR UNDERTAKINGS AND CANE PRODUCING FARMERS  
7. Power of Central Government to make certain declarations .—(1) The Central Government 
may, if it is satisfied, in relation to a notified sugar undertaking that it is necessary so to do in the interests 
of the general public with a view to preventing the fall in the volume of productio n of the sugar industry, 
it may, by notification, declare that — 
(a) all or any of the enactments specified in the Schedule shall not apply or shall apply with such 
adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission (which does not, however, affect 
the policy of the said enactments) to such sugar undertakin g, as may be specified in such   
notification, or  
(b) the operation of all or any of the contracts, assurances of property, agreements, settlements, 
awards, standing orders or other instruments in force (to which such sugar undertaking or the person 
owning  such undertaking is a party or which may be applicable to such sugar undertaking or person) 
immediately before the date of issue of the notification shall remain suspended or that all or any of 
the rights, privileges, obligations and liabilities accruing or arising thereunder before the said date, 
shall remain suspended or shall be enforceable with such adaptations and in such manner as may be 
specified in the notification.  
(2) The notification made under sub -section ( 1) in relation to a notified sugar und ertaking shall 
remain in force, in the first instance, for such period not exceeding one year as may be specified in the 
notification but the duration of such notification may be extended from time to time by a further 
notification by a period not exceedin g one year at a time.  
(3) Any notification made under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other law, agreement, or instrument or any decree or order of a Court, tribunal, 
officer or other authority or  of any submission, settlement or standing order.  
(4) Any remedy for the enforcement of any right, privilege, obligation or liability referred to in   
clause (b) of sub -section ( 1) and suspended or modified by a notification made under that sub -section 
shall, in accordance with the terms of the notification, remain suspended or modified and all proceedings 
relating thereto pending before any Court, tribunal, officer or other authority shall accordingly remain 
stayed or be continued subject to such adapta tions, so, however, that on the notification ceasing to have 
effect — 
(a) any right, privilege, obligation or liability so remaining suspended or modified shall become 
revived and enforceable as if the notification had never been made;  
(b) any proceeding so  remaining stayed shall be proceeded with subject to the provisions of any 
law which may then be in force, from the stage which had been reached when the proceedings 
become stayed.  
(5) In computing the period of limitation for the enforcement of any right,  privilege, obligation or 
liability referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the period during which it or the remedy for the 
enforcement thereof remained suspended shall be excluded.  
  6 
 8. Assistance to notified sugar undertakings to clear arrears of cane dues .—(1) The Central 
Government may issue such directions as it deems fit to the Custodian -General and the Custodians to 
facilitate the speedy clearance of arrears of cane dues so as to avoid undue hardship to cane producing 
farmers.  
(2) Without prej udice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may render such 
assistance in such manner as it may deem fit to any notified sugar undertaking to enable the undertaking 
to clear the whole or any part of its arrears of cane dues so as to avoid undue hardship to cane producing 
farmers.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression “arrears of cane dues ” shall be 
construed in accord ance with the provisions of clauses  (a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 6) of section 3.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Notified sugar undertaking, if a company, not to be wound up .—(1) No proceedings for the 
winding up of a notified sugar undertaking, being a  company, shall lie in any Court or be continued 
whether by or under the  supervision of any Court or  voluntarily, except with the consent of the Central  
Government.  
(2) In computing the period of limitation prescribed by any law for the time being  in force for any 
application which may be made in the course of winding up of  any such notified sugar undertaking in 
respect of any matter arising out of any  transaction in relation to such undertaking, the time during which 
the making of  such application was barred by this Act shall be excluded.  
10. Contracts, etc., in bad faith may be cancelled or varied .—(1) If the Central Government is 
satisfied, after such inquiry as it may think fit, that any contract or agreement entered into by the owner or 
manager of a notified sugar undertaking, in relation to the said undertaking, at any time within twelve 
months  immediately preceding the date of vesting, has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to 
the interests of the undertaking, it may make an order cancelling or varying (either unconditionally or 
subject to such conditions as it may think fit to im pose) the contract or agreement and thereafter the 
contract or agreemen t shall have effect accordingly : 
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied except after giving to the parties 
to the contract or agreement a reasonable opportu nity of being heard.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1) may make a n application to the 
principal C ourt of civil jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office of the 
sugar undertaking is situated for the variation or reversal of such order and, thereupon such Court may 
confirm, vary or reverse such order.  
11. Power to terminate the contract of employment .—If the Custodian or Custodian -General is of 
opinion that any contract of employment e ntered into by any owner or member of a notified sugar 
undertaking or its agent in relation to the said undertaking, at any time before the date of vesting, is 
unduly onerous, he may, by g iving to the employee one month’ s notice in writing or the salary or  wages 
for one month in lieu thereof, terminate such contract of employment.  
12. Management of notified sugar undertakings pending taking over physical possession by the 
Custodian .—(1) Pending the taking over by a Custodian, appointed under section 5, of the physical 
possession of any notified sugar undertaking, the person in charge of the management of such undertaking 
immediately b efore the date of vesting shall  on and from that date, be in charge of the management of 
such undertaking for and on behalf o f the Central Government; and the management of such undertaking 
shall be carried on by such person subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2) and such 
directions, if any, as the Central Government may give to him, and no other person, includin g the said 
undertaking shall, so long as such management continues, exercise any powers of management in relation 
to the said undertaking.  
  7 
 (2) No person in charge, under sub -section ( 1), of a notified sugar undertaking shall, without the 
previous approva l of the Custodian -General appointed under section 5, — 
(i) incur any expenditure from the assets appertaining to the undertaking otherwise than for the 
purpose of making routine payments of salaries or commissions to employees, agents or for the 
purpose of  meeting the routine day to day expenditure;  
(ii) transfer or otherwise dispose of any such assets or create any charge, hypothecation, lien or 
other incumbrance thereon;  
(iii) invest in any manner any moneys forming part of such assets;  
(iv) acquire any i mmovable property out of the moneys forming part of such assets;  
(v) enter into any contract of service or agency, whether expressly or by implication, for purposes 
connected wholly or partly with the undertaking or vary the terms and conditions of any con tract 
relating to any such transaction subsisting on the date of vesting.  
(3) The approval of the Custodian -General may be given either generally in relation to certain classes 
of transactions relating to the notified sugar undertaking or specially in rela tion to any of its transactions.  
13. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Government, the Custodian -General or any other officer of Government or any 
Custodian in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No su it or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the Custodian -General or any 
other officer of Government or any Custodian for any damage caused, or likely t o be caused, by anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
14. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the  powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than those under this section or  section 8 or       
section 20 may also be exercised by any person or persons as may be  specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to  whom such power 
has been delegated  shall act under the direction, control and  supervision of the Central Government.  
15. Debts incurred for the purposes of notified sugar undertakings to have priority .—Every debt 
arising out of any loan advanced to a notified sugar undertaking by the Centr al Government or a State 
Government for carrying on the management of such undertaking — 
(a) shall have priority over all other debts, whether secured or unsecured, incurred before the 
management of such undertaking was taken over under this Act;  
(b) shall  be a preferential debt within the meaning of section 530 of the Companies                  
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , 
and such debts shall rank equally among themselves and be paid in full out of the assets of the 
undertaking unless such assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal 
proportions.  
16. Penalties .—If any person — 
(a) fails  to deliver to the Custodian any assets, books of account, registers or any other documents 
in his custody relating to any notified sugar undertaking, or  
(b) retains any property of such undertaking or removes or destroys it, or  
(c) fails to comply with th e provisions of section 5, or  
(d) fails to comply with any direction made under this Act,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to sev en years, and  shall also be 
liable to fine.  
  8 
 17. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of , and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to  be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without h is knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence  has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly . 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and  includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
18. Act not to apply to certain sugar undertakings .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall not apply 
to any sugar undertaking which is owned by or is under the management of the Central Government or a 
State Government or a corporation established by or under an enactment (including an Ordinance) or a 
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the management of a sugar undertaki ng by a receiver or an 
authorised controller appointed by the Central Government or a State Government under any law for the 
time being in force shall also be deemed to be management of the undertaking by the Central Government 
or a State Government, as th e case may be.  
19. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law (other than this Act) or any judgment, decree or 
order of any Court, tribunal or other autho rity or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other 
than this Act.  
20. Power to make rules .—The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out 
the provisions of this Act . 
21. Laying of rules and certain notifications .—Every rule made by the Central Government under 
this Act and every notification made under section 7 s hall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the se ssion  or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be 
made, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such m odified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.  
22. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Sugar Undertaki ngs (Taking Over of Management)         
Ordinance, 1978  (Ord. 5 of 1978) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the correspond ing provisions of this Act.  
  9 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 7)  
1. The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946  (20 of 1946) . 
2. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) . 
3. The Minimum Wages Act, 1948  (11 of 1948) . 
 
