--------------------------The Coconut Development Board Act, 1979--------------------------
1 
 THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT,  1979  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union . 
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Board.  
5. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman and allowances of members.  
6. Resignation of members . 
7. Officers of the Board and other staff . 
8. Special provision for transfer of empl oyees to the Board . 
9. Committees of the Board . 
10. Functions of the Board.  
11. Dissolution of the Board . 
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
12. Grants and loans by the Central Government . 
13. Constitution of Coconut Development Fund . 
14. Borrowing powers of the Board . 
15. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
16. Directions by Central Government . 
17. Returns and reports.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
19. Power to make rules . 
20. Power to make regulations . 
21. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
 
  2 
 THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT,1979  
ACT NO. 5 OF 1979  
[17th March, 1979.]  
An Act to provide for the development under the control of the Union of the coconut industry 
and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coconut Development 
Board Act, 1979.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union .—It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the U nion should take under its control the coconut industry.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Coconut Development Board established under section 4;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Board;  
(c) “coconut ” means the fruit of coconut palm and includes green coconut, ripe coconut and 
copra.  
Explanation. —“Coconut p alm” means the coconut tree, CocosNucifera Linn;  
(d) “coco nut industry ” does not include — 
(i) coir industry; or  
(ii) an industry from which products (including by -products) out of coconut oil are 
manufactured;  
(e) “member ” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairman;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the Coc onut Development Board.  
(2)The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3)The head office of the Board shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(4)The Board shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
                                                           
1. 12th January, 1981, vide notification No. G.S.R. 13(E), dated 12th January, 1981, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(i). 
 3 
 (a)a Chairman, to be appointed by the Cen tral Government;  
(b)1[the Horticulture Commissioner] to the Government of India, ex officio ; 
(c)the Director, Central Plantation Crops Research Institute (Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research), ex officio ; 
(d)the Chairman of the Coir Board constituted under section 4 of the Coir Industry Act, 1953 (45 
of 1953) ,ex officio ; 
(e)three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House of the P eople and one 
by the Council of S tates;  
(f)two members to be appointed by the Central Government to rep resent respectively the 
Ministries of the C entral Government dealing with — 
(i)Revenue; and  
(ii)Civil Supplies and Co -operation;  
(g)three members to be appointed by the Central Government one each to represent the 
Government s of the States of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, being States wherein coconut is 
grown on a large scale;  
(h)five members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical order 
to represent the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Maharashtra,  Orissa and West Benga l and the 
Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar  Islands, Goa, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep and 
Pondicherry;  
(i)four members to be appointed by the Central Government , two to represent the coconut 
growers of the State of Kerala and one each to represen t the coconut growers of the States of Tamil 
Nadu and Karnataka;  
(j)one member to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the coconut processing 
industry;  
(k)two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent such other interest s 
connected with the coconut industry as, in the opinion of that Government, ought to be represented:  
Provided that every appointment under clauses ( g) and ( h) shall be made on there  commendation 
of the State Government or, as the case may be, of the Union  territory concerned.  
(5)The Board shall elect, from am ongst its members, a Vice -Chair man who shall exercise such of the 
powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to 
him by the Chairman.  
(6)The ter m of office of the members and the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(7)Any officer of the Central Government, not being a member of t he Board, when deputed by that 
Government in this behalf, shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Board and take part in the 
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(8)The Board may associate with itself in such manner, subject to  such conditions and for such 
purposes as may be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with 
any of the provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the 
discussions of the Boar d relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated but shall not have the 
right to vote and shall be entitled to receive such allowances or fees as may be fixed by the Central 
Government.  
(9)No act or proceeding of the Board or any committee appoi nted by it under section9 shall be 
invalidated merely by reason of — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1987, s. 2 , for “the Agriculture Commissioner” (w.e.f. 5 -8-1987).  4 
 (a)any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or such committee; or  
(b)any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board or such committee; 
or 
(c)any irregularity in the procedure of the Board or such committee not affecting the merits of the 
case.  
(10)The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings ( including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by 
regulations made by the Board under this Act.  
5. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman and allowances of 
members .—(1) The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and allo wances and shall be subject to such 
conditions of service  in respect of leave,  pension, provident fund and other matters as may, from time to 
time, be fixed by the Central Government.  
(2) The members of the Board shall receive such allowance s as may be fix ed by the Central 
Government.  
6. Resignation of members .—A member, other than an ex officio  member, may resign his office by 
giving notice thereof in writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he 
shall be deemed to have vacated his office.  
7. Officers of the Board and other staff .—(1) The Chairman shall be the chie f executive of the 
Board and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government shall appoint a Chief Coconut Development Officer to exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as ma y be delegated to him by the Chairman.  
(3) The Chief Coconut Development Officer appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall have the right to 
attend the meetings of the Board and its committees appointed under section 9 and take part in the 
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board who shall exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Board or the 
Chairman.  
(5) The Chief Cocon ut Development Officer and the Secretary shall be entitled to such salary and 
allowances and shall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund 
and other matters as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central Go vernment.  
(6) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Board may appoint such other 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions and the method 
of appointment , the conditions of service  and the scales of pay and allowances of such other officers and 
employees of the Board shall be such as may be provided by the Board by regulations made under this 
Act. 
(7) The Chairman, the Chief Coconut Development Officer, the Secretary and other offic ers and 
employees of the Board shall not undertake any work unconnected with their duties under this Act except 
with the permission of the Central Government.  
8. Special provision for transfer of employees to the Board .—(1) On the establishment of the 
Boar d, it shall be lawful for the Central Government to transfer to the Board, by order , and with effect 
from such date or dates as may be specified in the order, any officer or other employee holding office as 
such in the Directorate of Coconut Development im mediately before the date on  which the Board is 
established:  
Provided that the scale of pay of the post to which such officer or other employee is transferred shall 
not be lower than the scale of pay of the post he was holding immediately before such transfer and the 
other te rms and conditions of service ( including pension, leave, provident fund and medical benefits) of 
the post to which he is transferred shall not be less favourable than the terms and conditions of service in 
relation to the post held  by him i mmediately before such transfer:  5 
 Provided further that if, immediately before the date of his transfer , any such officer or other 
employee is officiating in a higher post under the Central Government either in a leave vacancy or in any 
vacancy of specified duration , his pay and other allowances, if any , on transfer, shall be protected for the 
unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafter he shall be entitled to the scale of pay applicable to the 
post under the Central Government to which he would  have reverted.  
(2) Before any order is issued under sub -section ( 1), all officers and other employees of the 
Directorate of Coconut Development shall be give an option in such forms as may be prescribed, and 
within such time as may be specified in that be half by the Central Government, to express their 
willingness or otherwise to become employees of the Board and such optio n once exercised shall be final:  
Provided that no order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in relation to any officer or other 
employee of the Directorate of Coconut Development who has intimated his intention of not becoming an 
employee of the Board within the time specified in that behalf:  
Provided further that such  of the persons employed by the  Central Government in the said 
Directorate, who do not express, within the time specified in that behalf, their intention of becoming the 
employees of the Board, shall be dealt with in the same manner and in accordance with the same rules as 
would apply to the employees of the Central Go vernment in the even t of the reduction of the strength of 
the Department in which such persons have been employed.  
(3) An officer or other employee transferred by an order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, on and 
from the date of transfer, cease to be an e mployee of the Central Government and become an officer or 
other employee of the Board with such designation as the Board may determine and shall, subject to the 
provisions of  the first and second provisos  to sub -section ( 1), be governed by the regulations  made by the 
Board under this Act in respect of remuneration and other conditions of service (including pension, leave, 
provident fund and medical benefits) and shall continue to be an officer or other employee of the Board 
unless and until his employment is duly terminated by the Board:  
Provided that till such time as the regulations referred to above governing the conditions of service of 
its officers or other employees are framed by the Board, the relevant rules and orders framed by the 
Central Governmen t shall continue to be applicable to such officers or other employees.  
(4) If a question arises whether the terms and conditions of service prescribed in the regulations 
framed  by the Board in respect of any matter, including remuneration, pension , leave, provident fund and 
medical benefits, are less favourable than those attached to the post held by an officer or other employee 
immediately before his transfer to the Board, the decision of the Central Government in the matter shall 
be final.  
9. Comm ittees of the Board .—(1) The Board may appoint such committees as may be necessary for 
the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall have the power to co -opt as members of any committee appointed  under sub -
section ( 1) such number of persons who are not members of the Board as it may think fit and the persons 
so co -opted shall have the right to attend meetings of the committee and take part in its proceedings but 
shall not have the right to vote.  
(3) The persons co -opted as member of a committee under sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to re ceive 
such allowances or fees for attending meetings of the committee as may be fixed by the Central 
Government.  
10. Function s of the Board .—(1) It shall be the d uty of the Board to promote, by such measures as it 
thinks fit , the development under the control of the Central Government of the coconut industry.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures referred to 
therein may provide for — 
(a) adopting measures for the development of coconut industry so that farmers , particularly small 
farmers, may become participants in, and beneficiaries of, the development  and growth of coconut 
industry;  
(b) recommending  measures for improving the marketing of coconut and its products in India;  6 
 (c) imparting technical adv ice to any person who is engaged  in the cultivation of coconut or the 
processing or marketing of coconut and its products;  
(d) providing financial or oth er assistance for the development of high yielding coconut hybrids, 
adoption of improved methods of cultivation of coconut, modern technology for processing of 
coconut and extension of areas under coconut cultivation (including replanting) with a view to 
improving  the growth of coconut industry;  
(e) adopting such measures as may be practicable for assisting coconut growers to get incentive 
prices including recommending as and when necessary, minimum and maximum prices for coconut 
and its products;  
(f) recom mending measures for regulating import and export of coconut and its products;  
(g) collecting statistics from growers of coconut, dealers in coconut , manufacturers of coconut 
products and such other persons and institutions as may be prescribed , on any mat ter relating to 
coconut industry and publishing the statistics so collected or portions thereof or extracts therefrom;  
(h) fixing grades, specifications and standards for coconut and its products;  
(i) financing suitable schemes in consultation with the Cen tral Government and the Governments 
of the States where coconut is grown on a large scale, so as to increase the production of coconut and 
to improve its quality and yield; and for this purpose evolving schemes for award of prizes or grant of 
incentives to  growers of coconut and the manufacturers of its products and for providing marketing 
facilities for coconut and its products;  
(j) assisting, encouraging , promoting or financing agricultural , technological, industrial or 
economic research on coconut and it s products in such manner as the Board may deem fit by making 
use of available institutions;  
(k) undertaking such publicity and publishing such periodicals, books or bulletins , on the research 
and development of coconut and its products , as may be found ne cessary;  
(l) setting up of regional offices and other agencies for the promotion and development of 
production , grading and marketing of coconut and its products in coconut growing States and Union 
territories for the efficient discharge of the functions a nd objectives of the Board;  
(m) such other measures as may , having regard to the purposes of this Act, be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Governments of the States where coconut is grown on a 
large scale;  
(3) The Board shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with , and subject to , such 
rules as may be made by the Central Government.  
11. Dissolution of the Board .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and for reasons to be sp ecified therein, direct that the Board shall be dissolved from such date and 
for such period as may b e specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Boar d to make representations against the proposed dissolution and shall consider the 
representations, if any, of the Board.  
(2) When the Board is dissolved under th e provisions of sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) all members , notwithstanding that their term of office has  not expired , shall , from the date of 
dissolution, vacate their offices as such member;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Board shall, d uring the period of dissolution, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may appoi nt in this behalf and their 
remuneration shall be such as may be prescribed;  
(c) all funds and other properties vested in the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, vest 
in the Central Government; and  7 
 (d) as soon as the period of dissolution expire s, the Board shall be reconstituted in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
12. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made my Parliament by law in this  behalf , pay to the Board by way of grants or loans such 
sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purpose s of this Act.  
13. Constitution of Coconut Development Fund .—(1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called 
the Coconut Development Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
1*                                *                              *                              *                             *  
(b) any grants or loans granted by the Central Government for the  purposes of this Act;  
(c) any grants or loans that may be made by any person for the purposes of this Act including 
loans under section 14;  
(d) any grants or donations from State Government s, voluntary organisations or other institutions:  
Provided that no  such grant, loan or donation shall be credited to the Fund except with prior approval 
of the Central Government . 
(2) The Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 10;  
(b) for meeting the salaries , allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and 
other employees, as the case may be , of the Board;  
(c) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board and any other expenses authorised 
by or under this Act;  
(d) for repayment of a ny loans . 
14. Borrowing powers of the Board .—(1) The Board may , for the purposes of carrying out its 
functions under this Act, and with the previous approval of, and subject to the directions of the Central 
Government, borrow money from — 
(a) the public by the issue or sale of bonds or debentures or both , carrying interest at such rates as 
may be specified therein;  
(b) any bank or other institution;  
(c) such other authority, organisation or institution as may be approved by the Central 
Government in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government may guarantee the repayment  of the monies  borrowed by the B oard 
under sub -section ( 1) and the payment of interest thereon and other incidental charges.  
15. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper a ccounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts , in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Controller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Controller and Auditor -General of India at such 
intervals as may be specified by his and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -Genera l of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in connection wi th the 
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 4 of 1987, s. 10 (w.e.f. 21 -3-1987).  8 
 audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Board.  
(4) The accounts of the Board as  certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
16. Directions by Central Government .—The Board shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of  this Act.  
17. Returns and reports .—(1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and 
statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and 
development of the coconut industry, as the Central Government may, from time to time , require.  
(2) The Board shall furnish a programme of its activities for each financial year to the Central 
Government for their information and directio ns, if any.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall , as soon as possible, after 
the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and before such 
date, as may be prescribed , giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes during 
the previous financial year.  
(4) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 3) shall be laid , as soon as may be , after it is 
received , before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government, or the Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the 
Board or such committee, or any officer  or other employee of the Central Government or of the Board or 
any other person authorised by the Central Government or the Board, for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
19. Power to ma ke rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the powers which may be exercised and functions which may be performed by the Vice -
Chairman of the Board under sub -section (5) of section 4; 
(b) the term of office of the members, the manner of filling vacancies among,  and the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the members , under sub -section ( 6) of section 4;  
(c) the manner in which and the purposes for which any person may be associated by the Board 
under sub -section ( 8) of section 4;  
(d) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be pe rformed by the Chairman 
as the c hief executive of the Board under sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(e) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be performed by the Chief 
Coconut  Development Officer of the Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(f) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be performed by the Secretary 
of the Board under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  9 
 (g) the control and restrictions subject whi ch officers and other employees may be appointed by 
the Board under sub -section ( 6) of section 7 ; 
(h) the form in which option may be given by the officers and other employees of the Directorate 
of Coconut Development under sub -section ( 2) of section 8 ; 
(i) the collection of statistics in respect of any matter relating to coconut industry under clause ( g) 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(j) the matters in respect of which the Board may undertake measures in the discharge of its 
functions under clause( m) of sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(k) the remuneration and other allowances payable to the person or persons referred to in clause 
(b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(l) the form in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15;  
(m) the form and manner in which and the time at which the Board may furnish returns and 
reports to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 17;  
(n) the form in which and the date before which the Board shall furnish to the Central 
Government the report of its activities and programmes under sub -section ( 3) of section 17;  
(o) any other matter which has to be , or may be, prescribed by rules under this Act.  
20. Power to make regulat ions.—(1) The Board may, with the previous san ction of the Central 
Government , by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations no t inconsistent with the provisions  
of this Act and the rules made thereunder , to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or 
expedient for the purp oses of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers , such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters , namely:— 
(a) the time s and places at which meetings of the Board or any committee thereof, shall be held 
and the procedure to be followed thereat, and the number of members which shall form a quorum at a 
meeting under sub -section ( 10) of section 4;  
(b) the method of appointment , the conditions of service and the scales of pay and allowances of 
any of the officers and other employees of the Board under sub -section( 6) of section 7;  
(c) generally , for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Board.  
(3) The Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette, modify or rescind any 
regulation sanctioned by it and the regulation so modified or rescinded shall have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modifica tion or rescission 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything done under the regulation before its modification or 
rescission.  
21. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session , for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session  or in two or more 
successive sessions , and if , before the expiry of the session immed iately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in maki ng any modification in the rule  or regulation , as 
the case may be,  or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be,  should not be made, 
the rul e or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so , however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or r egulation.  
--------------------------The Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979--------------------------
 
1 THE HARYANA AND UTTAR PRADESH (ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES) ACT, 1979  
_________  
  ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES  
3. Replacement of fluctuating boundaries by fixed boundaries.  
4. Transfer of territories.  
5. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
6. Construction of delimitation orders.  
7. Provision as to sitting members.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURTS  
8. Extension of jurisdiction of, and tr ansfer of proceedings to, High Court of Punjab and Haryana.  
9. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, High Court at Allahabad.  
10. Right to appear in any proceedings transferred under section 8 or section 9.  
11. Interpretation.  
PART V  
AUTHORISA TION OF EXPENDITURE  
12. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing appropriation 
Acts.  
13. Reports relating to accounts of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
14. Land and goods.  
15. Arrears of taxes.  
16. Right to recover loans and advances.  
17. Refund of taxes collected in excess.  
18. Deposits.  
19. Contracts.  
20. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  
21. Liability as guarantor of co -operative societies.  
22. Items in suspense.  
23. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.  
24. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
25. Expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund.  
PART VII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
26. State Financial Corporations and State Electricity Boards.  
27. Territoria l extent of laws.  
28. Power to adapt laws.   
2 SECTIONS  
29. Power to construe laws.  
30. Legal proceedings.  
31. Transfer of pending proceedings.  
32. Construction of boundary pillars, etc.  
33. Validity of demarcation done before commencement of Act.  
34. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws.  
35. Power to remove difficulties.  
36. Power to make rules.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
   
3 THE HARYANA AND UTTAR PRADESH (ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES) ACT, 1979  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1979  
[11th June,  1979 .] 
An Act to provide for the alteration of boundaries of the States of  Haryana and Uttar Pradesh and 
for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh  (Alteration of Boundaries) 
Act, 1979.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the day which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(b) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) ; 
(c) “fixed boundaries ” means the boundaries demarcated under the provisions of section 3;  
(d) “law” includes any en actment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of the St ate of 
Haryana or Uttar Pradesh;  
(e) “notified order ” means an order published in the Official Gazet te; 
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “present deep stream line ” means th e deep stream line of the river -Yamuna as verified and 
determined by the Survey of India during the months of November, 1974, December, 1974, January , 
1975 and February , 1975;  
(h) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, 
means a person who immediately before the appointed day is a member of that House;  
(i) “transferred territories ” means,— 
(a) in relation to the State of Haryana, the territories transferred by this Act from that State to 
the State of Uttar Pradesh, and  
(b) in relation to the State of Uttar Pradesh, the territories transferred by this Act from that 
State to the State of Haryana;  
(j) any reference to a district of a State shall be construed as a reference to the area physically 
comprised within that district immediately before the appointed day.  
PART II  
ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES  
3. Replacement of fluctuating boundaries by fixed boundaries .—(1) As from the appointed day, 
the boundary between the Karnal and Sonepat districts of the State of Haryana and the Saharanpur, 
Muzaffarnagar and Meerut districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh an d the boundary between the Gurgaon 
district of the State of Haryana and the Bulandshahr and Aligarh districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh 
which at present is the deep stream of the river -Yamuna, shall be altered to and replaced by fixed 
boundaries.   
4 (2) The said fixed boundaries shall be demarcated by an authority appointed in this behalf by the 
Central Government so as to be generally in conformity with the fixed boundaries described in the 
Schedule.  
(3) For the  purposes of such demarcation, — 
(a) the decision of the said authority on any matter relating to the interpretation of any part of the 
description of the fixed boundary given in the Schedule shall be final;  
(b) the said authority shall have power to determine the location of the points at which the 
boundary pillars shall be constructed and to specify the State Government which shall be responsible 
for the construction and maintenance of the boundary pillars at such points according to such 
specifications as that authority may indicate (the pillar s of the same specifications being apportioned , 
as far as practicable, equally between the two State Governments), the decision of the said authority 
in regard to these matters being final;  
(c) it shall be lawful for the said authority and for any person s pecified by such authority to enter 
upon and survey any area in the vicinity of any of the fixed boundaries described in the Schedule and 
to do all other acts as may be necessary.  
(4) The authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall also prepare maps of the areas on both sides of 
the fixed boundaries and i n the vicinity thereof showing — 
(a) the present deep stream line and the fixed boundary in relation to it; and  
(b) the names and boundaries of the villages on both sides of the fixed boundary as indicate d by 
the State Government concerned with reference to the revenue records of that Government,  
and send authenticated copies thereof to the Central Government and to the State Governments of 
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.  
4. Transfer of territories .—(1) As from  the appointed day, — 
(a) there shall be added to the State of Haryana all the territories of the State of Uttar Pradesh 
which lie on the Haryana side of the fixed boundaries, and the said territories shall thereupon cease to 
form part of the State of Uttar  Pradesh; and  
(b) there shall be added to the State of Uttar Pradesh all the territories of  the State of Haryana 
which lie  on the Uttar Pradesh side of the fixed boundaries, and the said territories shall thereupon 
cease to form part of the State of Haryan a. 
(2) Each of the State Governments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh shall, by order in the Official 
Gazette of the State, provide for the administration, as from the appointed day, of the territories 
transferred to that State under sub -section ( 1) by includi ng them or any part of them in such district,              
sub-division, police -station or other administrative unit as may be specified in the order.  
5. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day , in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, und er the heading “I. THE STATES” — 
(a) for the entry against “13. Uttar Pradesh ”, the following shall be substituted, namely: — 
“The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution                 
were either comprised in the Province known as the United Provinces or were being administered 
as if they formed part of that Province, the territories specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1)                
of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar  Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968  (24 of 1968)  and                        
the territories specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar 
Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979, but excluding the territories specified in clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries)                  
Act, 1968, and the territories specified in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Haryana 
and Uttar P radesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979  (31 of 1979) .”;  
5 (b) for the entry against “17. Haryana” , the followi ng shall be substituted, namely :— 
“The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 
1966 and the territories specified in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979  (31 of 1979) , but excluding the territories 
specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of that Act .”. 
PAR T III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
6. Construction of delimitation orders .—As from the appointed day, any reference in any order 
relating to delimitation of parliamentary constituencies, assembly constituen cies or council 
constituencies — 
(a) (i) to the State of Haryana, shall be construed as including the territories transferred to that 
State from the State of Uttar  Pradesh under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4, but excluding 
the territories transferred from the State of Haryana to the Sta te of Uttar Pradesh under clause ( b) of 
that sub -section;  
(ii) to any district, sub -division, police -station or other administrative unit in the State of Haryana, 
shall be construed as including that part of the territories, if any, transferred to that Sta te, which is 
included in that district, sub -division, police station or other administrative unit by order made under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) (i) to the State of Uttar Pradesh, shall be construed as including the territories transferred to 
that S tate from the State of Haryana under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4, but excluding the 
territories transferred from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Haryana under clause ( a) of that 
sub-section;  
(ii) to any district, sub -division, police -station or other administrative unit in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh, shall be construed as including that part of the territories, if any, transferred to that State, 
which is included in that district, sub -division, police -station or other administra tive unit by order 
made under sub -section ( 2) of section 4.  
7. Provision as to sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the House of the People 
representing any parliamentary constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the 
provisions  of this Act shall, notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed, as from the appointed day, to 
have b een elected to that House by that  constituency as so altered.  
(2) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh 
representing any assembly constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the provisions of 
this Act shall, notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed, as from the appointed day, to have been 
elected to the said Legislative Assembly by that constituency as so altered.  
(3) Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of the State of Uttar Pradesh representing any 
council constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the provisions of this Act shall, 
notwithstanding such alt eration, be deemed, as from the appointed day, to have been elected to the said 
Legislative Council by that constituency as so altered.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURTS  
8. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana .—(1) Except as hereinafter provided — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana shall, as from the appointed day, 
extend to the territories transferred by this Act from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of 
Haryana; and  
(b) the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in 
respect of the said territories.   
6 (2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad immediately before the 
appointed day as are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of 
accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and 
decided by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana shall, as soon as may be after such certificatio n, be 
transferred to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall have, and the High Court of Punjab and Haryana shall not 
have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme  
Court, applications for review  and other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in 
respect of any order passed by the Hi gh Court of Judicature at Allahabad before the appointed day:  
Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana, he shall order that they shall be so transferred and such proceedings shall 
thereupon be transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order made by the High Co urt of Judicature at Allahabad — 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana by virtue of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad retains 
jurisdiction by virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, but 
also as an order made by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.  
(5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, any such 
person who immediately before the appointed day is  an advocate entitled to practis e in the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana having regard to the transfer of territories from the State of Uttar Pradesh to the State 
of Haryana, shall be recognised as an advocate entitled to practi se in the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana.  
9. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, High Court at                         
Allahabad .—(1) Except as hereinafter provided — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall, as from the appointed day, 
extend to the territories transferred by this Act from the State of Haryana to the St ate of Uttar 
Pradesh; and  
(b) the High Court of Punjab and Haryana shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect 
of the said territories.  
(2) Such proceedings pendin g in the High Court of Punjab an d Haryana immediately before the 
appointed day a s are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of 
accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and 
decided by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall, as soon  as may be after such certification, be 
transferred to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court of Punjab and Haryana shall have , and the  High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall not 
have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme 
Court, applications for review and other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief i n 
respect of any order passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana before the appointed day:  
Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Punjab and 
Haryana, it app ears to the Chief Justice of that  High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad, he shall order that they shall be so transferred and such proceedings 
shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.   
7 (4) Any order made by the Hi gh Court of Punjab and  Haryana— 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad by virtue of sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of Punjab and Haryana retains 
jurisdiction by vi rtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of the High Court of Punjab and  Haryana, but also 
as an order made by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.  
(5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, any 
such person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practi se in the High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court of 
Judicature a t Allahabad having regard to the transfer of territories from the State of Haryana to the State 
of Uttar Pradesh shall be recognised as  an advocate entitled to practis e in the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad.  
10. Right to appear in any proceedings tr ansferred under section 8 or section 9 .—Any person 
who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practi se in the High Court of Punjab 
and Haryana or the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and was authorised to appear in any  
proceedings transferred under s ection 8 or section 9 shall have the right to appear in the High Court to 
which the proceedings have been transferred in relation to those proceedings.  
11. Interpretation .—For the  purposes of sections 8 and 9, — 
(a) proceedin gs shall be deemed to be pending in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana or the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad until that Court has disposed of all issues between the parties, 
including any issue with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proc eedings and shall include 
appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for 
revision and petitions for writs;  
(b) references to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana or the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division court thereof, and 
references to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including references to a 
sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that court or Ju dge. 
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE  
12. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing 
appropriation Acts .—(1) As from the appointed day , any Act passed by the Legislature of the State of 
Haryana or Uttar Pradesh before that day for the appropriation of any moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year in which the 
appo inted day falls shall have effect also in relation to the territories transferred to that State by the 
provisions of Part II and it shall be lawful for the State Government to spend any amount on any service 
in those territories out of the amount authorise d by such Act to be expended for that service during the 
financial year in that State.  
(2) The Governor of Haryana or of Uttar Pradesh may, after the appointed day, authorise such 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State as he deems necessary fo r any purpose or service in 
the territories transferred to that State for a period of not more than six months beginning with the 
appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State:  
Provided that no such au thorisation sh all be made so as to have effect for any period after the end of 
the financial year in which the appointed day falls.  
13. Reports relating to accounts of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh .—The reports of the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India referred to in clause (2) of article 151 of the Constitution relating to the 
accounts of the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh in respect of any financial year ending before the 
appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the States of Haryana and Uttar P radesh who 
shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.   
8 PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
14. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles 
and other goods belonging to  the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh in the transferred territories shall, as 
from the appointed day, pass to the State to which the territories are transferred.  
(2) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property of every kind and any rights in 
or over such property.  
15. Arrears of taxes .—The right of the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to recover arrears of any 
tax or duty on property situate in the transferred territories, including  land revenue, or to recover arrears 
of any other tax or duty in any case where the place of assessment of that tax or duty is in the transferred 
territories shall belong to the State to which the territories are transferred.  
16. Right to recover loans and  advances .—The right to recover any loans or advances made before 
the appointed day by the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to any local body, society, agriculturist, or 
other person in the transferred territories shall belong to the State to which the te rritories are transferred.  
17. Refund of taxes collected in excess .—The liability of the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to 
refund any tax or duty on property situate in the transferred territories including land revenue, collected in 
excess shall be the  liability of the State to which the territories are transferred, and the liability of the 
State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to refund any other tax or duty collected in excess in any case where 
the place of assessment of the tax or duty is in the transfer red territories shall also be the liability of the 
State to which the territories are transferred.  
18. Deposits .—The liability of the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh in respect of any civil deposit or 
local fund deposit made in the transferred territorie s shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of 
the State to which the territories are transferred.  
19. Contracts .—(1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh has 
made any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall 
be deemed to have been made in the e xercise of the executive power — 
(a) if such purposes are, as from that day, purposes relatable exclusively to the transferred 
territories , of the State to which th e territories are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case, of the State which made the contract, and all rights and liabilities which 
have accrued, or may accrue, under any such contract shall, to the extent to which they are rights or 
liabilities of the St ate which made the contract , be the rights or liabilities of the State specified in 
clause ( a) or clause ( b) above.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which have 
accrued or  may accrue under any con tract— 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations.  
20. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day , the 
State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong, other than 
breach of c ontract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the transferred territories , be a liability of the S tate 
to which the territories are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State which, immediately before that day, 
was subject to such liability.   
9 21. Liability as guarantor of co -operative societies .—Where, immediately be fore the appointed 
day, the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered 
co-operative society, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the area of the society’ s operations is limited to the transferred territories, be a liability of 
the State to which the territories are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State which , immediately before that day , 
was subject to such liability.  
22. Items in suspense .—If any item in s uspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
23. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement .—Where the States of Haryana and Uttar 
Pradesh agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned between 
them in a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, 
notwithstanding anythi ng contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be 
apportioned in the manner agreed upon.  
24. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, either of the State s of Haryana  or Uttar Pradesh becomes 
entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central 
Government , on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed day by ei ther of the 
States, is of opinion that it is just and equitable that that property or those benefits should be transferred 
to, or shared with, the other State or that a contribution towards that liability should be made by the other 
State, the said propert y or benefit s shall be allocated in such manner between the two States, or the other 
State shall make to the State subject to the liability such contribution in respect thereof, as the Central 
Government may, after consultation with the two State Governmen ts, by order, determine.  
25. Expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund .—All sums payable by either the State 
of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh to the other State by virtue of the provisions of this Part shall be charged on 
the Consolidated Fund of the S tate by which such sums are payable.  
PART VII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
26. State Financial Corporations and State Electricity Boards .—As from the appointed day, — 
(a) the Financial Corporations constituted under the State Financial Corporations                              
Act, 1951  (63 of 1951) , for the States of Haryana and Uttar  Pradesh; and  
(b) the State Electricity Boards constituted under the Electricity (Supply)  Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) , 
for the said States,  
 shall be deemed to have been co nstituted for those States with their areas as altered by the provisions of 
section 4.  
27. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of section 4 shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh shall, until 
otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed as meaning the 
territorie s within that State immediately before the appointed day.  
28. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in relation to the 
State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of two  years 
from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of 
repeal or amendment as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect 
subject to the adaptations or modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority.   
10 Explanation .—In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government, and as respects any other law, 
the State Government.  
29. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made  for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority, required 
or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in relation to the 
State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh, construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as 
may be necessary or proper in regard to the ma tter before the court, tribunal or authority.  
30. Legal proceedings .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Haryana or 
Uttar Pradesh is  a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities 
transferred to the other State under this Act, the other State shall be deemed to be substituted for the State 
from which such property, rights or liabilities are transfe rred as a party to those proceedings, or added as 
a party thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may continue accordingly.  
31. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a court (othe r than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on 
that day falls within the State of Haryana or Uttar Pradesh shall, if it is a proceeding/relatable exclusively 
to any part of the territories which as from that day are the territori es of the other State, stand transferred 
to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer in the other State.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High  Court having jurisdiction in respect of the area in which the court, tribunal, 
authority or officer before which, or before whom, such proceeding is pending on the appointed day, is 
functioning, and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In t his section, — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authorit y or officer”  in a State means — 
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the proceeding would 
have lain if the proceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State as may be 
determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State, or before the appointed day 
by the Gove rnment of the other State, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
32. Construction of boundary pillars, etc .—(1) It shall be lawful for the State Government which is 
responsible for the construction of any boundary pillar under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 to cause such 
pillar to be constructed and maintained and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the State Government or any of its officers for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this section.  
(2) The boundary pillars shall be inspected jointly by the officers of the State Government s of 
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh in accordance with such rules as the Central Government may make in this 
behalf.  
(3) Whoever wilfully removes or injures a ny boundary pillars shall be punishable with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , an 
offence unde r sub -section ( 3) may be inquired into and tried by a court in either of the States of Haryana 
and Uttar Pradesh.  
33. Validity of demarcation done before commencement of Act .—All things done and all steps 
taken before the commencement of this Act in connection with the demarcation of the fixed boundaries 
shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of s ection 3, be 
deemed to have been done in accordance with law.   
11 34. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding any law, custom or usage which is inconsistent therewith.  
35. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may, by notified order, do anything, not inconsistent with such provisions which 
appears to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
36. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made , before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the sessio n or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be ; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
   
12 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3  (2)] 
Description of the fixed boundaries  
1. The fixed boundary between the Karnal and Sonepat districts of Haryana on the one side and the 
Saharanpur, Muzaffarnagar and Meerut districts of Uttar Pradesh on the other side shall be the present 
deep stream line.  
2. (1) The fixed boundary between the Gurgaon district of Haryana on the one s ide and the 
Bulandshahr and Aligarh districts of Uttar Pradesh on the other side shall commence from the point 
where the present deep stream line crosses the north -west boundary of BASANTPUR and proceed along 
the said boundary up to the point where it cros ses the north bank of the river Yamuna as ascertained at the 
1971 -72 river survey conducted by the Survey of India.  
(2) It shall then proceed along the said north bank up to the point where it meets the boundary 
between BASANTPUR and SALARPUR ; thence along  the northern and eastern boundaries of 
SALARPUR , the eastern boundary of ASALATPUR , the north -eastern boundary of DADSIA , the 
northern and north -eastern boundaries of KIRAWLI , the northern boundary of LALPUR , the northern 
and eastern boundaries of MAHABATPUR , the eastern boundary of MUAZZAMABAD , the eastern 
boundary of BHASKOLA , the eastern and northern boundaries of RAJPUR KALAN including CHAK 
PHULERA , the northern and eastern boundaries of SHIKARGAH , the northern and eastern boundaries of 
AMINPUR , the eastern boundary of CHIRSI , the eastern boundary of AKBARPUR , the eastern boundary 
of MOZAMABAD -MAZRA -SHEIK HPUR , the eastern boundary of SHEIKHPUR , the eastern boundary 
of MANJHAWLI , the eastern boundary of GARHI BEGAMPUR , the south -eastern boundary o f 
DALELGARH , the eastern boundary of NANGLA -MAZRA -CHANDPUR , the northern and eastern 
boundaries of SHAHJAHANPUR , the eastern boundary of LATIFPUR , the eastern boundary of 
PARASRAMPUR alias  DULE HPUR , the eastern boundary of MAKANPUR , the north -eastern boundary 
of WALIPUR , the western, northern and eastern boundaries of SHEIKHPUR , the northern and the north -
eastern boundaries of BEHRAMPUR , and the north -western boundary of NANGLIA up to the point 
where it meets the present deep stream  line. 
(3) From this point, it shall proceed along the present deep stream line following the boundary on 
Uttar Pradesh side of NANGLIA, JHUPPA, BAGHPUR KHALAN, BAGHPUR KHURD, SOLRAH, 
BHOLRA, DOSTPUR, GURWARI AND CHANDHAT  up to the junction of the old main  stream of the 
river Yamuna and the channel or branch of the river commonly known as the Zair Nala, and thence along 
the present deep stream line up to the southern boundary of MAHOLI . 
Explanation .—In this paragraph, — 
(a) any reference to the boundary of a  village named in sub -paragraphs ( 1) and ( 2) sha ll be 
construed as a reference to the boundary of that village as ascertained and mapped at the Settlement 
of Gurgaon district completed in 1943;  
(b) the references to the present deep stream line at the end of sub -paragraph ( 2) and the 
beginning of sub -paragraph ( 3) shall be construed as reference s to the present deep stream line 
pertaining to the old main stream of the river Yamuna.  
--------------------------The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979--------------------------
1 
 THE INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
AND  CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1979  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENT S EMPLOYING INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN  
3. Appointment of registering officers . 
4. Registration of certain establishments . 
5. Revocation of registration in certain cases . 
6. Prohibition against employment of inter -State migrant workmen without registration . 
CHAPTER III  
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS  
7. Appointment of licensing officers.  
8. Licensing of contractors . 
9. Grant of licences . 
10. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.  
11. Appeal.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF CONTRACTORS  
12. Duties of contractors . 
CHAPTER V  
WAGES , WELFARE AND OTHER FACILITIES TO BE P ROVIDED TO INTER -STATE  
MIGRANT WORKMEN  
13. Wage rates and other conditions of service of inter -State migrant workmen . 
14. Displacement allowance . 
15. Journey allowance , etc. 
16. Other facilities . 
17. Responsibility for payment of wages . 
18. Liability of principal employer in certain cases . 
19. Past liabilities.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTING STAFF  
20. Inspectors.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
21. Inter -State migrant workmen to be deemed to be in employment from date of recruitment for the 
purposes of certain enactments . 
22. Provisions regarding industrial disputes in relation to inter -State migrant  workmen . 
23. Registers and other records to be maintained.  
24. Obstructions.  
25. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of inter -State migrant workmen.  
26. Other offences . 
27. Offences by companies.  
28. Cognizance of offences.  
29. Limitation of prosecutions.  
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.  
31. Power to exempt in special cases.  
32. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
33. Power to give directions.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Power to make rules.  
36. Repeals and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF  EMPLOYMENT  
AND  CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1979  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1979  
[11th June , 1979 .]  
An Act to regulate  the employment of inter -State migrant workmen and to provide for their 
conditions of service and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Inter -State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that if the Central Government considers it necessary or expedient so to do in the public 
interest, it may postpone or relax, to such extent as may be specified in s uch notification, the operation of 
all or any of the provisions of this Act in any State or States for such period not extending beyond one 
year from the date on which this Act comes into force.  
(4) It applies — 
(a) to every establishment in which five or m ore inter -State migrant workmen (whether or not in 
addition to other workmen) are employed or who were employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months;  
(b) to every contractor who employs or who employed five or more inter -State migrant workmen 
(whether  or not in addi tion to other workmen) on any d ay of the preceding twelve  months.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to — 
(1) any establishment pertaining to any industry carried on by or under the authority of 
the Central Government or pertaining to any such controlled industry as may be specified 
in this behalf by the Central Government; or  
(2) any  establishment of any railway,  Cantonment Board, major port, mine or oil -field; or  
(3) any establishment of  a banking or insurance company,  
the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in which that 
other  establishment is situated;  
(b) “contractor ”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes (whether as an 
independent  contractor, agent, employee or otherwise) to produce a given result for  the establishment, 
other than  mere supply of goods or articles of manufacture to such establishment, by the employment 
of workmen  or to supply workmen to the establishment, and includes a sub -contractor, Khatadar , 
Sarda r, agent or  any other person, by whatever name called, who recruits or employs workmen;  
(c) “controlled industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been declared 
by any Central Act to be expedient in the public interest;  
                                                           
1. 2nd October, 1980, vide notification No. G.S.R. 513(E), dated 11th August, 1980, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 4 
 (d) “establishment ” means — 
(i) any office or department of the Government or a local authority; or  
(ii) any  place where any industry, trade, business, manufact ure or occupation is carried on ; 
(e) “inter-State migrant workman ” means any person who is recruited by or through a contractor 
in one  State under an agreement or other arrangement for employment in an establishment in another 
State, whether with or without the knowledge of the principal employer in relation to such 
establishment;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “principal  employer ” means, — 
(i) in relation to any offic e or department of the Government or a local authority, the head of 
that office, department or authority or such other officer as the Government or the local authority, 
as the case may be, may specify in this behalf;  
(ii) in relation to a factory, the owne r or occupier of the factory and where a person has been 
named  as the manager of the factory under the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the person so 
named;  
(iii) in relation to a  mine, the owner or agent of the mine and where a person has been named 
as the manager of the mine, the person so named;  
(iv) in relation to any other establishment, any person responsible for the supervision and 
control of  the establishment.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -clause ( iii) of this clause, the expressions “mine ”, 
“owner ” and “agent ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clause ( j), clause ( l) 
and clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Mines Act,1952 (35 of 1952);  
(h) “recruitment ” includes entering into any agreement or other arrange ment for recruitment and 
all its  grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;  
(i) “wages ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( vi) of section 2 of the Payment of 
Wages Act,  1936 (4 of 1936);  
(j) “workman ” means  any person employed in or in connection with the work of any 
establishment to do  any skilled, semi -skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical 
work for hire or reward,  whether the terms of employment be express or implied, but do es no t include 
any such person — 
(i) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administration capacity; or  
(ii) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding five hundred 
rupees per  mensem, or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by 
reason of the  powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENT S EMPLOYING INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN  
3. Appointment of registering officers .—The appropriate Government may, by order not ified in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons, being officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be registering officers 
for the purposes of this Chapter; and  
(b) define the limits, within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers conferred on him 
by or under this Act.  
4. Registration of certain establishments .—(1) Every principal employer of an establishment to 
which this Act applies shall, within such period as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the 5 
 Official Gazette, fix in this behalf with respect to establishments generally or with respect to any class of 
them, make an application to the registering officer, in such form and manner and on payment of such 
fees as may be prescribed, for the registration of the establishment:  
Provided that the registerin g officer may entertain any such application for registration after the 
expiry of the period fixed in that behalf, if the registering officer is satisfied that the applicant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from making the application in time.  
(2) Within one month after the receipt of an application for registration under sub -section  (1), the 
registering officer shall, — 
(a) if the application is complete in all respects, register the establishment and issue to the 
principal employer of the establishment a certificate of registration in the prescribed form; and  
(b) if the application is not so complete, return the application to the principal employer of the 
establishment.  
(3) Where within a period of one month after the receipt of an application for registration of an 
establishment under sub -section  (1), the r egistering officer does not grant  under clause  (a) of                        
sub-section  (2) the certificate of registration applied for and does not return the application under         
clause  (b) of that sub -section, the registering officer shall, within fifteen days of the receipt of an 
application in this behalf, from the principal employer, register the establishment and issue to the 
principal employer a certificate of registration in the pre scribed form.  
5. Revocation of registration in certain cases .—If the registering officer is satisfied, either on a 
reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that the registration of any establishment has been 
obtained by misrepresentation or suppr ession of any material fact  or that for any other reason, the 
registration has become useless or ineffective and, therefore, requires to be revoked, the registering 
officer may , after giving an opportunity to the principal employer of the establishment to be heard and 
with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, revoke by order in writing the registration and 
communicate the order to the principal employer:  
Provided that where the registering officer considers it necessary so to do for any special reasons, he 
may, pending such revocation, by order suspend the operation of the certificate of registration for such 
period as may be specified in the order and serve, by re gistered post, such order along with a statement of 
the reasons on the principal employer and such order shall take effect on the date on which such service is 
effected.  
6. Prohibit ion against employment of inter -State migrant workmen without registration .—No 
principal employer of an establishment to which this Act applies shall employ inter -State migrant 
workmen in the establishment unless a certificate of registration in respect of such establishment issued 
under this Act is in force:  
Provided that nothin g in this section shall apply to any establishment in respect of which an 
application for registration made within the period fixed, whether originally or on extension under                
sub-section  (1) of section 4 is pending before a registering office r and for the purposes of this proviso, an 
application to which the provisions of sub -section  (3) of section 4 apply shall be deemed to be pending 
before the registering officer concerned till the certificate of registration is issued in accordance with th e 
provisions of that sub -section.  
CHAPTER III  
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS  
7. Appointment of licensing officers .—The appropriate Government  may, by order not ified in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint  such persons, being officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be licensing officers for 
the purposes of this Chapter; and  
(b) define  the limits , within which a licensing officer shall exercise the jurisdiction and powers 
conferred on licensin g officers by or under this Act.  6 
 8. Licensing of contractors .—(1) With effect from such date as the appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, no contractor t o whom this Act applies shall, — 
(a) recruit any person in a State for the purpose of employing him in any establishment situated in 
another State, except under and in accordance with a licence issue d in that behalf — 
(i) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of                            
sub-section ( 1) of section 2, by the licensing officer appointed by the Central Government who 
has jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the recruitment is made;  
(ii) if such establishment is an establishment referred to i n sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 2, by the licensing officer appointed by the State Government who has 
jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the recruitment is made;  
(b) employ as workmen for the exec ution of any work in any establishment in any State, persons 
from another State (whether or not in addition to other workmen) except under and in accordance 
with a licence issued in that behalf, — 
(i) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in  sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of                          
sub-section ( 1) of section 2, by the licensing officer appointed by the Central Government who 
has jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the establishment is situated;  
(ii) if such establishm ent is an establishment referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of                        
sub-section ( 1) of section 2,  by the licensing  officer appointed by the Stat e Government who has 
jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the establishment is situated.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a licence under sub -section ( 1) may contain such conditions 
including, in particular, the terms and conditions of the agreement or other arrangement under which the 
workmen will be recruited, the remuneration payable, hours of work, fixation of wages and other essential 
amenities in respect of the inter -State migrant workmen, as the appropriate Government may deem fit to 
impose in accordance with the rules, if any , made under section 35 and shall b e issued on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if for any special reasons, the licensing officer is satisfied that it is necessary to require 
any person who has applied for, or who has been i ssued, a licence to furnish any  security fo r the due 
performance of the conditions of the licence, he may, after communicating such reasons to such person 
and giving him an opportunity to represent his case, determine in accordance with the rules made in this 
behalf the security which shall be furn ished by such person for obtaining or, as the case may be, for 
continuing to hold the licence.  
(3) The security which may be required to be furnished under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) shall be 
reasonable and the rules for the purposes of the said provis o shall, on the basis of the number of workmen 
employed, the wages payable to them, the facilities which shall be afforded to them and other relevant 
factors provide for the norms with reference to which such security may be determined.  
9. Grant of licence s.—(1) Every application for the grant of a licence under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 8 shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the particulars regarding the location of 
the establishment, the nature of process, operation or work for which inter-State migrant workmen are to 
be employed and such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) The licensing officer may make such investigation in respect of the application received under 
sub-section ( 1) and in making any such investigation, the lic ensing officer shall follow such procedure as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) A licence granted under section 8, shall be valid for the period specified therein and may be 
renewed from time to time for such period and on payment of such fees and on such conditions as may be 
prescribed.  
  7 
 10. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences .—(1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, 
either on a reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that — 
(a) a licence  granted under section 8 has been obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of 
any material fact, or  
(b) the holder of a licence has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply with the conditions 
subject to which the licence has been granted or has con travened any of the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made hereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the licence may be liable under this 
Act, the licensing officer may, after giving the holder of the licence an oppor tunity to be heard, by order 
in writing, revoke the licence or forfeit the security furnished by him under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8 or any part thereof and communicate the order to the holder of the licence:  
Provided that where the licen sing officer considers it necessary so to do for any special reasons, he 
may, pending such revocation or forfeiture, by order, suspend the operation of the licence for such period 
as may be specified in the order and serve, by registered post, such order a long with a statement of the 
reasons on the holder of the licence and such order shall take effect on the date on which such service is 
effected.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may vary or amend a 
licence gr anted under section 8.  
11. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 4, section 5, section 8 or 
section 10 may, within thirty days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an 
appeal to an appellate officer who shall be a person nominated in this behal f by the appropriate 
Government : 
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if he  is satisfied that the appellant  was prevented by sufficient cau se from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate officer s hall, after giving the appellant  
an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF CONTRACTORS  
12. Duties of contractors .—(1) It shall b e the duty of every contractor — 
(a) to furnish such particulars and in such form as may be prescribed, to the specified authority in 
the State from which an inter -State migrant workman is recruited and in the State in which such 
workman is employed, within fifteen days from the date of recruitment, or, as the case may be, the 
date of employment, and where any change occurs in any of the particulars so furnished, such change 
shall be notifie d to the specified authorities of both the States;  
(b) to issue to every inter -State migrant workma n, a pass book affixed with a passport size 
photograph of the workman and indicating in Hindi and English languages, and where the language 
of the workman is  not Hindi or English, also i n the language of the workman, — 
 (i) the name and place of the establishment wherein the workman is employed;  
(ii) the period of employment;  
(iii) the proposed rates and modes of payment of wages;  
(iv) the displacement allowanc e payable;  
(v) the return fare payable to the workman on the expiry of the period of his employment and 
in such contingencies as may be prescribed and in such other contingencies as may be specified in 
the contract of employment;  
(vi) deductions made; and  
  8 
 (vii) such other particulars as may be prescribed;  
(c) to furnish in respect of every inter -State migrant workman who ceases to be employed, a 
return in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, to the specified authority in the State 
from which  he is recruited and in the State in which he is employed, which shall include a declaration 
that all the wages and other dues payable to the workman and the fare for the return journey back to 
his State have been paid.  
(2) The contractor shall maintain the pass book referred to in sub -section ( 1) up-to-date and cause it to 
be retained with the inter -State migrant workman concerned.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and section 16 “specified authority ” means such 
authority as may be specified by the appropriate Government in this behalf.  
CHAPTER V  
WAGES , WELFARE AND OTHER FACILITIES TO BE P ROVIDED TO INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN  
13. Wage rates and other conditions of service of inter -State migrant workmen .—(1) The wage 
rates, holidays, hours of work and other conditions of service of an inte r-State migrant workman shall, — 
(a) in a case where such workman performs in any establishment, the same or similar kind of 
work as is being  performed by any ot her workman in that establishment, be the same as those 
applicable to such other  workman; and  
(b) in any other case, be such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that an inter -State migrant workman shall in no case be paid less tha n the wages fixed under 
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948  (11 of 1948).  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, wages payable to 
an inter -State migrant workm an under this section shall be paid in cash.  
14. Displacement allowance .—(1) There shall be paid by the contractor to every inter -State migrant 
workman at the time of recruitment, a displacement al lowance equal to fifty per cent.  of the monthly 
wages payable to him or seventy -five rupees, whichever is hi gher. 
(2) The amount paid to a workman as displacement allowance under sub -section ( 1) shall not be 
refundable and shall be in addition to the wages or other amount s payable to him.  
15. Journey allowance , etc.—A journey allowance of a sum not less than the  fare from the place of 
residence of the inter -State migrant workman in his State to t he place of work in the other St ate shall be 
payable by the contractor to the workman both for the outward and return journeys and such workman 
shall be entitled to payme nt of wages during the period of such journeys as if he were on duty.  
16. Other facilities .—It shall be the duty of every contractor employing inter -State migrant workmen 
in connection with the work of an establishme nt to which this Act applies, — 
(a) to ensure regular payment of wages to such workmen;  
(b) to ensure equal pay for equal work irrespective of sex;  
(c) to ensure suitable conditions of work to such workmen having regard to the fact that they are 
required   to work in a State different from their own State;  
(d) to provide and maintain suitable residential accommodation to such workmen during the 
period of th eir  employment;  
(e) to provide the prescribed medical facilities to the workmen, free of charge;  
(f) to provide such protective clothing to the workmen as may be prescribed; and  
(g) in case of fatal accident or serious bodily injury to any such workman, t o report to the 
specified authorities of both the States and also the next of kin of the workman.  9 
 17. Responsibility for payment of wages .—(1) A contractor shall be responsible for payment of 
wages to each inter -State migrant workman employed by him and su ch wages shall be paid before the 
expiry of such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every principal employer shall nominate a representative duly authorised by him to be present at 
the time of disbursement of wages by the contractor and it shall be the duty of such representative to 
certify the amounts paid as wages in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the contractor to ensure the disbursement of wages in the presence of the 
authorised representative of the principal employer.     
(4) In case the contractor fails to make payment of wages within the prescribed period or makes short 
payment, then the principal employer shall be liable to make payment of the wages in full or the unpaid 
balance due, as the case may be, to the inter -State  migrant workman employed by the contractor and 
recover the amount so paid from the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the 
contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
18. Liability of principal employer in certain cases .—(1) If any allowance required to be paid 
under section 14 or section 15 to an inter -State migrant workman employed in an establishment to which 
this Act applies is not paid by the contractor or if any facility specified in section 16 is not provided for 
the benefit of such workman, such allowance shall be paid, or, as the case may be, the facility shall be 
provided, by the principal employer within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) All the allowances paid by the principal employer or all th e expenses incurred by him in providing 
the facility referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be recovered by him from the contractor either by deduction 
from any amount payable to the contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
19. Past liabilities .—It shall be the duty of every contractor and every principal employer to ensure 
that any loan given by such contractor or prin cipal employer to any inter -State migrant workman does not 
remain outstanding after the completion of the period of  employment of such workman under the said 
contractor or, as the case may be, in the establishment of such principal employer and accordingly every 
obligation of an inter -State migrant workman to re -pay any debt obtained by him during the period of his 
employment from the contractor or the principal employer and remaining unsatisfied before the 
completion of such period shall, on such completion, be deemed to have been extinguished and no suit or 
other proceeding shall lie in any court or before any authori ty for the recovery of such debt or any part 
thereof.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTING STAFF  
20. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and define the local 
limits within which they shall exercise their powers under this Act.   
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, within the local limits for which he i s appointed, an 
inspector may — 
(a) if he has reason to believe that any inter-State migrant workmen are employed in any premises 
or place, enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any), being persons in the service of 
the Government or any local or other public authority as he thinks fit, such premise s or place  for the 
purpose of — 
(i) satisfying himself whether the provisions of this Act in relation to the payment of wages, 
conditions of service, or facilities to be provided to such workmen are being complied with;   
(ii) examining any register or record or notic es required to be kept or exhibited by the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, and requiring the production thereof for 
inspection;   
(b) examine any person found in any such premises or place for the purpose of determining 
whether such per son is an inter -State migrant workman;   10 
 (c) require any person giving out work to any workman, to give any information, which is in his 
power to give, with respect to the names and addresses of the persons to, for and from whom the work 
is given out or rec eived, and with respect to the payments to be made for the work;   
(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages, or notices or portions thereof as he may 
consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been 
committed by a principal employer or contractor, and   
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.   
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), if a State Government considers it 
necessary for the purpose of satisfy ing itself that the provisions of this Act are being complied with in 
respect of any workmen belonging to that State and employed in an establishment situated in another 
State, it may, by order in writing, appoint such persons, being persons in the service  of that Government, 
for the exercise of such of the powers mentioned in sub -section ( 2), as may be specified in that order:  
Provided that no such order shall be issued without the concurrence of the Government of the State in 
which such workmen are employ ed or where the establishment is an establishment referred to in                  
sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, without the concurr ence of the Central 
Government.  
(4) Any person required to produce any document or thing, or to give any information required, by an 
inspector under sub -section ( 2), or by a person appointed under sub -section ( 3), shall be deemed to be 
legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code                
(45 of 1860).  
(5) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority 
of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Inter -State migrant workmen to b e deemed to be in employment from date of recruitment 
for the purposes of certain enactments .—For the purposes of the enactments specified in the Schedule, 
an inter-State migrant workman shall, on and from the date of his recruitment, be deemed to be employed 
and actually worked in the establishment or, as the case may be, the first establishment in connection with 
the work of which he is employed.  
22. Provisions regarding industrial disputes in relation to inter -State  migrant                     
workmen .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. 1947 (14 of 1947), 
any dispute or difference in connection with the employment or  non-employment or the terms of 
employment or the conditions of labour, of an inter -State migrant workman (hereafter in this section 
referred to a s the industrial dispute), may, — 
(a) if the industrial dispute is relatable to an establishment referred to in  sub-clause ( i) of               
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the 
Central Government to any of the authorities referred to in Chapter II of that Act (hereafter in this 
section referre d to as the said authorities), — 
(i) in the State wherein the establishment is situated;  
(ii) in the State wherein the recruitment of such workman was made if he makes an 
application in that behalf to that Government on the ground that he has returned to that S tate after 
the completion of his employment;  
 (b) if the industrial dispute is relatable to an establishment referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause  (a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, — 
(i) be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the Governme nt of the State wherein 
the establishment is situated, to any of the said authorities in that State; or  11 
 (ii) be referred under the pro visions of the said Act, by the Government of the State wherein 
the recruitment of such workman was made to any of the sai d authorities in that State, if he makes 
an application in that behalf to that Government on the ground that he has returned to that State 
after the completion of his employment:  
Provided tha t— 
(a) no application referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) or sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b) shall 
be entertained after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of his return to the State 
wherein the recruitment was made after the completion of his employment, unless the Government 
concerned is satisfie d that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application within that period;  
(b) no reference under the said sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b) shall be made except after obtaining 
the concurrence of the Government of the State wherein  the establishment concerned is situated.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 33B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947                       
(14 of 1947), where during the pendency of any proceeding in respect of an industrial dispute under that 
Act before any of the said authorities in the State wherein the establishment is situated, an application is 
made to that authority by an inter -State migrant workman for the transfer of such proceeding to a 
corresponding authority in the State wherein  his recruitment was made on the ground that he has returned 
to that State after the completion of his employment, that authority shall forward the application to the 
Central Government, or, as the case may be, to the Government of the State wherein such r ecruitment was 
made and transfer such proceeding in the prescribed manner to such authority as may be specified in this 
behalf by that Government:  
Provided that in a case where no authority has been specified by the Government concerned within 
the prescrib ed period, the authority before which the proceeding is pending shall, on a request being made 
by the inter -State migrant workman and after obtaining the previous approval of the Government which 
referred the dispute to that authority, forward such proceed ing to the Government concerned for reference 
of such dispute to an authority in the State wherein such recruitment was made.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), if the Central Government is satisfied that 
it is expedient in the int erests of justice so to do, it may, by order in writing and for reasons to be stated 
therein, withdraw any proceeding in respect of any industrial dispute relating to an inter -State migrant 
workman pending before an authority in the Sta te in which the esta blishment concerned is situated and 
transfer the same to such authority in the State wherein the recruitment of such workman was made as 
may be specified in the order.  
(4) The authority to which any proceeding is transferred under this section may proceed either                 
de novo  or from the stage at which it was so transferred.  
23. Registers and other records to be maintained .—(1) Every principal employer and every 
contractor shall maintain such registers and records giving such particulars of the inter-State migrant 
workmen employed, the nature of work performed by such workmen, the rates of wages paid to the 
workmen and such other particulars in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every principal employer and every contractor shall keep exhibited in such manner as may be 
prescribed within the premises of the establishment where the inter -State migrant workmen are employed, 
notices in the prescribed form containing particulars about the hours of work, nature of duty and such 
other information as may  be prescribed.  
24. Obstructions .—(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector or a person appointed under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 20 (hereinafter referred to as unauthorised person) in the discharge of his duties u nder this Act 
or refuses or wil fully neglects to  afford the inspector or authorised person any reasonable facility for 
making any inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation authorised by or under this Act in relation to 
an establishment to which, or a contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall b e punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand 
rupees, or with both.  12 
 (2) Whoever wil fully  refuses to produce on the demand of any inspector or authorised person any 
register or other document kept in pursuance of this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does 
anything which he has reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from app earing before or being 
examined by any inspector or authorised person acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend 
to two thousand rupees, or  with both.  
25. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of inter -State migrant workmen .—
Whoever contravenes any provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder regulating the 
employment of inter -State migrant workmen, or contravenes any con dition of a licence granted under this 
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an 
additional  fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such contravention.  
26. Other offences .—If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with 
both.  
27. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence  under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be gu ilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:   
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his kn owledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that of fence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of           
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
28. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, an inspector or authorised person and no 
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
29. Limitation of prosecutions .—No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act unless th e complaint thereof is made within three months from the date on which the alleged 
commission of the offence came to the knowledge of the inspector or authorised person concerned:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an inspector or 
authorised person, complaint thereof may be made within six months of the date on which the offence is 
alleged to have been committed.  
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have  effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of 
any agreement or contract of service, or in any standing orders applicable to the establishment whether 
made before or after the commencement of this Act:  13 
 Provided that where under any such law, agreement, contract of service or standing orders, the             
inter-State migrant workmen employed in the establishment are entitled to benefits in respect of any 
matter which are more favourable to them than t hose to which they would be entitled under this Act, the 
inter-State migrant workmen shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that 
matter, notwithstanding that they receive benefits in respect of other matters under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any inter -State migrant workmen 
from entering into an agreement with the principal employer or the contractor, as the case may be, for 
granting them rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them than those 
to which they would be entitled under this Act.  
31. Power to exempt in special cases .—The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette and subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, and for such period or periods as 
may be specified in the notification, direct that all or any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder shall not apply to or in relation to any establishment or class of establishment s or any 
contractor or class of contractors or any inter -State migran t workmen in such establishment  or class of 
such workmen, if that Government is satisfied that it is just and proper so to do having regard to the 
methods of recruitment and the condition s of employment in such establishment or class of 
establishments and all other relevant circumstances.  
32. Protection of action taken under Act .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against any registering officer, licensing office r or any other employee of the Government for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rule or notification or order made or issued thereunder.  
33. Power to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to the Government of 
any State as to the carrying into execution in the State of the provisions contained in this Act.  
34. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may , by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of tw o years from the date on which this 
Act comes into force.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
35. Power to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to th e condition of 
previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the foll owing matters, namely: — 
(a) the f orm and mariner in which an application for the registration of an establishment may be 
made under section 4, the fees payable thereon and the form of a certificate of registration issued 
under that section;  
(b) the  form in which an application for the grant  or renewal of a licence may be made under 
section 9 and the particulars it may contain;  
(c) the manner in which an investigation is to be made in respect of an application for the grant of 
a licence and the matte rs to be taken into account in granting or refusing a licence;  
(d) the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed under this Act, the conditions subject 
to which the licence may be granted or renewed, the fees payable for the grant or renewal of a l icence 14 
 and the security, if any, required to be furnished for the due performance of the conditions of the 
licence;  
(e) the circumstances under which licen ces may be varied or amended under section 10;  
(f) the form and the manner in which appeals may be fi led under section 11 and the procedure to 
be followed by appellate officers in disposing of the appeals;  
(g) the wage rates, holidays, hours of work and other conditions of service which an inter -State 
migrant workman is entitled under section 13;  
(h) the period within which wages payable to inter -State migrant workmen should be paid by the 
contractor under sub -section ( 1) of section 17 and the manner of certification of such payment under 
sub-section ( 2) thereof;  
(i) the time within which allowances or fac ilities required by this Act to be provided and 
maintained may be so provided by the contractor and in case of default on the part of the contractor, 
by the pri ncipal employer under section 18 ; 
(j) the powers that may be exercised by inspectors under secti on 20;  
(k) the form of registers and records to be maintained, and the particulars and information to be 
contained in notices to be exhibited, by the principal employers and contractors under section 23;  
(l) the manner of submission of returns, and the for ms in which, and the authorities to which, such 
returns may be submitted;  
(m) legal aid to inter -State migrant workmen;  
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of th e session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified fo rm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
36. Repeals and saving. —(1) The Orissa Dadan  Labour (Control and Regulat ion) Act, 1975           
(Orissa Act 42 of 1975)  and any law corresponding to this Act, in force in any State, shall stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the Act or 
law so repeated shall , in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act as if the said provisions were in 
force when such thing was done or such action was taken and sha ll continue to be in force accordingly 
until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
 
  15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 21]  
1. The Wor kmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923 ( 8 of 1923).  
2. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).  
3. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
4. The Employees ’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948).  
5. The Employees’  Provident Funds and Misce llaneous Provisions Act, 1952 ( 19 of 1952).  
6. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961).  
 
 
 
 
   
 
--------------------------The Punjab Excise (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1979--------------------------
1 THE PUNJAB EXCISE (DELHI AMENDMENT) ACT, 1979  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. Validation.  
7. [Repealed .] 
 
 
  2 THE PUNJAB EXCISE (DELHI AMENDMENT) ACT, 1979  
ACT NO. 12 OF 1979  
[29th March , 1979. ] 
An Act further to amend the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 as in force in the Union territory of Delhi.  
WHEREAS  by reason of certain excisable articles not being manufactured or produced in Delhi, 
countervailing duty is not leviable on such articles which are imported into Delhi;  
AND WHEREAS the consumption, except for medic inal purpose s, of such articles would be injurious to 
health and the levy of a special duty on the importation of such articles into Delhi would be an endeavour 
towards bringing about prohibition of the consumption as aforesaid of such articles;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Punjab Excise (Delhi 
Amendment) Act, 1979.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of January, 1979.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
6. Validation .—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, 
anything or any action done or taken or purported to have been done or taken under the principal Act 
before the commencement of this Act shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, as valid and 
effective as if such thing or acti on had been done or taken under the principal Act, as amende d by this 
Act, and accordingly :— 
(a) any duty, tax or fee levied, assessed or collecte d or purporting to have been levied, assessed or 
collected under the principal Ac t before the commencement of this  Act shall be deemed to have been 
validly levied, assessed or collected in accordance with law;  
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maint ained or continued in any court or before any 
authority for the refund, and no enforcement shall be made by any court or other authority of any 
decree or order directing the refund, of any such duty, tax or fee which has been so collected;  
(c) recoveries s hall be made in accordance with the provision s of the principal Act of all amounts 
which would have been collected as duties, taxes or fees under the principal Act by reason of the 
amendments made in the principal Act by this Act but which had not been collected.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts , it is hereby declared that no act or omission on the part of 
any person before the commencement of this Act shall be punishable as an offence which would not have 
been so punishable if this Act had not been enacted.  
2*   *   *   *   *
   
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 5 rep. by Act  19 of 1988, s. 2 and the  First Schedule  (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
2. Section  7 rep. by s. 2  and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
 
 
--------------------------The Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Amendment Act, 1979--------------------------
 
1 THE SUG AR UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) AMENDMENT 
ACT, 1979  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. Validation . 
4. [Repealed .] 
   
2 THE SUG AR UNDERTAKINGS (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT) AMENDMENT 
ACT, 1979  
ACT NO. 18 OF 1979  
[31st March , 1979.]  
An Act to amend the Sugar Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1978.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Sugar Undertakings (Taking 
Over of Management) Amendment Act, 1979.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of January, 1979.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
3. Validation. —Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order (whether interim or otherwise) of 
any court, anything or any action (including the issue by the Central Government of any notification 
declaring that the management of any sugar undertaking shall vest in the Central Government on and 
from the date specifie d in such notification) done or taken or purported to have been done or taken under 
section 3 of the principal Act or under the corresponding provisions of t he Ordinance which was repealed 
by the principal Act, shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been as validly done or 
taken as if such thing or action (including the issue of such notification) had been done or taken under 
section 3 of the principal Act as amended by section 2 of this Act and accordingly — 
(a) no suit or other proceed ing shall be maintained or continued in any court against the Central 
Government or any person or authority whatsoever for the restoration to the owner of the management of 
any sugar undertaking with respect to which such notification had been issued by th e Central 
Government;  
(b) no court shall enforce any decree or order (including an interim order) for the restoration to the 
owner of the management of any sugar undertaking with respect to which such notification had been 
issued by the Central Government;  and 
(c) every such notification shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, valid , effective and 
enforceable by or on behalf of the Central Government in accordance with the tenor thereof and the 
provisions of the principal Act as amended by this A ct. 
Explanation .—Words and expressions used in this section which are defined in, or for the meanings 
of which provision has been made in, section 2 of the principal Act shall have the same meanings as 
under that section.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
 
 
                                                           
1. Section  2 rep. by Act  19 of 1988, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
2. Section 4  rep. by s. 2  and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  
--------------------------The Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1979--------------------------
1 
 THE UNION DUTIES OF EXCISE (DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1979  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definition . 
3. Payment to States of sums equivalent to a part of the net proceeds of Union  duties of excise and 
distribution of sums among them.  
4. Payment to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India . 
5. Power to make rules . 
6. Repeal . 
 
  2 
 THE UNION DUTIES OF EXCISE (DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1979  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1979  
[20th May , 1979. ] 
An Act to provide for the payment out of the Consolidated Fund of India of sums equivalent to a 
part of the net proceeds of certain Union duties of excise to the States to which the law 
imposing the duty extends and for the distribution of those sums among  those States in 
accordance with the principles recommended by the Finance Commission in its1[report dated 
the 25 th day of November, 19 94]. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Union Duties of Excise 
(Distribution) Act,  1979.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the  1st day of April,  1979.  
2[2. Definition .—In this Act, the expression “distributab le Union duties of excise ” means 3[forty -
seven and a half per cent.] of the net proceeds of Union duties of excise, levied and collected under the 
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944  (1 of 194 4) and any other law for the levy and collection of such duty, 
unless the law earmarks the proceeds of the duty for any special purpose.  
Explanation. —The expression  “net proceeds ” has the same meaning as in clause ( 1) of article 279 of 
the Constitution.  
4[3.Payment to States of sums equivalent to a part of the net proceeds of Union  duties of excise 
and distribution of sums among them .—During  the financial year commencing on the  1stday of 
April,  1995,and each of the four succeeding financial years, there  shall be paid, out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India, to the States, sums equivalent  to the distributable Union duties of excise levied and 
collected in that year  and,— 
(a)sixteen -nineteenth of the sums so payable during each such financial year  shall  be distributed to 
each of the States specified in column ( 1)of Table I below in such percentage as is set out against it in 
column ( 2)thereof; and  
(b)three -nineteenth of the sums so payable during each such financial year  shallbe distributed to each 
of the St ates specified in column ( 1)of Table II below in such percentage as is set out against it in column 
(2)thereof with r espect to that financial year: — 
TABLEI  
 
State                    Percentage  
(1)                   (2) 
Andhra Pradesh  . . . . . . . . . 8.465  
Arunachal Pradesh  . . . . . . . . . 0.170  
Assam  . . . . . . . . . 2.784  
Bihar  . . . . . . . . . 12.861  
Goa . . . . . . . . . 0.180  
Gujarat  . . . . . . . . . 4.046  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1995 , s. 2, for “ second report dated the 18th day of December, 1989 ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1995). 
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 198 9, s. 3, for sections 2 and 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1989).  
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 1995, s. 3, for “forty -five per cent.” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1995).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1995).  3 
 (1)          (2) 
Haryana  . . . . . . . . . 1.238 
Himachal Pradesh  . . . . . . . . . 0.704  
Jammu and Kashmir  . . . . . . . . . 1.097  
Karnataka  . . . . . . . . . 5.339  
Kerala  . . . . . . . . . 3.875  
Madhya Pradesh  . . . . . . . . . 8.290  
Maharashtra  . . . . . . . . . 6.126  
Manipur  . . . . . . . . . 0.282  
Meghalaya  . . . . . . . . . 0.283  
Mizoram  . . . . . . . . . 0.149  
Nagaland  . . . . . . . . . 0.181  
Orissa  . . . . . . . . . 4.495  
Punjab  . . . . . . . . . 1.461  
Rajasthan  . . . . . . . . . 5.551  
Sikkim  . . . . . . . . . 0.126  
Tamil Nadu  . . . . . . . . . 6.637  
Tripura  . . . . . . . . . 0.378  
Uttar Pradesh  . . . . . . . . . 17.811  
West  Bengal  . . . . . . . . . 7.471  
TABLEII  
 
State  Financial year and percentage    
(1) (2)  
 1995 -96 1996 -97 1997 -98 1998 -99 1999 -2000  
Andhra Pradesh  12.069  7.988  0.000  0.000  0.000  
Arunachal Pradesh  3.410  4.300  5.871  6.224  6.667  
Assam  8.543  9.836  11.849  10.748  9.290  
Bihar  6.434  2.965  0.000  0.000  0.000  
Goa 0.973  1.058  1.161  0.917  0.604  
Himachal Pradesh  8.816  10.744  14.057  14.230  14.338  
Jammu and Kashmir  13.366  16.491  21.985  22.741  23.700  
Manipur  3.930  4.891  6.602  6.917  7.348  
Meghalaya  3.590  4.403  5.815  5.994  6.130  
Mizoram  3.676  4.628  6.278  6.784 7.074  
  4 
 (1)   (2)   
Nagaland  5.818  7.417  10.247  11.072  12.025  
Orissa  4.815  5.248  4.934  2.773 0.680  
Rajasthan  0.835  0.000  0.000  0.000  0.000  
Sikkim  1.199  1.473  1.938  1.982  2.055  
Tripura  5.465  6.807  9.263   9.618  10.089  
Uttar Pradesh  17.061  11.751  0.000  0.000  0.000. ]] 
  
4. Payment to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India .—The expenditure on the payments 
in pursuance of section  3 shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.  
5. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules providing for the time at which and the manner in which, any payments under this Act are to 
be made, for the making of adjustments between one financial year andanother  and f or 
any other  incidental or ancillary matters.  
(2) Every rule made under this section  shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule  should not be made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification of 
annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that  rule. 
6. Repeal .—The Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act,  1962  (3 of 1962) , shall , as from the            
1st day of April,  1979  stand repealed.  
 
