--------------------------The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980--------------------------
 
1 
 THE BANKING COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKIN GS) 
ACT,  1980  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1980  
[11th July,  1980.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of certain banking 
companies, having regard to their size, resources, coverage and organisation, in order further 
to control the heights of the economy, to meet progressively, and serve  better, the needs of 
the development of the economy and to promote the welfare of the people, in conformity 
with the policy of the State towards securing the principles laid down in clauses ( b) and ( c) of 
article 39 of the Constitution and for matters con nected t herewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Trans fer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th d ay of April, 1980.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “banking company ” does not include a foreign company within the mea ning of section 591 of 
the C ompanies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(b) “corresponding new bank ”, in relation to an existing bank, means the body corporate specified 
against such bank in column 2 of the First Schedule;  
(c) “Custodian ” means the person who becomes, or is appointe d, a Custodian under section 7;  
(d) “existing bank ” means a banking company specified in column 1 of the First Schedule, being 
a company the total of the demand and time liabilities in India of which, as shown i n the return as on 
the 14th day of March, 1980, furnished to the Reserve Bank under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) , amounts to not less than rupees two hundred crores;  
1[(da) “prescribed ” means prescribed by r egulations made  under this Act; ] 
(e) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Banking Reg ulation Act, 
1949 (10 of 1949) have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act ; 
1[(f) words and expressions used herein and not defined either  in this Act or in the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (1 0 of 1949) , but defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956. ] 
CHAPTER II  
2[TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXISTING BA NKS AND SHARE CAPITAL S OF THE CORRESPONDING 
NEW BANKS ] 
3. Establishment of corresponding new banks and business thereof. —(1) On the commencement 
of this Act, there shall be constituted such corresponding new banks as are specified in column 2 of the 
First Schedule.  
(2) The paid -up capital of every corresponding new bank constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall, 
until any provision is made in this behalf in any scheme made under section 9, be equal to the paid -up 
capital of the existing bank in relation to wh ich it  is the corresponding new bank.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “T RANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF EXI STING BANKS ” (w.e.f. 15 -7-1995).   
2 
  1[2[(2A) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorised capital of every corresponding new bank 
shall be three thousand crores of rupees divided into three hundred crores of fully paid -up shares of ten 
rupees each:  
Provided that the corresponding new bank ma y reduce the nominal or face value of the shares, and 
divide the authorised capital into such denomination as it may decide with the prior approval of the 
Reserve Bank:  
Provided further that the Central Government  may in con sultation with the Reserve Bank  and by 
notification in the Official Gazette increase or reduce the authorised capital as it deems fit so however that 
the shares in all cases shall be fully paid -up shares .] 
(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the paid -up capital o f every 
corresponding new bank constituted under sub -section ( 1) may from  time to time be increased by — 
(a) such amounts as the Board of Dir ectors of the corres ponding new bank may, after consultation 
with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of  the Central Government, transfer from the 
reserve fund established by suc h bank to such paid -up capital;  
(b) such amounts as the Central Government may, after consu ltation with the Reserve Bank, 
contribute to such paid -up capital;  
3[(c) such amounts as the Bo ard of Directors of the corres ponding new bank may, after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, raise 
by public issue 4[or rights iss ue or by issue of bonus shares]  or preferential allotment or p rivate 
placement, of equity shares or preference share s in accordance with the procedure as may be 
prescribed, so , however , that the Central Government shall , at all times hold not less than fifty -one per 
cent. of the paid -up capital  consisting of equity shares  of each corresponding new bank : 
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in accordance with the guidelines framed by 
the Reserve Bank specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue of each class of such 
preference shares  (whether perpetual  or irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and conditions 
subject to which, each class of preference shares may be issued.  
5[(2BB) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the paid -up capital of a 
corresponding new bank constituted under sub -section ( 1) may, from time to time and before any paid -up 
capital is 6[raised by public issue  4[or rights issue or by issue of bonus shares ] or preferential allotment or 
private placement]  under clause ( c) of  sub-section ( 2B), be reduced by — 
(a) the Central G overnment, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, by cancelling any 
paid-up capital which is lost, or is unrepresented by available assets;  
(b) the Board of Directors, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the p revious 
sanction of the Central Government, by paying off any paid -up capital which is in excess of the 
wants of the corresponding new banks:  
Provided that in a case where such  capital is lost, or is unrepr esented by available assets because 
of amalgamation of another corres ponding new bank or a corresponding new bank as defined in 
clause ( d) of section 2 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 
1970 (5 of 1970) with the corresponding new bank, such reduction may b e done, either prospectively 
or retrospectively, but not from a date earlier than  the date of such amalgamation.  
(2BBA ) (a) A corresponding new bank may, from time to time and after any paid -up capital has been 
6[raised by public issue  4[or rights issue or  by issue of bonus shares ] or preferential allotment or private 
placement]  under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2B), by resolution passed at an annual general meeting of the 
shareholders entitled to vote, voting in person, or, where proxies are allowed, by proxy, and the votes cast 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 12, for sub -sections ( 2A) and 3 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
2. Subs . by Act 4 of 20 13, s. 16 , for sub -section ( 2A)  (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 8, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
4. Ins. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 16 (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
5. Ins. by Act 8 of 1995, s. 3  (w.e.f. 21 -1-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s.  8, for “raised by public issue” (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).   
3 
 in favour of the resolution are not less than three times the number of the votes, if a ny, cast against the 
resolution by the share holders so entitled and voting reduce its paid -up capital in any way.  
(b) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the paid -up capital may be reduced 
by— 
(i) extinguishing or reducing the liabi lity on any of its shares in respect of share capital not 
paid-up;  
(ii) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its paid -up shares, 
cancelling any paid -up capital which is lost, or is unrepresented by avail able assets; or  
(iii) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its paid -up shares, 
paying off any paid -up share capital which is in excess of the wants  of the corresponding new 
bank.  
(2BBB ) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2BB) or sub-section ( 2BBA ), the paid -up 
capital of a corresponding new bank shall not be reduced at any time so as to render it below twenty -five 
per cent. of the paid -up capital of that bank as on the date of commencement of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition an d Transfer of Undertakings) A mendment Act, 1995 (8 of 1995). ] 
(2C) The en tire paid -up capital of a corresp onding new bank, except the paid -up capital 1[raised 
from  public by public issue 2[or rights issue or by issue of bonus shares ] or preferential allotment or 
private placement]  under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2B), shall stand vested in, and allot ted to, the Central 
Government.  
(2D) The shares of every corresponding new bank not held by the Central Governmen t shall be 
freely transf erable:  
Provided that no individual or company resident outside India or any company incorporated under 
any law not in force in India or any branch of such company, whether resident outside India or not, shall 
at any time hold or acquire by transfer or oth erwise shares of the corresponding new bank so that such 
investment in aggregate exceeds the percentage, not being more than twenty per cent. of the paid -up 
capital, as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “company ” means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other asso ciation of individuals.  
(2E) No shareholder of the corresponding new bank, other than the Central Government, shall be 
entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of any shares held by him in excess of 3[ten per cent. ] of the 
total voting rights of all the shareholders  of the corr esponding new bank.  
4[Provided that the shareholder holding any preference share capital in the corresponding new bank 
shall, in respect of such capital, have a right to vote only on resolutions placed before such corresponding 
new bank which directly affe cts the rights attached to his preference shares:  
Provided further that  5[no preference shareholder, other than the Central Government, shall be 
entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of preference shares held by him in excess of ten per cent.] of 
the total voting rights of all the shareholders holding preference share capital only .] 
(2F) Every corresponding new bank shall keep at its head office a register, in one or more books, of 
the shareholders (in this Act referred to as the register) and shal l enter therein the following              
particulars: — 
(i) the  names, addresses and occupations, if any, of the shareholders and a statement of  the 
shares held by each share -holder, distinguishing eac h share by its denoting number;  
(ii) the date on which each person is  so entered as a share holder;  
(iii) the date on which any person ce ases to be a share -holder; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 8, for “raised by public issue” ( w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 16 (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “one per cent.” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013 ). 
4. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 8 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
5. Subs. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 16, for certain words  (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).   
4 
 (iv) such other pa rticulars as may be prescribed.  
1[Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to shares held with a depository .] 
(2G) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2F), it shall be lawful for ever y 
corresponding new bank to keep the register in computer floppies or diskettes subject to such s afeguards 
as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in t he Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1  of 1872), a copy of, or 
extract from, the register, certified to be a true c opy under the hand of an office r of the corresponding new 
bank authorised in this behalf by it, shall, in all legal proceedi ngs, be admissible in evidence.]  
(4) Every corresponding new bank shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of proper ty, 
and to contract, and may be and sued in its name.  
(5) Every corresponding new bank shall carry on and transact the business of banking as defined in 
clause ( b) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), and may engage in 2[one or 
more of the other forms of business ] specified in sub -sectio n (1) of section 6 of that Act.  
(6) Every corresponding new bank shall establish a reserve fund to which shall be transferred the 
share premiums and the balance, if any, standing to the credit of the reserve fund of the exi sting bank in 
relation to which it is the corresponding new bank, and such further sums, if any, as may be transferred in 
accordance with the provisions of section 17 of the Banking Reg ulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949).  
3[(7) (i) The corresponding new bank sh all, if so required by the Reserve Bank, act as agent of the 
Reserve Bank at all places in Ind ia where it has a branch, for — 
(a) paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money, bullion and securities on behalf of any 
Government in India; and  
(b) underta king and transacting any other business which the Reserve Bank may f rom time to 
time entrust to it.  
(ii) The terms and conditions on which any such agency business shall be carried on by the 
corresponding new bank on behalf of the Reserve Bank shall  be suc h as may be agreed upon.  
(iii) If no agreement can be reached on any matter referred to in clause ( ii), or if a dispute 
arises between the corresponding new bank and the Reserve Bank as to the interpretation of any 
agreement between them, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government and the decision 
of the Central Governme nt thereon shall be final.  
(iv) The corresponding new bank may transact any business or perform any functions 
entrusted to it under clause ( i), by itself or through any agen t app roved by the Reserve Bank. ] 
4[3A. Trust not to be entered on the register .—Notwithstanding anything contained in                    
sub-section ( 2F) of section 3, no notice of any trust, express, implied or constructive, shall be  entered on 
the register, or be receivable,  by the corresponding new bank: ] 
5[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a depository in respect of shares held by it as a 
registered owner on behalf of the beneficial owners .] 
6[3B. Register of beneficial owners. —The register of benificial owners maintained by a depository 
under section 11 of the Depositories Act,  1996  (22 of 1996) , shall be deemed to be a register of 
shareholders for the purposes of this act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 19 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 71, for “one or more forms of business” (w.e.f. 15-2-1984).  
3. Ins. by s. 71,  ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 13 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
5. Ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  
6. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).   
5 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of section 3,  section 3A and  this section , the expressions “benificial 
owner ”, “depository ” and “registered  owner ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
clauses ( a), (e) and ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act,  1996.]  
4. Undertakings of existing banks to vest in corresponding new banks .—On the commencement 
of this Act, the undertaking of every existing bank shall be transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
corresponding new bank.  
5. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertaking of each existing bank shall be deemed to include 
all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, cash 
balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising o ut of, such property 
as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the ownership, possession, power or control 
of the existing bank in relation to the undertaking, whether within or without India, and all books of 
accounts, registers, records and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be 
deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the 
existing bank in relation to the undertaking.  
(2) If, according to the laws of any country outside India, the provisions of this Act by themselves 
are not effective to transfer or vest any asset or liability situated in that country which forms part of the 
undertaking of an existing bank to, or in, the corresponding new bank, the affairs of the existing bank in 
relation to such asset or liability shall, on and from the commencement of this Act, stand entrusted to the 
chief executive officer for the time being of the corresponding new bank, and the chief executive officer 
may exerci se all powers and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the existing bank 
for the purpose of effectively transferring such assets an d discharging such liabilities.  
(3) The chief executive officer of the corresponding new bank shall, in  exercise of the powers 
conferred on him by sub -section ( 2), take all such steps as may be required by the laws of any such 
country outside India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, and may either himself or 
through any person authorised  by him in this behalf realise any asset and discharge any liability of the 
existing bank.  
(4) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers 
of attorney, grants of legal representation and other instrument s of whatever nature subsisting or having 
effect immediately before the commencement of this Act and to which the existing bank is a party or 
which are in favour of the existing bank shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the 
correspo nding new bank, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in the place of 
the existing bank the corresponding new bank had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in 
favour of the corresponding new bank.  
(5) If, immediatel y before the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature in relation to any business of the undertaking which has been transferred under section 4, 
is pending by or against the existing bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way, 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertaking of the existing bank or of anything 
contained in this Act but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced 
by or agai nst the corresponding new bank.  
(6) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as applying to the assets, rights, powers, authorities and 
privileges and property, movable and immovable, cash balances and investments in any country outside 
India (and other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property) and borrowings, liabilities and 
obligations of whatever kind subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Act, of any 
existing bank operating in that country if, under the laws in force in that country, it is not permissible for a 
banking company, owned or controlled by Government, to carry on  the business of banking there.   
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
6. Payment of amount. —(1) Every existing bank shall be given by the Central Government such 
amount in respect of the transfer, under section 4, to the corresponding new bank of the undertaking of the 
existing bank as is specified against each such bank in the  Second Schedule.  
   
6 
 (2) The amount referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be given to every existing bank, at its option, — 
(a) in cash (to be paid by cheque drawn on the Reserve Bank) in three equal annual instalments, 
the amount of each instalment carrying interest at the rate of five and a half per cent. per annum from  
the commencement of this Act; or  
(b) in saleable or otherwise transferable promissory notes or stock certificates of the Central 
Government issued and repayable at par, and maturing at the  end of — 
(i) ten years from the commencement of this Act and carry ing interest from such 
commencement at the rate  of six per cent. per annum, or  
(ii) thirty years from the commencement of this Act and carrying interest from such 
commencement at the rate o f seven per cent. per annum; or  
(c) partly in cash (to be paid by c heque drawn on the Reserve Bank) and partly in such number of 
securities specified in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii), or both, of clause  (b), as may be re quired by 
the existing bank; or  
(d) partly in such number of securities specified in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b) and partly in such 
number of securities specified in sub -clause ( ii) of that clause, as may be required by the existing 
bank.  
(3) The first of the three equal annual instalments referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall be 
paid, an d the securities referred to in clause ( b) of that sub -section shall be issued, within sixty days from 
the date of receipt by the Central Government of the option referred to in that sub -section, or where no 
such option has been exercised, from the latest date before which such optio n ought to have been 
exercised.  
(4) The option referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be exercised by every existing bank before the 
expiry of a period of three months from the commencement of this Act (or within such further time, not 
exceeding three months, as the Central Government may, on the application of the existing bank, al low) 
and the option so exercised shall be final and shall not be altered or rescinded after it has been exercised.  
(5) Any existing bank which omits or fails to exercise the option referred to in sub -section ( 2), within 
the time specified in sub - section (4), shall be deemed to have opted for payment in securities specified in 
sub-clause ( i) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any existing bank may, before the expiry of 
three months from the commencemen t of this Act (or within such further time, not exceeding three 
months, as the Central Government may, on the application of the existing bank, allow) make an 
application in writing to the Central Government for an interim payment of an amount equal to                
seventy -five per cent. of the amount of the paid -up capital of such bank, immediately before such 
commencement, indicating therein whether the payment is desired in cash or in securities specified in 
sub-section ( 2), or in both.  
(7) The Central  Government shall, within sixty days from the receipt of the application referred to in 
sub-section ( 6), make the interim payment to the existing bank in accordance with the option  indicated in 
such application.  
(8) The interim payment made  to an existing bank under sub -section ( 7) shall be set off against the 
total amount payable to such existing bank under this Act and the balance of the amount remaining  
outstanding after such payment shall be given to the existing bank in accordance with the option 
exercised, or deemed to have been exercised, under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5), as the case may be:  
Provided that where any part of the interim payment is obtained by an existing bank in cash, the 
payment so obtained shall be set off, in the first inst ance, against the first instalment of the cash payment 
referred to in sub -section ( 2), and in case the payment so obtained exceeds the amount of the first 
instalment, the excess amount shall be adjusted against the second instalment and the balance of such  
excess amount, if any, against the third instalment of the cash payment.  
   
7 
 CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF CORRESPONDING NEW BANKS  
7. Head office and management. —(1) The head office of each corresponding new bank shall be at 
such place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
and, until any such place is so specified, shall be at such place at which the head offi ce of the existing 
bank, in relation to which it is the corresponding new bank, is on the commencement of this Act, located.  
(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of a 
corresponding new bank shall vest in a Board of Directors which shall be entitled to exercise all such 
powers and do all such acts and things as the corresponding new bank is  authorised to exercise and do.  
(3) (a) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Central Government shal l, in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, constitute the first Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, 
consisting of not more than seven persons, to be appointed by the Central Government, and every director 
so appointed shall hold office until the  Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank is constituted 
in accordance with t he scheme made under section 9:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary in the interests of the 
corresponding new bank so to do , remove a person from the membership of the first Board of Directors 
and appoint  any other person in his place.  
(b) Every member of the first Board of Directors (not being an officer of the Central Government or 
of the Reserve Bank) shall receive such rem uneration as is equal to the remuneration which a member of 
the Board of Directors of the existing bank was entitled to receive immediately befor e the commencement 
of this Act.  
(4) Until the first Board of Directors is appointed by the Central Government u nder sub -section ( 3), 
the general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of a corresponding 
new bank shall vest in a Custodian, who shall be the chief executive officer of that bank and may exercise 
all powers and do all acts  and things as may be exercised or done by that bank.  
(5) The Chairman of an existing bank holding office as such immediately before the commencement 
of this Act, shall be the Custodian of the corresponding new bank and shall receive the same emoluments 
as he was receiving immedi ately before such commencement:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if the Chairman of an existing bank declines to become, 
or to  continue to function as, a Cus todian of the corresponding new bank, or, if it is of opinion that it is 
necessary in the interests of the corresponding new bank so to do, appoint any other person as the 
Custodian of a corresponding new bank and the Custodian so appointed shall receive s uch emoluments as 
the Central Government may specify in this behalf.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section and in sub -section ( 1) of section 12, the expression “Chairman ”, in 
relation to any existing bank, includes the person carrying out the duties of the Cha irman or otherwise 
functioning as the chief executive officer of that bank.  
(6) The Custodian shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
8. Corresponding new banks to be guided by the directions of the Central Government .—Every 
corre sponding new bank shall, in the discharge of its functions, be guided by such directions in regard to 
matters of policy involving public interest as the Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Gove rnor of the Reserve Bank, give.  
9. Power of Cen tral Government to make scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, make a scheme for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the said  scheme may 
provide for all or any of the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) the capital structure of the corresponding new bank  1***  
                                                           
1. The words “, so however that the paid -up capital  of any such bank shall not be  in excess of rupees one thousand  five hundred 
crores” omitted by Act 37 of 1994, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).   
8 
 (b) the constitution of the Board of Directors, by whatever name called, of the corresponding new 
bank and all such matters in connection therewith or incidental thereto as the Central Government 
may conside r to be necessary or expedient;  
(c) the reconstitution of any corresponding new bank into two or more corporations, the 
amalgamation of any corresponding new bank with any o ther corresponding new bank or with 
another banking institution, the transfer of the whole or any part of the undertaking of a 
1[corresponding new bank to any other corresponding new bank or banking institution ] or the transfer 
of the whole or any part of the undertaking of any other banking institution to a corr esponding new 
bank; 
2[(ca) the manner in which the excess number of directors shall retire under the second proviso to 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 3);] 
 (d) such  incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary to carry out the 
provisions of this Act.  
3[(3) Every Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, cons tituted under any scheme made 
under sub -section ( 1), shall include — 
(a) 4[not more than four whole -time directors ] to be appointed by the Central Government after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank;  
(b) one director who is an official of the Central Government to be nomin ated by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that no such director shall be a director of an y other corresponding new bank.  
Explanation. —For the purpo ses of this clause, the expres sion “corresponding new bank ” shall include 
a corresponding new bank within the meaning of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Tran sfer of 
Under taking s) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970);  
5[(c) one director, possessing necessary expertise a nd experience in matters relating to regulation 
or supervision of commercial banks, to be nominated by the Central Government on the 
recommendation of the Reserve Bank; ] 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, “an officer of the Reserve Bank ” includes an officer of 
the Reserve Bank who is deputed by that Bank under section 54AA of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934 (2 of 1934) to any i nstitution referr ed to therein;  
6*   *   *   *  * 
 (e) one director, from among such of the employees of the corresponding new bank who are 
workmen under clause ( s) of sec tion 2 of the Industrial Disputes Ac t, 1947 (14 of 1947), to be 
nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be specified in a scheme made under 
this section;  
(f) one director, from amo ng the employees of the corres ponding new bank who are not workmen 
under clause ( s) of section  2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), to be nominated by the 
Central Government after cons ultation with the Reserve Bank;  
(g) one director who has been a Chartered Accountan t for not less than fifteen years to be 
nominated by the Central Go vernment after cons ultation with the Reserve Bank;  
(h) subject to the provisions of clause ( i) not more  than six direc tors to be n ominated by Central 
Government;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 36, for “corresponding new bank to any other banking institution” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 9 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
3. Subs. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 14, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 9, for “not more than two whole -time directors” (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f 16 -10-2006).  
6. Clause ( d) omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).   
9 
 1[(i) where the capital issued under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2B) of section 3 is — 
(I) not more than sixteen per cent. of the total paid -up capital, one director;  
(II) more than sixteen per cent. but not more than thirty -two per cent. of the total paid -up 
capital, two directors;  
(III) more than thirty -two per cent. of the total paid -up capital,  three directors,  
to be elected by the shareholders, other than the Central Government, from amongst themselves:  
Provided that on the assumption of charge after election of any such director under this 
clause, equal number of directors nominated under clause (h) shall retire in such manner as may 
be specified in the scheme:  
Provided further that in case the number of directors elected, on or before the commencement 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial Institu tions 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2006, in a corresponding new bank exceed the number of directors 
specified in sub -clause ( I) or sub -clause ( II) or sub -clause ( III), as the case may be, such excess 
number of directors elected before such commencement shall reti re in such manner as may be 
specified in the scheme and such directors shall not be entitled to claim any compensation for the 
premature retirement of their term of  office.]  
 (3A) The directors to be nominated under clause ( h) or to be elected under clause  (i) of                          
sub-section ( 3A) shall — 
(A) have special knowledge or practical experience in respect of one or more of t he following 
matters, namely: — 
(i) agricultural and rural econ omy,  
(ii) banking,  
(iii) co-operation,  
(iv) economics,   
(v) finance,  
(vi) law,  
(vii) small -scale industry,  
(viii) any other matter the special knowledge of, and practical experience in, which would, in 
the opinion of the Reserve Bank, be useful to the corresponding new bank;  
(B) represent  the interests of depositors; or  
(C) represent the interests of farmers, workers and artisans.  
2[(3AA) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 3A) and notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no person shall be eligible to 
be elected as director under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 3) unless he is a person having fit and proper status 
based upon track record, integrity and such other criteria as the Reserve Bank may notify from  time to 
time in this regard.  
(3AB) The Reserve bank may also specify in the notification issued under sub -section ( 3AA), the 
authority to determine the fit and proper status, the manner of such determination, the procedure to be 
followed for such determin ation and such other matters as may be considered necessary or incidental 
thereto. ] 
(3B) where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that any director of a corresponding new bank elected 
under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 3) does not fulfil the requirements of 3[sub-section ( 3A) and                        
sub-section ( 3AA)], it may, after giving to such director and the bank a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard, by order, remove such director and on such removal, the Board of Directors shall co -opt any other 
perso n fulfilling the requi rments of   3[sub-section ( 3A) and sub -section ( 3AA)] as a director in place of the 
person so removed till a director is duly elected by the shareholders of the corresponding new bank in the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 9, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 9,  ibid. (w.e.f. 16-10-2006 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “sub -section ( 3A)”  (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006),   
10 
 next annual general meeting and the person so co -opted shall be deemed to have been duly elected by the 
shareholders of the corres ponding new bank as a director.]  
(4) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, make a scheme to amend 
or vary any scheme made under su b-section ( 1). 
1[(5) On and from the date of coming into operation of a schem e made under this section with respect 
to any of the matters referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) or any matters incidental, conse quen tial 
and supplemental thereto, — 
(a) the scheme shall be binding on the corresponding new bank or corporations or banking 
institutions, and also on the members, if any, the depositors, and other creditors and  employees of 
each of them and on any other persons having any right or liability in relation to any of them 
including the trustees or other persons, managing or in any other mann er connected with, any 
provident fund or other fund maintained by any of them;  
(b) the properties and assets of the corresponding new bank or, as the case may be,  of the banking 
institution shall, by virtue of and to the extent provi ded in the scheme, stand trans ferred to, and vested 
in, and  the liabilities of the corres ponding new bank or, as the cas e may be, of the banking insti tution 
shall, by virtue of, and to the extent provided in the scheme, stand transferred to, and become the 
liabilities of, the corporation or corporations br ought into existence by recons titution of the banking 
institution or the corresponding new bank, as the c ase may be. ] 
2[Explanation I].—In this section, “banking institution ” means a banking company and includes 
the State Bank  of India or a subsidiary bank.  
3[Explanation  II.—For the purposes of this s ection, the exp ression “corresponding new bank ” 
shall include a corresponding new bank within the meaning of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970). ] 
4[(6)] Every scheme made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session o r the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the scheme or both Houses agree that the scheme should not be made, the 
scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that scheme.   
5[9A. Power of Reserve Bank to appoint additional director. —(1) If the Reserve Bank is of the 
opinion that i n the interest of banking policy or in the public interest or in the interests of the 
corresponding new bank or its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it may, from time to time, by order in 
writing, appoint, with effect from such date as may be specifie d in the order, one or more persons to hold 
office as additional directors of the corresponding new bank.  
(2) Any person appointed as an additional director in pursuance of this section — 
(a) shall hold office during the pleasure of the Reserve Bank and subject thereto for a period not 
exceeding three years or such further periods not exceeding three years at a time as the Reserve Bank 
may specify;  
(b) shall not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything 
done or omitted to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation 
thereto; and  
(c) shall not be required to hold qualification share s in the corresponding new bank;   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 72 (w.e.f 15 -2-1984). 
2. Explanation  numbered as Explanation I thereof by Act 66 of 1988, s. 36 (w.e.f 30 -12-1988).  
3. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 0-12-1988).  
4. Sub-section ( 5) re-numbered as sub -section (6) by A ct 1 of 1984, s. 72 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 10 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).   
11 
 (3) For the purpose of reckoning any proportion of the total  number of directors  of the 
corresponding new bank, any additional director appointed under this section  shall not be taken into 
account. ] 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
10. Closure of accounts and disposal of profits .—(1) Every corresponding new bank shall cause its 
books to be closed and balanced on the 31st day of December 1[or such other date in each year as the 
Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, specif y] and shall appoint, with the 
previo us approval of the Reserve Bank, auditors for the audit of its accounts.  
2[Provided that with a view to facilitating the transition from one period of accounting to another 
period of accounting under this sub -section, the Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary or expedient for the closing and 
balancing of, or for other matters relating to, the books in respect of the concerned years. ] 
(2) Every auditor of a corresponding new bank s hall be a person who is qualified to act as an auditor 
of a company under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and shall receive such 
remuneration as the Reserve Bank may fix in consultati on with the Central Government.  
(3) Every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance -sheet and profit and loss 
account and a list of all books kept by the corresponding new bank, and it shall be the duty of the auditor 
to examine the balance -sheet and profit and loss account with the acco unts and vouchers relating thereto, 
and in the performan ce of his duties, the auditor — 
(a) shall have, at all reasonable times, access to the books, accounts and other documents of the 
corresponding new bank;  
(b) may, at the expense of the corresponding ne w bank, employ accountants or other persons to 
assist him in i nvestigating such accounts; and  
(c) may, in relation to such accounts, examine the Custodian or any officer or other employee  of 
the corresponding new bank.  
(4) Every auditor of a corresponding new bank shall make a report to the Central Government upon 
the annual balance -sheet and accounts and in every such report shall state — 
(a) whether, in his opinion, the balance -sheet is a full and fair balance -sheet containing all the 
necessary particulars and is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the affairs of the 
corresponding new bank, and in case he had called fo r any explanation or information, whether it has 
been given and whether it is satisfactory;  
(b) whether or not the transactions of the corresponding new bank, which have come to his notice, 
have been within the powers of that bank;  
(c) whether or not the r eturns received from the offices and branches of the corresponding new 
bank have been found adequat e for the purpose of his audit;  
(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance of profit or loss for the peri od 
covered by such account; and  
(e) any other matter which he considers should be brought to the notice of the Central 
Government.  
3[Explanation I.—For the purposes of this Act, — 
(a) the balance -sheet shall not be treated as not disclosing a true and fair view of the affairs of 
the corresponding new bank, and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 37, for “of each year” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 37,  ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 73  (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).   
12 
 (b) the profit and loss account shall not be treated as not showing a true balance of profit or 
loss for the period covered by such account,  
merely by reason of the fact that the balance -sheet or, as the case may be, the profit and loss account, does 
not disclose any matters which are by the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) , 
read with the relevant provisions of this Act or any other Act , not required to be disclosed.  
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this Act, the accounts of the corresponding new bank shall 
not be deemed as having not been properly drawn up on the ground merely that they do no t disclose 
certain matters if — 
(i) those matters are such as the corresponding new bank is, by virtue of any p rovision 
contained in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) , read with the relevant provisions of 
this Act, or any othe r Act, not required to disclose ; and 
(ii) the provisions referred to in clause ( i) are specified in the balance -sheet and profit and 
loss account of the corres ponding new bank or in the auditor ’s report. ] 
(5) The report of the auditor shall be verified, signed and transmi tted to the Central Government.  
(6) The auditor shall also forward a copy of the audit report to the corresponding ne w bank and to the 
Reserve Bank.  
(7) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets, contributions to staff 
and superannuation funds and all other matters for which provision is necessary under any law, or which 
are usually provided for by banking companies, a cor responding new bank 1[may, out of its net profits, 
declare a dividend and retain th e surplus, if any ]. 
2[(7A) Every corresponding new bank shall furnish to the Central Government 3[and to the Reserve 
Bank] the annual balance -sheet, the profit and loss acco unt, and the auditor ’s report and a report by its 
Board of directors on the working and activities of the bank during the period covered by the accounts.]  
(8) The Central Government shall cause every auditor ’s report and report on the working and 
activities of each corresponding new bank to be laid 4[as soon as may be after they are received bef ore 
each House of Parliament  5***]. 
 2[(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Central Government may,  at any time, 
appoint such number  of auditors as it thinks fit to examine and report on the accounts of a corresponding 
new bank and the auditors so appointed shall have all the rights, privileges and authority in relation to the 
audit of the accounts of t he corresponding new bank which an a uditor appointed by the corres ponding 
new bank has under this section. ]  
6[10A. Annual general meeting .—(1) A general meeting (in this  Act referred to as an annual general 
meeting) of every corresponding new bank which has issued capital under clause ( c) of                   sub-
section ( 2B) of section 3 shall be held at the place of the head office of the bank in each year at such time 
as shall from time to time be speci fied by the Board of Directors:  
Provided that such  annual general meeting shall be held before the expiry of six weeks from the date 
on which the balance -sheet, together with the profit and loss account and auditor ’s report is, under                 
sub-section ( 7A) of section 10, f orwarded to the Central  Govern ment or to the Reserve B ank, whichever 
date is earlier.  
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting 7[shall be entitled to discuss , approve and 
adopt]  the balance -sheet and the profit and loss account of the corresponding new bank made  up to the 
previous 31st day of March, the report of the Board of Directors on the working and activities of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 15, for “shall transfer the balance of profits to the Central Government” (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
2. Ins. by 1 of 1984, s. 73 (w.e.f 15 -2-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 15 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 73, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
5. The words “, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or m ore 
successive sessions” omitted by  Act 81 of 1985, s. 15 (w.e.f. 0 1-05-1986).  
6. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 16 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1994).  
7. Subs. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 11, for “shall be entitled to discuss” (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).   
13 
 corresponding new bank for the period covered by the accounts and the auditor's report on the balance -
sheet and accounts. ] 
1[(3) Nothing  contained in this section shall apply during the period for which the Board of Directors 
of a corresponding new bank had been superseded under sub -section ( 1) of section 18A:  
Provided that the Administrator may, if he considers it appropriate in the inter est of the corresponding 
new bank whose Board of Directors had been superseded, call annual general meeting in accordance with 
the provisions of this section.]  
2[10B. Transfer of unpaid or unclaimed divide nd to Unpaid Dividend Account. —(1) Where, after 
the commencement of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial 
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 2006  (45 of 2006) , a dividend has been declared by a corresponding 
new bank but has not been paid or claimed within thirty da ys from the date of declaration, to, or by, any 
shareholder entitled to the payment of the dividend, the corresponding new bank shall, within seven days 
from the date of the expiry of such period of thirty days, transfer the total amount of dividend which 
remains unpaid or unclaimed within the said period of thirty days, to a special account to be called 
“Unpaid Dividend Account of ... (the name of the corresponding new bank) . 
Explanation .—In this sub -section, the expression “dividend which remains unpaid ” means any 
dividend the warrant in respect thereof has not been encashed or which has otherwise not been paid or 
claimed.  
(2) Where the whole or any part of any dividend, declared by a corresponding new bank before the 
commencement of the Banking Companies  (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) and Financial 
Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 2006  (45 of 2006) , remains unpaid at such commencement, the 
corresponding new bank shall, within a period of six months from such commencement, transfer such 
unpai d amount to the account referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
        (3) Any money transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account of a corresponding new bank in 
pursuance of this section which remains Unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date of  
such transfer, shall be transferred by the corresponding new bank to the Investor Education and Protection 
Fund established under sub -section ( 1) of section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956).  
        (4) The money transferred under sub -section ( 3) to the Investor Education and Protection Fund shall 
be utilised for the purposes and in the manner specified in section 205C of the Companies Act,1956                   
(1 of 1956). ] 
11. Corresponding new bank deemed to be an Indian company .—For the purposes of the           
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), every corresponding new bank shall be deemed to be an Indian 
company and a company in which the publi c are substantially interested.  
12. Vacat ion of office of Chairman, etc .—(1) Every person  holding office, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, as Chairman of an existing bank shall, if he becomes Custodian of the 
corresponding new bank, be deemed, on such commencement, to have vacated office as such Chairman.  
(2) Save as otherwise  provided in sub -section ( 1), every officer or other employee of an existing bank 
shall become, on the commencement of this Act, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the 
corresponding new bank and shall hold his office or service in that ba nk on the same terms and conditions 
and with the same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if 
the undertaking of the existing bank had not been transferred to and vested in the corresponding new bank 
and contin ue to do so unless and until his employment in the corresponding new bank is terminated or 
until his remuneration, terms or conditions are duly altered  by the corresponding new bank.  
(3) For the persons who immediately before the commencement of this Act w ere the trustees for any 
pension, provident, gratuity or other like fund constituted for the officers or other employees of an 
existing bank, there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the Central Government may, by 
general or special order, sp ecify. 
                                                           
1. Ins. b y Act 45 of 2006, s. 11 (w.e.f. 16-10-2006 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f . 16-10-2006).   
14 
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee from an 
existing bank to a corresponding new ban k shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any 
compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
1[12A. Bonus .—(1) No officer or other empl oyee [other than an employee within the meaning of 
clause ( 13) of section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965)]  of a corresponding new bank 
shall be  entitled to be paid any bonus.  
(2) No employee of a corresponding new bank, being an employee w ithin the meaning of clause ( 13) 
of section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965), shall be entitled to be paid any bonus except 
in accordance with the provisions of that Act.  
(3) The provisions of this sec tion shall have effect notwith standing  any judgment, decree or order of 
any court, tribunal or other authority and notwithstanding anythin g contained in any other provi sion of 
this Act or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or any other law for the time being in force 
or any pra ctice, usage or custom or any contract, agreement, settlement, award or other instrument. ]  
13. Obligati ons as to fidelity and secrecy. —(1) Every corresponding new bank shall observe, except 
as otherwise required by law, the practices and usages customary among bankers, and, in particular, it 
shall not divulge any information relating to or to the affairs of its constituents except in circumstances in 
which it is, in accordance with law or practices and usages customary among bankers, necessary or 
appropria te for the corresponding new ba nk to divulge such information.  
(2) Every director, member of a local board or a committee, or auditor, adviser, officer or other 
employee of a corresponding new bank shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration  of 
fidelity and secrecy in the form  set out in the Third Schedule.  
(3) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank shall, as soon as possible, make a declaration of 
fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Thi rd Schedule.  
2[(4) Nothing contained in  this section shall apply to the credit  information disclosed  under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005  (30 of 2005) .] 
14. Custodian to be public servant .—Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank shall be 
deemed to be a public servan t for the purposes of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
15. Certain defects not to invalidate acts or proceedings. —(1) All acts done by the Custodian, 
acting in good faith, shall, notwithstanding any defect in his appointment  or in the procedure, be valid.  
(2) No act or proceeding of any Board of Directors or a local board or committee of a corresponding 
new bank shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the 
constitution of, such bo ard or  committee, as the case may be.  
(3) All acts done by a person acting in good faith as a director or member of a local board or 
committee of a corresponding new bank shall be valid, notwithstanding that it may afterwards be 
discovered that his appoint ment was invalid by reason of any defect or disqualification or had terminated 
by virtue of any provision contained in any l aw for the time being in force:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to give validity to any act by a director or 
member of a local board or committee of a corresponding new bank after his appointment has been shown 
to the corresponding new bank to be invalid or to have terminated.  
16. Indemnity. —(1) Every Custodian of a corresponding new bank and every officer of the  Central 
Government or of the Reserve Bank and every officer or other employee of a corresponding new bank, 
shall be indemnified by such bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in or in relation to the 
discharge of his duties except such as ha ve been caused by his own wilful  act or default.  
(2) A director or member of a local board or committee of a corresponding new bank shall not be 
responsible for any loss or expense caused to such bank by the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 64 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 11 -9-1984).  
2. Ins. by  Act 30 of 2 005, s.  34 and Part IX of the  Schedule (w.e.f. 14-12-2006).   
15 
 or title to, any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the corresponding new bank, or by the 
insolvency or wrongful act of any customer or debtor, or by anything done in or in relation to the 
execution of the duties of his office, unless such lo ss, expense, insufficiency or deficiency was due to any 
wilful act or default on the part of such director or member.  
1[16A. Arrangement with corresponding new bank on appointment of directors to                  
prevail .—(1) Where any arrangement entered  into by a corresponding new bank with a company 
provides for the appointment by the corresponding new bank of one or more directors of such company, 
such provision and any appointm ent of directors made in pursu ance thereof shall be valid and effective 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or in any 
other law for the time being in force or in th e memorandum, articles of asso ciation or any other 
instrument  relating to the company, and any provision regarding share qualification, age limit, number of 
direc torships, removal from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any such law or 
instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appo inted by the corresponding new bank in 
pursuance o f the arrangement as aforesaid.  
(2) Any director  appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the corresponding new bank and may be removed or 
substituted by any pers on by order in w riting of the corresponding new bank;  
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anthing in relation 
thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of direc tors liable to such retirement. ] 
17. Construction of references to existing banks. —Any reference to any existing bank in any law, 
other than this  Act, or in any contract or other instrument shall, in so far as it relates to the undertaking 
which has been transferred by section 4, be construed as a reference to the corresponding new bank.  
18. Dissolution .—No provision of law relating to winding up of corporations shall apply to a 
corresponding new bank and no corresponding new bank shall be placed in liquidation save by order of 
the Central Government and i n such manner as it may direct.  
2[18A. Supersession of Board in certain cases. —(1) Where the C entral Government, on the 
recommendation of the Reserve Bank, is satisfied that in the public interest or for preventing the affairs of 
any corresponding new bank being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors or 
the correspondin g new bank or for securing the proper management of any corresponding new bank, it is 
necessary so to do, the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, 
supersede the Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank for a per iod not exceeding six months 
as may be specified in the order:  
Provided that the period of supersession of the Board of Directors may be extended from time to time, so, 
however, that the total period shall not exceed twelve months.  
        (2) The Central Government may, on supersession of the Board of Directors of the corresponding 
new bank under sub -section ( 1), appoint, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, for such period as it may 
determine, an Administrator (not being an officer of the Central Govern ment or a State Government) who 
has experience in law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy.  
        (3) The Central Government may issue such directions to the Administrator as it may deem 
appropriate and the Administrator shall be bound to follow s uch directions.  
        (4) Upon making the order of supersession of the Board of Directors of the corresponding new bank, 
notwithstanding a nything contained in this Act, — 
(a) the chairman, managing director and other directors shall, as from the date of s upersession, 
vacate their offices as such;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 74 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 2006, s. 13 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).   
16 
 (b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force, be exercised and discharged by or on behalf of the Board of 
Directors of suc h corresponding new bank, or by a resolution passed in general meeting of such 
corresponding new bank, shall, until the Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank is 
reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by the Administrator appointed by the Ce ntral Government 
under sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that the power exercised by the Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding that such 
power is exercisable by a resolution passed in the general meeting of the corresponding new bank.  
        (5) The Centra l Government may constitute, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, a committee 
of three or more persons who have experience in law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy to 
assist the Administrator in the discharge of his duties.  
        (6) The comm ittee shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure as 
may be specified by the Central Government.  
        (7) The salary and allowances payable to the Administrator and the members of the committee 
constituted under sub -section ( 5) by the Central Government shall be such as may be specified by the 
Central Government and be payable by the concerned corresponding new bank.  
        (8) On and before the expiration of two months before expiry of the period of supersession of the 
Board  of Directors as specified in the order issued under sub -section ( 1), the Administrator of the 
corresponding new bank, shall call the general meeting of the corresponding new bank to elect new 
directors and reconstitute its Board of Directors.  
        (9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or in any contract, the memorandum or 
articles of association, no person shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or termination of 
his office.  
(10) The Administrator appointed under sub-section ( 2) shall vacate office immediately after the 
Board of Directors of the corresponding new bank has been reconstituted .] 
19. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank may, 
after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, 1[by 
notification in the Official Gazette ], make regulation s, not inconsistent with  the provisions of this Act or 
any scheme made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is expedient for the purpose 
of giving effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the re gulations may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the powers, functions and duties of local boards and restrictions, conditions or limitations, if 
any, subject to which they may be exercised or performed, the formation and constit ution of local 
committees and committees of local boards (including the number of members of any such 
committee), the powers, functions and duties of such committees, the holding of meetings of local 
committees and committees of local boards and t he conduc t of business thereat;  
(b) the manner in which the business of the local boards shall be transacted and the proce dure in 
connection therewith;  
2[(ba) the nature of shares of the corresponding new bank, the manner in which and the 
conditions subject to whi ch shares may be held and transfer red and generally all matters re lating to 
the rights and duties of Shareholders;  
(bb) the maintenance of register, and the particulars to be entered in the register in addi tion to 
those specified in sub -section ( 2F) of section 3, the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of 
register on comput er floppies or diskettes, inspe ction and closure of the register and all oth er matters 
connected therewith;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 38 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1994, s. 17 (we.f. 15 -7-1994).   
17 
 (bc) the manner in which general meetings shall be convened, the pr ocedure to be followed 
thereat and the manner in which voting rights may be exercised;  
(bd) the holding of meeting s of shareholders and the business to be transacted thereat;  
(be) the manner in which notices may be served on the half of the corresponding new bank upon 
shareholders or other persons;  
(bf) the manner in which the directors nominated under clause ( h) of sub -section  (3) of section 9 
shall retire;]  
(c) the delegation of powers and functions of the Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank 
to the general manager, director, officer or other employee of that bank;  
(d) the conditions or limitations subject to which the corresponding new bank may appoint 
advisers, officers or other employees and fix their remuneration and other t erms and conditi ons of 
service;  
(e) the duties and conduct of advisers, officers or other employees  of the corresponding new 
bank;  
(f) the establishment and maintenance of superannuation, pension, provident or other funds for 
the benefit of officers or other employees of the correspo nding new bank or of the depende nts of such 
officers or other employees and the granting of superannuation allowances, annuities and pens ions 
payable out of such funds;  
(g) the conduct and defence of legal proceedings by or against the correspo nding new bank and 
the manner of signing pleadings;  
(h) the provision of a seal for the corresponding new bank and th e manner and effect of its use;  
(i) the form and manner in which contracts binding on the corresponding new bank may be 
executed;  
(j) the conditions and the requirements subject to which loans or advances may be made or bills 
may be discounted or purchased by the corresponding new bank;  
(k) the persons or authorities who shall administer any pension, provident or other fund 
constituted for the benefit of officers or other employees of the corresp onding new bank or their 
depende nts;  
(l) the preparation and submission of statements of programmes of activities and financial 
statements of the corresponding new bank and the period for which and the time within which such 
statements and estimates are to be prepared and submitted; and  
(m) generally for the efficient conduct of the affairs  of the corresponding new bank.  
(3) Until any regulation is made under sub -section ( 1), the articles of association of the existing bank 
and every regulation, rule, bye -law or order made by the existing bank in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the regulations made under sub -section ( 1) and shall 
have effect accordin gly and any reference therein to any authority of the existing bank shall be deemed to 
be a reference to the corresponding authority of the corresponding new bank and until any such 
corresponding authority is constituted under this Act shall be deemed to r efer to the Custodian.  
1[(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made under this Act by the Board of 
directors of a corresponding new bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government 
shall cause a copy of the same to be l aid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more succcessive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the s uccessive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation 
should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case  may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 75  (w.e.f. 15-2-1984 ).  
18 
 20. [Amendment of certain enactment .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1988                       
(19 of 1988), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  
21. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Ordinance, 1980 ( 3 of 1980), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken, including any order made, 
notification issued or direction given, under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken, 
made, issued or given, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of  this Act.  
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 2, 3 and 4)  
 
Existing bank   Corresponding New Bank  
Column 1   Column 2  
The Andhra Bank Limited  … Andhra bank  
Corporation Bank Limited  … Corporation Bank  
The New Bank of India Limited  … New Bank of India.  
The Oriental Bank of Commerce 
Limited  … Oriental Bank of Commerce  
The Punjab and Sind Bank Limited  … Punjab and Sind Bank  
Vijaya Bank Limited  … Vijaya Bank  
__________  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 6)  
 
 
  Name of existing bank   Amount   
  (in lakhs of rupees)  
The Andhra Bank Limited  ..... 610 
Corporation Bank Limited  ..... 180 
The New Bank of India Limited  ..... 510 
The Oriental Bank of Commerce 
Limited  ..... 100 
The Punjab and Sind Bank Limited  ..... 210 
Vijaya Bank Limited  ..... 240  
19 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 13]  
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
 I....., do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability 
execute and perform the duties required of me as Custodian, Director, member of Local Board, 
member of Local Committee, auditor, adviser, officer or other employee (as the case may be) of 
the*.....and which properly relate to the office or position in the said *.....held by me.  
 I. further declare that I will not co mmunicate or allow to be communicated to any person not 
legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the *.....or to the affairs of any 
person having any dealing with the *.....; nor will I allow any such person to inspect or have 
access to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession of the *.....and relating to the 
business of the *.....or to the business of any per son having any dealing with the *......................  
*Name of corresponding new bank to be filled in.  
 
--------------------------The Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE BENGAL CHEMICAL AND PHARMACEUTICAL WORKS LIMITED  
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1980  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, Central Government of the undertakings of the Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Central Government or existing, or new, Government company, not to be liable for certain 
prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in an 
existing Government company.  
7. Transfer of the undertakings of the Company from an existing Government company to a new 
Government com pany.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount . 
9. Payment of further amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
12. Accounts to be rendered by the Company or any other person.  
13. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
14. Employment of certain employees to continue . 
15. Provident fund and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
16. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
17. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner.  2 
 SECTIONS  
18. Certain powers of Central Government or existing, or new, Government company.  
19. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
20. Priority of claims.  
21. Examination of claims.  
22. Admission or rejection of claims.  
23. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants.  
24. Disbursement of amounts to the company and possession o f certain machinery, equipment, 
etc. 
25. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Act to have overriding effect.  
27. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Gover nment or existing, or 
new, Government company.  
28. Penalties.  
29. Offences by companies.  
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
31. Delegation of powers.  
32. Power to make rules.  
33. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  3 
 THE BENGAL CHEMICAL AND PHARMACEUTICAL WORKS LIMITED  
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 58 OF 1980  
[12th December, 1980 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer, in the public interest, of the undertakings of 
the Beng al Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Limited, and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Limited were engaged in the production 
and distribution of articles specified in the First Schedul e to the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , namely, chemicals (other than fertilizers), drugs, pharmaceuticals and other 
products, which are essential to the needs of the general public;  
AND WHEREAS  the Central Government, bein g of opinion, after an investigation into the affairs of the 
Company, that the affairs of the C ompany have been managed in a manner highly detrimental to the 
public interest, had authorised, under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation)       
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , a body of persons to take ove r the management of the Company;  
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of reconstructing and rehabilitating the undertakings ow ned by the 
Company so as to sub serve the interest s of the general public by the augmentation of production and 
distribution of different varieties of chemicals (other than fertilizers), drugs, pharmaceutical s and other 
products which are essential to the needs of the general public and to secure the conti nued supply thereof, 
it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Company;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called th e Bengal Chemical  and 
Pharmaceutical Works Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 16;  
(c) “Company ” means the Bengal Chemical and Pharmace utical Works Limited, being a 
company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office             
at 6, Ganesh Chunder Avenue, Calcutta -700013;  
(d) “existing Government company ” means a Government company which is carryi ng on 
business on the appointed day;  
(e) “new Government company ” means a Government company formed and registered on or after 
the appointed day;  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any of 
the provisions of this Act, by notification, specify, and different dates may be specified for different 
provision s of this Act;  
                                                           
1. 15th December, 1980, vide notification No. S.O. 962(E) , dated 12th December, 1980 see Gazette of India, Extraordinary ,   Part 
II, sec. 3(ii), p.1882 . 4 
 (i) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the Companies                
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, Central Government of the undertakings of the Company .—On 
the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central 
Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including lands, buildings, offices, factories, workshops, stores, instruments, plants, machinery and 
equipment, installations, laboratories, office furniture, stationary and equi pment, vehicles, patents, trade  
marks, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other rights and 
interests in, or arising out of , such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the 
ownership, possession, power or control of the Company, whether within or outsi de India, and all books 
of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties and assets as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under    
section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed a nd discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, 
charge, lien and all other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of 
any court or other authority restricting the use of such properties or assets in any manner or ap pointing 
any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such properties or assets shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested, under this Act , in the Central Government and 
every person holding any char ge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an  intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and inter ests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part , out of the amount specified in section 8, and also out of the 
amounts determined under section 9, but, no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any  property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(5) Any licence  or other instrument granted to the Company in relation to any undertaking which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be in force on an d after such day in accordance 
with its tenor in relation to and for the purposes of such undertakings, and, on and, from the date of 
vesting of such undertaking, under section 6, in an existing Government company, or under section 7, in a 
new Government c ompany, the existing, or new , Government company, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had 
been granted to such existing, or new , Government company and s uch existi ng, or new, Government 
company shall hold it for the remainder  of the period for which the Company would have held it under 
the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding, of whatever nature , in relation to 
any proper ty or asset which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 , instituted or preferred 
by or against the Company is pendi ng, the same shall not abate, be  discontinued or be , in any way , 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the under takings of the Company or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced 
by or against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed under 
section 6 to ve st in an existing Government company, or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of 
section 7 to a new Government company, by or against such Government company.  5 
 5. Central Government or existing, or new, Government company, not to be liable for ce rtain 
prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the 1st day of 
April, 1979, shall be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and not against the 
Central Government, or , where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in 
an existing Government company, or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of section 7, to a new 
Government company, against such Government company.  
(2) Any liability  incurred by, or arising against, the Company on or after the 1st day of April, 1979, 
including the liability to repay loans advanced to the Company by the Central Government on or after that 
day, together with the interest due t hereon, shall be the liabil ity,— 
(a) Where the undertakings of the Company are directed , under section 6 , to vest in an existing 
Government company, of that existing Government company; or  
(b) where the undertakings of the Company become transferred by virtue of the provisions of 
section 7, to a new Government company, of that new Government company,  
and shall be discharged by such Government company as and when the discharge of such liability 
becomes due.  
(3) For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherw ise expressly provided in this Act, no liability of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings in respect of any period prior to the 1s t day of April, 1979, shall be  enforceable against 
the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are  directed, under section 6 , to 
vest in an existing Government company, or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of   
section 7 , to a new Government company, against such Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or o ther authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed on or after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute, which arose before the 1st day of April, 1979, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government, or, where t he undertakings of the Company are directed , under section 6, to vest in an 
existing Government company, or become transferred, by virtue of the provisions of section 7 , to a 
new Government company,  against such Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the 1st day of April, 1979, for the contravention 
of any provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section  6, to vest in an 
existing Government company, or become transferred, by virtue of the provisions of section 7, to a 
new Government company, against such Government company.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Compan y in an 
existing Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, and 
subject to the provisions of section 7, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that an existing 
Government company is willing to comply, or has com plied, with such terms and conditions as that 
Government may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the Company, and 
the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Centr al 
Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in that 
existing Government company either on the date of publication of the notification or on such earlier or 
later date (not being a date earlier than th e appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings vest, under      
sub-section ( 1), in an existing Government company, that Government company shall, on and from  the 
date of such vesting be deemed to have become , and until the transfer of the undertakings by virtue of the 
provisions of section 7 to a new Government company, be deemed to be, the owner in relation to such 
undertakings and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings 
shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become, and until the date of such transfer 
be deemed to be, the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that existing Government com pany.  6 
 7. Transfer of the undertakings of the Compa ny from an existing Government c ompany to a 
new Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, where the 
undertakings of the Company have been directed, under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, to vest in an existing  
Government company, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a new Government company is 
willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to 
impose, declar e, by notification, that the undertakings of the Company be transferred to that new 
Government company, and on the issue of such declaration, the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings which had been directed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 to vest in an 
existing Government company, shall, instead of continuing to vest in that existing Government company, 
vest in that new Government company with effect from the date on which such declaration is made.  
(2) Where the right,  title and interest of the existing Government company in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company vest under sub -section ( 1) in a new Government company, that new 
Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner 
in relation to such undertakings and all the rights and liabilities of the existing Government company in 
relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the 
rights and liabilities, respectively , of that new Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government , under     
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees five hundred and two lakhs and four thousand.  
9. Payment of further amount .—(1) For the dep rivation of the Company of the management of its 
undertakings, there shall be given to the Company by the Central Government an amount calculated at the 
rate of two thousand rupees per month for the period commencing on the date on which the management 
of the undertakings of the Company was taken over by the person s authorised by the Central Government 
under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , and ending on 
the appointed day.  
(2) The amount specified in section  8, and the amount determined under sub -section ( 1), shall carry 
simple intere st at the rate of four per cent.  per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day 
and ending on the date on which payment of such amounts is made by the Central Governmen t to the 
Commissioner.  
(3) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 8.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is h ereby declared that the liabilities of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall be discharged from the 
amount referred to in section 8, and also from the amounts determined under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), in 
accordance with the rights and interest s of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—(1) The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the 
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Go vernment under section 3,  
shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been given by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of     
section 6, vest, on and from the date specified in such direction, in the existing Government company 
specified therein; or  
(b) where a declaration has been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, vest, on a nd from the 
date of such declaration, in the new Government company specified therein; or  7 
 (c) where no direction referred to in clause ( a) or declaration under clause ( b) has been given or 
made, vest, on and from the appointed day, in one or more Custodian s appointed by the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 2), 
and thereupon the existing, or new, Government company so specified or the Custodian or Custodians so 
appointed, as the case may be, shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion of all other p ersons, all such 
powers and do all such things as the Company is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its 
undertakings.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals or a Government company as the 
Custodian or Custodians of the und ertakings of the Company in relation to which no direction has been 
made by it under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 or no declaration has been made by it under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 7.  
(3) The Custodian or Custodians so appointed shall receive from the funds of the undertakings of the 
Company such remuneration as the Central Government may fix and hold office during the pleasure of 
the Central Government.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, et c.—(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in an existing, or 
a new, Government company or on the appointment of a Custodian or Custodians, all persons in charge of 
the management of the undertakings of the Company immediate ly before such vesting or appointment 
shall be bound to deliver to such Government company, or Custodia n or Custodians , as the case be, all 
assets, books of account, registers and other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of 
such Compan y. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the existing, or new, Government company or the Custodian or Custodians as to the powers 
and duties of such Government company, or  Custodia n or Custodians and such Government company, or 
Custodian or Custodians may also, if it is considered necessary so to do , apply to the Central Government 
at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the undertakings of the 
Compa ny shall be conducted or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such management.  
(3) Any person, who on the appointed day has in his possession or under his control any books, 
documents or other papers relating to the undertakings of the Company which have vested in the Central 
Government or in any existing , or new, Government company and which belong to the Company, or 
would have so belonged if the undertakings of the Company had not vested in the Central Government or 
the existing, or ne w, Government company, shall be liable to account for the said books, documents or 
other papers to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may 
be, and shall deliver them up to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company or 
to such person or body of persons as the Central Government or such Government company may specify 
in this behalf.  
(4) The Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company may take, or cause to be 
taken, all nece ssary steps for securing possession of all undertakings which have vested in the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company under this Act.  
(5) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all its properties and assets, as on the appointed day, 
pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, and, for this 
purpose, the Central Government or the exis ting, or new, Government company shall afford to the 
Company all reasonable facilities.  
12. Accounts to be rendered by the Company or any other person .—(1) Where , in pursuance of 
any decree, order or injun ction of any court or otherwise — 
(a) the authorised  persons were, after the date on which the management of the undertakings of 
the Company was taken over by them under section 18A of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951)  and before the appointed day; or  8 
 (b) the Central Governm ent or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, is, 
on or after the appointed day,  
prevented from taking over the management of any part of the undertakings of the Company,  the 
Company, or any other person in possession, custody or co ntrol of such part, shall , in relation to the 
period commencing on the date of such taking over and ending on the date on which such part was or is 
handed over to the authorised persons or, as the case may be, the Central Government or the existing , or 
new, Government company, render, within a period of sixty days from the appointed day or where such 
part was so handed over after the appointed day, within a period of sixty days from the date of such 
handing ov er, accounts with regard to the — 
(i) assets  and stores of the undertakings or any part thereof, acquired, utilised or sold during the 
said period; and  
(ii) income derived by the Company or any other person from the undertakings or any part thereof 
during the said period,  
to the Central Government o r the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) If, on examination of the accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1) any income or other monies is or 
are found to have been derived by the Company or any other person from such undertaking s or any part 
thereof during the period referred to in that sub -section, or any other monies are found to be payable to 
the Company, such income or other monies shall be recoverable by the Central Government or the 
existing , or new , Government company from t he Company or such other person, as the case may be, and 
from the amount payable under this Act to the Company and the debt due to the Central Government or 
the existing, or new, Government  company, as the case may be, on this account shall rank as an unse cured 
debt.  
(3) If no account is rendered by the Company or such other person in respect of the undertakings or 
any part thereof within the period referred to in sub -section ( 1) or if the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as t he case may be, has any reason to believe that the account 
rendered by the Company or such other person is incorrect or false in any material particular, the Central 
Government or t he existing, or new, Government  company, as the case may be, may refer the matter to 
the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner shall determine the income derived by the Company 
or such other person from such undertakings or any part thereof during the period referred to in           
sub-section ( 1) and take steps to recover  the said income or other monies from the Company or such other 
person and from the amount payable to the Company under this Act, as if the debt due to the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, on this account were an 
unsecured debt.  
(4) No mortgage, charge, lien or other incumbrance in relation to the undertakings of the Company or 
any part thereof shall be binding on the Central Government or the existing, or new , Government 
company, as the case may be, if suc h mortgage, charge, lien or other incumbrance was created, at any 
time during the period in which the authorised persons were and the Central Government or the existing, 
or new, Government company, as the case may be, is  prevented , by any decree, order or injunction of any 
court or otherwise, from taking over the management of such undertakings or any part thereof.  
13. Accounts and audit .—The Custodian or Custodians of the undertakings of the Company shall 
maintain an account of the undertakings of the Comp any in such form and manner and under such 
conditions as may be prescribed and the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , shall apply 
to the audit of the account so maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts of a company.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
14. Employment of certain employees to continue .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately 
before the appointed day, employed in any of the undertakin gs of the Company shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government; and  
  9 
 (b) where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, to 
vest in an existing Government company, or are transferred by virtue of the provisions of section 7, to 
a new Government company, an employee of such Government company on and from the date of 
such vesting or transfer,  
and shall hold officer or service under the Central Government or the existing, or new , Government 
company, as the case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters 
as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting or transfer and shall continue to 
do so unless and until his employment under the Central Government or  the existing, or new, Government 
company, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service 
are duly altered by the Central Government or the existing , or new , Government company, as the case 
may be.  
(2) Notw ithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  ( 14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in the undertakings of the Company to the Central Gover nment or the existing, or new, Government 
company, as the case may be, shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under 
this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any 
court, tribunal or other authority.  
15. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in the 
undertakings of the Company, the moni es relatable to the employees, whose services have become 
transferred by or under this Act to the Central Government or the existing , or new, Government company, 
as the case may be, shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such 
provident, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Cent ral Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or the 
existing , or new, Government company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
16. Appointment of C ommissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Go vernment shall, for the 
purpose  of disbursing the amounts payable under sections 8 and 9, by notification, appoint a 
Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may th ink fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by wa y of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
17. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government shall, 
within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amounts payable to the Company under secti on 9.  
  10 
 (2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit acco unt and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in        
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the said account.  
18. Certain powers of Central Government or existing, or new, Gover nment c ompany .—(1) The 
Central Government or the existing , or new, Government company , as the case may be, shall be entitled 
to receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to t he Company, 
in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Government company, as the case may be,  and realised after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the 
realisation pertains to a period prior t o the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the existing , or new, Government company, as the case may be, may 
make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for 
discharging any liability of the Compa ny, in relation to any period prio r to the 1st day of April, 1979;  and 
every such claim shall have priority in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the 
matter in relation to which such liability has been discharged by the Central Go vernment or the existing, 
or new, Government company, as the case may be.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act , the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the 1st day of April, 1979, which have not been discharged on or bef ore the specified date, shall 
be the liabilities of the Company.  
19. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:  
Provided  that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days , he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
20. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with the following principles: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Categor y III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly;  
(c) the question of d ischarging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
21. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims mad e under section 19, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in  the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims , the Commissioner is of the opinion th at the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine any claim in respect of such lower category.  
22. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining t he claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before which every claimant 
shall file the proof of his claims, failing which he shall be excluded from the benefit of the disbursements 
made by the  Commissioner.  
  11 
 (2) Not less than fourteen days’  notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in such 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language and in such issue of daily newspaper in such 
regional language as the Commissioner ma y consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the 
claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the 
advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specifi ed by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion , be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have th e same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , whil e trying a suit , in respect o f the following 
matters, namely :— 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Pe nal Code  (45 of 1860)  and the Commis sioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil c ourt for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner ma y prefer an appeal 
against  the decision to the principal civil c ourt of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is s ituated : 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is app ointed to be the Commissioner, 
the appeal shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of that High Court.  
23. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim  under this 
Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons 
to whom such amount is due, and, on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of such claim 
shall stand discharged.  
24. Disburse ment of amounts to the c ompany and possession of certain machinery, equipment, 
etc.—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertakings of the Company, there is a 
balance left after meeting the liabilities in accordance with the prioritie s specified in the Schedule, the 
Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where any machinery, equipment or other property has vested under this Act in the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, but such machinery, 
equipment or other property does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, to continue to possess 
such machinery, equipment and other pr operty on the same terms and conditions under which they were 
possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day.  
25. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner to the general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money 12 
 so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the persons entitled to such payment and 
shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made and the order, if any, for payment of the claim 
being treated as an order for the refund of the revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in  force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or  in any decree or order of any c ourt, tribunal or 
other authority.  
27. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or existing, or 
new, Go vernment company .—Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its 
undertakings for any service, sale or supply, and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on 
and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from that day, cea se to have effect unless such 
contract is, before the expiry of the said period , ratified in writing by the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the existing, or new, Government company, and in ratifying such contract, the Central 
Government or, as t he case may be, the existing, or new, Government company may make such 
alterations or modifications therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or , as the case may be, the existing, or new, Government 
company shall not omit to ratify a contract and shall not make any alt eration or modification therein — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government or, as the case may be , such Government 
company; and  
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for its refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
28. Penalties .—A person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the existing, or 
new, Government company , as the case may be, or any person or body of persons authorised by that 
Government or existing, or new, Government company; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Company or willfully with holds or fails to furnish to the Central Government , or, as t he case may 
be, the existing, or  new, Government company or any person or body of persons authorised by that 
Government or Government company, any document relating to such undertakings which may  be in 
his possession, custody or control or fails to deliver to the Central Government or, as the case may be, 
the existing, or new, Government company or any person or body of persons authorised by that 
Government or existing, or new, Government company,  any assets, books of account, registers or 
other documents in his possession, custody or control relating to the undertakings of the Company; or  
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the undertakings of the 
Company or prefers any  claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be 
false or grossly inaccurate.  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
29. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as  well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  13 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowl edge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a c ompany and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of , any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other of ficer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
30. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or th e Custodian of the 
undertakings of the Company or the existing, or new, Government company or any officer or other person 
authorised by that Government or existing, or new, Government company for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
31. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the power conferred by this section or section 32 
or section 33, may also be exerci sed by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Centra l Government.  
32. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification , make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for a ll or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the  form and the manner in which, and the conditions under which, the Custodian or 
Custodians shall maintain accounts as required by section 13;  
(c) the manner in which monies in any provident fund or other fund referred to in section 15 shall 
be dealt with;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid , as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period  of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the ex piry of the 
session immediately  following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in th e rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the va lidity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
33. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may , by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove th e 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
 14 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 20, 21, 22 and 24)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF THE LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY  
Part A.—Post-take-over and pre -take-over periods  
Category I — 
Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company for the post -take-over period as 
well as arrears in relation to wages, salaries, provident fund and other dues of the employees for the 
pre-take-over period.  
 Part B.—Post-take-over period  
Category I I— 
(a) Loans advanced by the Central Government and interest due thereon.  
(b) Loans , advanced by banks and financial institutions, guaranteed by the Central 
Government and interest due thereon.  
Category I II— 
(a) Credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any other dues.  
Part C.—Pre-take-over period  
Category I V— 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central Government or a State 
Government.  
(b) Sales  tax, rates and taxes, contributi ons to be made to the Employees’  State Insurance 
Fund and additional dearness allowance payable to employees.  
Category V — 
Principal amount of the secured loans advanced by banks and financial institutions and interest 
due thereon up to and including December 15, 1977, that is to say, the date on which the notified 
order under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , was 
published in the Official Gazette.  
Category VI — 
Revenue, taxes,  cesses, rates or any other dues payable to a local authority or State Electricity 
Board.  
Category VII — 
Amounts due by way of interest on secured loans r eferred to in c ategory V after December       
15, 1977.  
Category VIII— 
(a) Any other credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any other dues.  
 
--------------------------The Bird and Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings and Other Properties) Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE BIRD AND COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS AND OTHER PROPERTIES) ACT, 1980  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  COMPANY AND OF  
SHARES HELD BY THE  COMPANY IN THE SPECIFIED COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertaking s of the Company . 
4. Transfer and vesting of shares held by the Company in the specified companies . 
5. General effect of vesting . 
6. Central Govern ment or the Government company not to liable for certain prior liabilities . 
7. Power of Central Government to direct  vesting of the undertakings of the Company in a 
Government company . 
 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount s to the Company and specified companies . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company . 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of the Company to deliver all  
assets,  etc. 
11. Continuance of employees . 
12. Provident fund and other funds . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF  PAYMENTS  
13. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments . 
14. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner . 
15. Certain powers of Central Government or Government company . 
16. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
17. Priority of claims . 
18. Examination of claims . 2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Admission or rejection of claims . 
20. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants . 
21. Disbursement of amounts to the Company and possession of certain machinery, equipment, etc . 
22. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Act to have overriding effect . 
24. Contracts to  cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or  
Government company . 
25. Penalties . 
26. Offences by companies . 
27. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
28. Delegation of powers . 
29. Power to make rules . 
30. Power to remove difficulties . 
31. Repeal and saving . 
SCHEDULE I . 
SCHEDULE II . 
 
  3 
 THE BIRD AND COMPANY LIMITED ( ACQUISITION AND  
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS  AND OTHER PROPERTIES ) ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 67 OF 1980  
[27th December , 1980 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer  of the undertakings o f the Bird and Company 
Limited for the purpose of ensuring the continuity of production of goods which are vital to 
the needs of the country and for the acquisition of shares held by the Bird and Company 
Limited in the specified companies for the purpose o f securing to those undertakings the 
facilities and advantage s derived by reason of such share holding with respect to the operation 
and functioning of those undertakings and also to enable the Central Government to exercise 
such control over the affairs of  the specified companies as is necessary to ensure that the 
affairs of those companies are not mismanaged and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Bird and Company Limited were engaged in the manufacture of E.O.T.  cranes and 
other varieties of cranes; polystyrene based cation exchange resin; equipment for fertilizers, oil refineries, 
steel plants, petro -chemical and other industries; tanks and vessels of various shapes and sizes, water 
treatment equipment and other types of equipment for the control of water pollution and were also 
engaged in various other activities;  
AND WHEREAS  the top management of the Bird and Company Limited had so mismanaged the affairs 
of that Company as to cause heavy losses to the Company and had also managed the affairs of the 
Company in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the Company and the public  interest;  
AND WHEREAS in view of the mismanagement aforesaid, the Central Government had, in pursuance 
of the provisions of section 408 of the  Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ), appointed six directors on the 
Board of directors of the Bird and Company Limit ed; 
AND WHEREAS investment of a large amount is necessary for the maintenance and development of the 
production of the undertakings of the Company;  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary in the public interest to acquire the undertakings of the Bird and 
Company Limit ed to enable the Central Government to have such investment made and to ensure that the 
interests of the general public are served by the continuance, by the undertakings of the Company, of the 
manufacture, production and distribution of goods or articles which are essential to the needs of the 
economy of the country;  
AND WHEREAS  the Bird and Company Limited is holding shares in the specified companies which are 
either engaged in the production, distribution or marketing of goods which are vital to the need s of the 
country or are engaged in providing finance to other companies which are so engaged and it is expedient 
in the public interest to acquire the said shares to secure for the undertakings of the Company the facilities 
and advantages derived by reason  of such share holding with respect to the operation and functioning of 
such undertakings and also to enable the Central Government to exercise, through such shareholdings, 
such control on the affairs of those companies as may be necessary  to prevent their mismanagement;  
BE it enacted b y Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—This Act may be call ed the Bird and Company Limited  
(Acquisition and Transfer  of Undertaking s and Other Properties  ) Act , 1980 . 
(2) It shall  be deemed to have come into force on the 25th day of October, 1980.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 25th day of October, 1980;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the commissioner of Payments appointed under section 13;  4 
 (c) “Company ” means the Bird and Company Limited, being a company as define d in the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ), and having its regi stered office at Chartered Bank Buildings, 
Calcutta -700001, in the State of West Bengal;  
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
 (e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “share” means a share, whether equity or preference, held by the Company in the capital of a 
specified company and includes any such share pledged by the Company with any bank or any other 
creditor;  
(g) “specified company ” means a company specified in Schedule I;  
(h) “specified date ”, means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose s of any 
provision  of this Act, by notification, specify, and different dates may be specified for d ifferent 
provisions of this Act;  
(i) words and expressions u sed herein and not defined  but defined in the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956), shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER  II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKING S OF THE  COMPANY AND OF SHARES HELD BY THE  
COMPANY IN THE SPECIFIED COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, Central Government of the undertaking s of the Company .—On 
the appointed day, the undertaking s of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertaking s shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central 
Government.  
4. Transfer and vesting of shares held by the Company in the specified companies .—(1) On the 
appointed day, all the shares held by the Company in the specified companies shall, by virtue of this Act, 
stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall be deemed, on and from the appointed day, to have been registered 
in the Register of Members of the concerned specified comp any as the holder of each share which stands 
transferred to, and vested in, it by virtue of the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that t he provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) 
shall not be deemed to affec t,— 
(a) any right of a specified company subsisting, immediately before the appointed day, against the 
Company to recover from it any sum of money on the ground that the Company has not paid or 
credited to the specified company the whole or any part of the  value of the share s held by it, or on any 
other ground whatsoever; or  
(b) any right of a specified company subsisting, immediately before the appointed day, against the 
Company to receive any payments due from the Company.  
5. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertaking of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights,  lease holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including land s, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, ca sh balances, cash 
on hand, reserve funds, investments, b ook debts, and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, 
such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or 
control of the Company , whether w ithin or outside India, and all books of account, registers and other 
documents of whatever nature relating t hereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government , whether  under section 3 
or section 4, shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, 
charge, lien and all other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunctio n, decree or order of 
any court  or other auth ority restricting the use of such properties  in any manner or appointing any receiver 
in respect of the whole or any part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.   5 
 (3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act, in th e Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give , 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lie n or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any proper ty referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be ent itled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues , in whole or in part, out of the amounts specified in section 8, but no such mortgage, 
charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central 
Government.  
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Company in relation to any undertaking which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3 , at any time before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before th at day, shall continue to be in force on and after such day in accordance with its 
tenor in relation to, and for the purposes of , such undertaking  and on and from the date of vesting o f such 
undertaking under section 7, in a Government company, that Government company shall be deemed to be 
substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been granted to 
such Government company  and such Governmen t company  shall hold it for the remainder of the period 
for which that company would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
property which has vested in  the Central Government, whether under section 3 or under section 4, 
instituted or preferred by or against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or 
be, in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertaki ngs of the Company or of 
anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or 
enforced by or against the Central Government , or where the undertakings of the Company are directed 
under section 7, to vest in a Government company , by or against such company.  
6. Central Government or the Government compan y not to  be liable for prior liabilities .—(1) 
Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of 
the Company and shall be enforceable against it and not against the Central Government, or , where the 
undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 7, to vest in a Government company, against 
such company.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability of Company in relation to its 
undertakings , or in relation to any share held by it in a specified company, in respect of any period 
prior to the appointed day, shall b e enforceable against the Central Government, or, where the 
undertakings of the Company are directed  under section 7, to vest in a Government company , against 
such company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation  to the 
undertakings of the Company or in relation to any share  held by the Company in a specified  company  
passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute which arose before that day, 
shall be enforceable against the Central Gove rnment, or where the undertakings of the Company  are 
directed, under section 7 to vest in a Government company, against such company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, 
where the undertakin gs of the Company are directed under sectio n 7, to vest in a Government 
company, against such company.  
 
7. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of  the Company in a 
Government company .—(1) Notwithstandin g anything contained in section 3, the Central Government 
may, if it is satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply with such terms and conditions as 
that Government may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the Company 
and the right, title a nd interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 6 
 Central Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest 
in the Government company either on the date of publication of the notification or on such earlier or later 
date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its underta kings , vest under  
sub-section ( 1), in a Government company that Government company shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting , be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such undertaking s, and all the rights and 
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakin gs shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount s to the Company and specified companies .—For the transfer to,  and 
vesting  in, the Central Government, under section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, 
title and interest of the Company i n relation to its undertakings there shall be paid by the Central 
Government to the Company  in cash and in the ma nner specified in Chapter VI, an aggregate amount of 
rupees two hundred and eighty -three lakhs.  
(2) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under section 4, of the shares held by 
the Company in the specified companies, there shall be p aid by the Central  Government to the Company 
in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, an aggregate amount of rupees twenty -seven lakhs.  
(3) The amount specified in sub -section ( 1) and the amount specified in sub -section ( 2) shall carry 
simple interest of four per cent. per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending 
on the date on which payment of such amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is here by declared that the liabilities of the Company, in relation to 
its undertakings, shall be met , in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company, 
from the amounts due to the Company under sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2). 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—(1) The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the 
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Gov ernment under section 3, 
shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 7, vest , on and from the date specified in such di rection, in the Governme nt company 
specified therein;  
(b) where no such direction has been made by the Central Government, vest, on and from the 
appointed day, in one or more Custodians appointed by the Central Government under  
sub-section  (2), 
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the Custodian or Custodians so appointed, as the 
case may be , shall be entitled to exercise  to the exclusion of all other persons, all such powers and do all 
such things as the Company is authorised to exerc ise and do in relation to its undertakings.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint an individual  or a Government company as the Custodian 
of the undertakings of the Company in relation to which no direction has been made by it under  
sub-section ( 1) of sec tion 7.  
(3) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the undertakings of the Company such 
remuneration as the  Central Government may fix and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
Government.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management o f undertakings of the Com pany to deliver all 
assets, etc .—(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in a Government 
company  or on the appointment of a Custodian, all persons in charge of the management of the 
undertakings of the Company immediately before such vesting or appointment , shall be bound to deli ver 7 
 to such Government company or Custodian, as the case may be, all ass ets, books of account, registers and 
other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of the Company.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Government company or t he Custodian as to the powers and dut ies of such Government 
company or Custod ian and such Government company or Custodian may also, if it is considered 
necessary so to do, apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in whi ch 
the management of the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted or in relation to any other matter 
arising in the course of such management.  
(3) The Custodian shall maintain an account of the undertakings of the Company in such form and 
manner and under such conditions as may be prescribed and the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956 ), shall apply to the audit of the account so maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts 
of a company.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISION RELATING TO EMPLOYEES O F THE  COMPANY  
11. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every employee of the Company , employed in connection with 
any undertaking owned by it, shall, on and from the appointed day, become an employee of the Central 
Government, and where such undertaking is vested  in a Government company under this Act, become, on 
and from the date of such vesting in such Government company, an  employee thereof and shall hold 
office or service under the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, with the 
same  rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him 
if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under the 
Central Government or the Government company, as t he case may be, is duly terminated or until his 
remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Government or the 
Governme nt company, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the  Industrial Disputes Act, 19 47 (14 of 1947 ), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking owned by the Company to the Central Govern ment or the Government company shall 
not entitle such office r or other employee to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
12. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fun d for the benefit of the person employed in any of the 
undertakings of the Company, the m onies relatable to the employee , whose services have become 
transferred by or under this Act , to the Ce ntral Government or the Government company, shall, out of the 
monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident, superannuation, welfare or other 
fund, stand transferred to , and vest in, the Central Government or the Government compan y, as the case 
may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or the  Government  
company in such manner as may be prescribe d. 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF  PAYMENTS  
13. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable  to the Company under section  8, by notification, appoint a 
Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise  one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  8 
 (3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exerc isable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and oth er persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
14. Payment by  the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, withi n thirty days from the specified date, pay , in cash , to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company the amounts specified in section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner , in 
the Public Account of India , and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of the Company 
and the s hares held by it in the specified companies, in relation to which payment has been made to him 
under this Act.  
(4) The i nterest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit accou nt referred to in  
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the Company.  
15. Certain powers of  the Central Government or Government company .—(1) The Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive , up to the 
specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to the Company, or the Government 
company, and realised after the appointed day , notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period 
prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, may make a claim to 
the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for discharging any 
liability of the Company in relation to any period prior to the  appointed day; and every  such claim shall 
have priority in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which 
such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the Government company.  
(3) Save as oth erwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before the specified date , shall be the 
liabilities of the company.  
16. Claims to be made to the Comm issioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissio ner within thirty days from the specified date : 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
17. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule II shall have 
prioriti es in accordance  with the following principles  namely :— 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories , shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proporti ons and be paid 
accordingly;  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
18. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 16, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule II and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of priorities.  9 
 (2) If, on  an examination of the claims, the C ommissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  
19. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule II, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which every 
claimant sh all file the proof of his claim or be excluded from the benefit of the disburs ements made by the 
Commissioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the 
regional language as t he Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the 
claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the 
advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim withi n the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursement s made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be  necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of b eing heard, by order in writing , admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions , including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making an  investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ), while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the  discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 an d 228 of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860 ) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Proce dure, 1973  ( 2 of 1974 ).  
(7) A claimant , who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner , may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdicti on the registere d office of the Company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta , and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of that High Court.  
20. Disbursement of money by  the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the  Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due, and , on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of 
such claim shall stand discharged.  
21. Disbursement of amounts to the Company and possession of ce rtain machinery, equipment, 
etc.—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to the undertakings of the Company, there is a 
balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the Schedule  II, the Commissioner shall disburse 
such balance to the company.  
(2) Wh ere any machinery, equipment or other property , has vested , under this Act , in the Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, but such machinery, equipment or other 
property does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the 10 
 Government company, as the case may be, to contin ue to possess such machinery , equipment and other 
property on the same terms and conditions under which they were possessed by the Company 
immediately before the appointed day.  
22. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue acco unt.—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wo und up, to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and t he 
order, if any, for payment of the claim , being treated as an or der for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
24. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Government 
company .—Every contract  entered into by the Company in relation to the undertaking s owned by it, 
which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, for any service, sale or supply, and in force 
immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period of one hundred and eighty 
days from the appointed day, c ease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, 
ratified, in writing, by the Central Government or Government company, in which such undertakings 
have been vested under this Act, and in ratifying such contract, the Central Go vernment or Government 
company may make such alteration or modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or  Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract and 
shall not make any alt eration or modification in a contr act— 
(a) unless it is satisfied that s uch contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interest s of the Central Government or such Government company; and  
(b) except after giving  to the parties to the contract a  reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording , in writing , its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
25. Penalties .—Any person who — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Company, or any share held by the Company in any specifie d company, wrongfully withholds  
such property or share from the Central Government or Government company ; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possess ion of , or retains any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Company or willfully withholds or fails to furnis h to the Central Government or Government 
company or any person specified by that Government or Government company, any document 
relatin g to such undertakings or share which may be in his possession, custody or control or fails to 
deliver to the Central Go vernment or Government company or any person specified by that 
Government or Government Company, any assets, books of account, registers  or oth er documents in 
his possession, custody or control, relating to t he undertakings of the Company or any share held by 
the Company in any specified company; or  
(c) wrongfully re covers or destroys any property forming part of  any undertaking of the Com pany 
or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to  be false or 
grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupe es, or with both.  11 
  26. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence  punishable under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where any offence under thi s Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director,  manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose s of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
27. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or  the Custodian of the Undertakings of the Company, or the 
Government Company or any officer or other person authorised by that Government or Government 
company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
28. Delegation of powers .—(1)The Central Government may, by notification , direct that all or any of 
the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section and section 29 
and section 30, may also be exercised by such person or person s as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of po wer is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
29. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation shall be given to the 
commissioner under sub -section ( 3) of section 5 ; 
(b) the  form and the manner in which, and the conditions under which, accounts shall be 
maintained by the Custodi an as required by sub -section ( 3) of section 10;  
(c) the manner in which monies in any provident fund or other fund referred to in section 12 shall 
be dealt with;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, b efore each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Hou ses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be ; so, however, that 
any such modification or annu lment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
  12 
 30. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may , by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
31. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Bird and Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings and Other Properties) Ordinance, 1980 (18 of 1980), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  13 
 SCHEDULE I  
[See section  2 (g)] 
1. Bisra Stone Lime Company Limited                                       
2. Burrakur Coal Company Limited  
3. Birds Trading and Investments Company Limited  
4. Eastern Investments Limited  
5. Garuda Investments Limited       
6. Karanpura Development Company Limited  
(including Funders Shares)       Having Registered  
7. Kinnison Jute Mills Company Limited     Office     
8. Kumar dhubi Fireclay and Silica Works -Limited        at Chartered Bank  
9. Lawrence Investments and Property Company Limited     Buildings,  Calcutta - 
10. Ondal Investments Company Limited          700001.  
11. Orissa Minerals Development Company Limited  
12. Sendra Investments Company Limited  
13. Birds Employees’ Co-operative Society Limited  
14. Becker Gray and Company (1930) Limited  
15. Karanpura Collieries Limited —Preference Shares,  
having registered office at 11, B ritish Indian Street,  
Calcutta -700069.  
16. Calcium Carbide and Chemicals Ltd., having                 Having                                
registered office  at 161/1, Mahatma Gandhi Road,                              Registered  
Calcutta -700007 (Partly Paid).                                                             Office at                      
17. Holman -Climax (Rock Drills) Limited                                                Dolphin Court,  
18. Holman -Climax Manufacturing Limited                                             7-A, Middleton Street,  
19. Patya Tea Company Limited, having registered                                 Calcutta -700016.  
office at 12, Dilkusha, Street, Calcutta -700017.  
20. The Titaghur Paper Mills Company Limited,having registered  
office at 95, Park Street,Calcutta -700016.  
21. Sonakunda Baling Company Limited, having  registered office  
 in Bangla  Desh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  14 
 SCHEDULE II  
(See sections 17, 18, 19 and 21)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES F OR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE  COMPANY  
Category I — 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the Company . 
(b) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company to the Provident Fund,  
Employees State Insurance Fund, Life Insurance Corporation premium and any other arrear under any 
law for the time being in force (excluding gratuity).  
Category II — 
Principal amount of secured loans advanced by — 
(i) Central Government;  
(ii) State Government;  
(iii) Banks;  
(iv) public financial institutions.  
Category III — 
Principal amount of unsecured loans advanced by — 
(i) Central Government;  
(ii) State Government;  
(iii) Banks;  
(iv) public financial institutions.  
Category IV — 
(a) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any dues payable to the State Electricity Boards or other Government or semi -Government 
institutions for supply of goods or services.  
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances.  
Category V — 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rate s or other dues to Central Government, State Government and 
local authorities.  
(b) Any other loans or dues.  
--------------------------The Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980--------------------------
1 THE BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD ACT, 1980  
_________  
  ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BOARD  
 
4. Establishment and incorporation of the Brahmaputra Board.  
5. Conditions of service of members.  
6. Powers of Chairman and Vice -Chairman.  
7. General Manager.  
8. Financial Adviser.  
9. Chief Engineers, Secretary and other officers . 
10. Advisory Committees.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE BOARD  
 
11. Limits of the Brahmaputra Valley.  
12. Master Plan for the control of floods, etc., in the Brahmaputra Valley.  
13. Other functions of the Board.  
14. Conditions subject to which the Board may perform its functions.  
15. General powers of the Board.  
16. Forwarding of, and Consultation with respect to, plans, etc., prepared by the Board.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
 
17. Directions and instructions by Central Government . 
 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
 
18. Grants and loans by Central Government.  
19. Constitution of Brahmaputra Board Fund.  
20. Budget.  
21. Annual report.  
22. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
23. Disputes between the Board and the State Governments.  
24. Removal , etc., of members.  
25. Power to enter.  
26. Member s, officers and employees of the  Board to be public servants.  
27. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Power to make regulations . 
30. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
  2 THE BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 46 OF 1980  
[1st September , 1980 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Board for the planning and integrated 
implementation of measures for the control of floods and bank erosion in the Brahmaputra 
Valley and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union .—It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the Central Government should take under its control the regulation and 
development of the inter -State Brahmaputra river valley to the extent hereinafter provided.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Brahmaputra Board established under section 4;  
(b) “Brahmaputra Valley”  means the inter -State Brahmaputra river valley as demarcated under 
section 11;  
(c) “Fund ” means the Brahmaputra Board Fu nd constituted under section 19 ; 
(d) “Master Plan ” means the Master Plan for the control of floods, bank erosion and improvement 
of dra inage in the Brahmaputra Valley prepared under section 12 and includes, where it is prepared in 
parts , each such part; 
(e) “member ” means a member of the Board;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Board under this Act;  
(h) “rules ” means rules made by the C entral Government under this Act;  
(i) “State Government” , in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof 
appointed under article 239 of the Constitution.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE BOARD  
4. Establishment and incorporation of the Brahmaputra Board .—(1) With effect from such date 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall 
be established for the purposes of this Act a Board, to be called the Brahmaputra Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire , hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman and a Vice -Chairman to be appointed by the Central Governm ent; 
                                                           
1. 31st December , 198 1, vide notification No. G.S.R. 677(E), dated 28th December , 198 1, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 3 (b) the General Manager of the Board and the Financial Adviser to the Board, ex officio ; 
(c) a member each to represent respectively the Governments of Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland, 
Manipur and Tripura and the Administrations of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram, and the North -
Eastern C ouncil constituted under section 3 of the North -Eastern Council Ac t, 1971  (84 of 1971), to 
be appo inted by the Central Government ; 
(d) a member each to represent respectively the Ministries of the Central Government dealing 
with agriculture, irrigation, finance, power and transport to be appointed by the Central Governme nt; 
(e) a member each to represent respectively the Central Water Commission, the Central 
Electricity Authority , the Geological Survey of India , the India  Meteorological Department, to be 
appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) If any member, for infirmit y or otherwise, is incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on 
leave otherwise than in circumstances not involving the vacation of his appointment, the Central 
Government may appoint another person to act in his place.  
(5) Any officer of the Centr al Government, not being a member of the Board, if deputed by  that 
Government in this behalf , shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Board and take part in the 
proceedings thereof, but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(6) The Board may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined 
by regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the 
provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in t he discussions of the 
Board relevant to the purpose for which he has been associated, but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(7) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be i nvalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in  the constitution of, the Board ; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board ; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
(8) Subject to any rules made under this Act, the  Board may constitute a Standing Committee 
consisting of the General Manager of the Board, Financial Adviser to the Board and three other members 
of the Board.  
(9) The Standing Committee constituted under sub -section ( 8) shall perform, exercise and dischar ge 
such of the functions, powers and duties of the Board as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to it by 
the Board.  
5. Conditions of service of members .—The term of office of the members (other than the ex officio  
members) and other conditions of service of the members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
6. Powers of Chairman and Vice -Chairman .—(1) The Chairman shall, in addition to presiding 
over the meetings of the Board, exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be 
delegated to him by the Board and such other powers and duties as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Vice -Chairman of the Board shall exercise and discharge such of the powers and duties of the 
Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairman.  
7. General Manager .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint the General Manager of the Board.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the General Manager shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Subject to the genera l superintendence and control of the Board and the Chairman of the Board, 
the General Manager shall be the Chief Executive Authority of the Board.  
(4) The General Manager shall exercise and discharge such of the powers and duties of the Chairman 
as may be prescribed or, as may be delegated to him by the Chairman, and such other power s and duties 
as may be prescribed by rules or determined by regulations.  4 8. Financial Adviser .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint the Financial Adviser to the 
Board.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Financial Adviser shall be such as may be prescribed.  
9. Chief Engineers, Secretary and other officers .—(1) The C entral Government shall appoint — 
(a) two Chief Engineers to assist the General Manager of the Board;  and 
(b) the Secretary to the Board.  
(2) The Board may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the 
efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Chief Engineers, the Secretary and other officers and 
employees of the Board shall be such as may be determined by regulations.  
10. Advisory Committees .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf , the Board may from time to 
time constitute such Advisory Committees as may be neces sary for the efficient discharge of its functions.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE BOARD  
11. Limits of the Brahmaputra Valley .—(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this 
Act, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, demarcate the limits of the 
Brahmaputra Valley for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Board shall perform such of its functions and exercise such of the powers within such areas in 
the Brahmaputra Valley as the Central Government may, by notificati on in the Official Gazette, specify 
from time to time:  
Provided that before issuing any notification in respect of any area under this sub -section, the Central 
Government shall consult the Government of the State within which such area is situated.  
12. Master Plan for the control of floods, etc., in the Brahmaputra Valley .—(1) Subject to the 
other provisions of this Act and the rules , the Board shall carry out surveys and investigations in the 
Brahmaputra Valley and prepare a Master Plan for the control of floods and bank erosion and 
improvement of drainage in the Brahmaputra Valley:  
Provided that the Board may prepare the Master Plan in parts with reference to different areas of the 
Brahmaputra Valley or with reference to different matters relating to such areas and may, as often as it 
considers necessary so to do, revise the Master Plan or any part thereof.  
(2) In preparing the Master  Plan, the Board shall have regard to the  development and utilization of the 
water resources of the Brahmaputra Valley for irrigation, hydro power, navigation and other beneficial 
purposes and shall, as far as poss ible, indicate in such plan the wor ks and other measures which may be 
undertaken for such development.  
(3) The Master Plan shall be submitted to the Central Government as soon as may be after it has been 
prepared or, as the case may be, revised and the Central Government shall, after consultation with the 
State Government s concerned , approve the same subject to such modifications as it may deem fit.  
13. Other functions of the Board .—(1) The Board shall also — 
(a) prepare detailed reports and estimates in respect of the dams and other projects proposed in 
the M aster Plan as approved by the Central Government and indicate in each case the cost attributable 
to different purposes or uses ; 
(b) draw up standards and specifications for the construction, operation and maintenance of such 
dams and other  projects ; 5 (c) construct, with the approval of the Central Government, multi -purpose dams and works 
connected therewith proposed in the Master Plan as approved by the Central Government and 
maintain and operate such dams and works;  
(d) prepare, in consultation with the State Governments concerned, a phased programme for the 
construction by the State Governments of all dams and other projects proposed in the Master Plan as 
approved by the Central Government other than those referred to in clause ( c); 
(e) perform any other such function which may  be prescribed for the proper implementa tion of 
this Act ; 
(f) perform such other function s as are supplemental, incidental or consequential to the functions 
specified in section 12 or in clauses ( a) to ( d), or prescribed under clause ( e), of this sub -section.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), the Board may, with the prior 
approval of the Central Government, construct any dam or project referred to in that clause if it is 
satisfied, having regard to the cost of construction, and the expertise required for the construction, of any 
such dam or project, that it is expedient so to do.  
(3) The Board may maintain and operate any dam or project referred to in sub -section ( 2) for so long 
as it deems it necessary so to do.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this secti on, “ multi -purpose dam ” means a dam which is 
constructed for purposes of flood control and for other purposes.  
14. Conditions subject to which the Board may perform its functions .—The performance by the 
Board of the functions specified in, or prescribed under, section s 12 and 13 shall be subject to the 
following conditi ons, namely: — 
(a) no multi -purpose dam referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13 shall be 
constructed by the Board unless the State Governments concerned make available the land required 
for the purpose;  
(b) no dam or project referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13 sh all be  constructed 
by the Board unless the State Governments  concerned make available free of cost the land required 
for its execution and also undertake to take over its maintenance on and from the expiry of such 
period after its completion as may be spec ified by the Board;  
(c) no da m or other works shall be under taken by the Board unless the State Government s 
concerned agree to provide all such assistance as may be required for the construction , operation and 
maintenance th ereof ; 
(d) such other condition s (including conditions relating to the sharing by the State Government s 
concerned of the whole or any part of cost of dam or other works constructed by the Board) as may be 
specified by the Central Government by general or special order published in the O fficial Gazette:  
Provided that before undertaking the construction of any such dam or other works, the Board shall 
apprise the State Governments concerned of the cost of construction of , and the benefits likely to accrue 
from, such dam or other works and t he proportion in which the State Governments shall share such cost 
and benefits:  
Provided further that if the Board and the State Governments are unable to agree in respect of the 
sharing of the cost and benefits of any such dam or other works, the Board shall refer the matter to the 
Central Government for decision and the Central Government shall decide such matter after consulting 
the State Governments and the decision of the Central Government shall be final.  
15. General powers of the Board .—(1) Subject  to the provisions of this Act and the rules, the Board 
shall have the power to do anything which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of performing 
its functions under this Act.  6 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Board may — 
(a) publish statistics  or other information relating to various aspects of flood control, bank erosion 
and drainage in the Brahmaputra Valley;  
(b) require the State Governments concerned to furnish to it information relating to the  measures 
undertaken by them for the control of floods and bank erosion and improvement of drainage in the 
Brahmaputra Valley, topographical, meteorological and hyd rological and other related data  and such 
other information as the Board may require for the  performance of its functions under this Act.  
16. Forwarding of, and Consultation with respect to, plans, etc., prepared by the                           
Board .—(1) The Board shall forward copies of the Master Plan, reports, estimates, standards and 
specif ication s prepared by it to the Central Government and the State Government s concerned.  
(2) The Central Government and the State Government s concerned may consult the Board with 
regard to any matters connected with, or arising out of, such plan, reports, estimates or standards and 
specifications.  
(3) If, for any reason, a State Government considers it necessary to execute any project for the control 
of floods and bank erosion and drainage work in the Brahmaputra Valley and such pro ject is not 
envisaged in the Master Plan or such project is intended to be executed by the State Government in a 
manner not in conformity with the Master Plan, the State Government may consult the Board with  regard 
to the execution of the project and the Board may make such recommendations as it may deem fit:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall be construed as imposing any requirement on 
any State Government to consult the Board with regard to the execution of any works which have bec ome 
urgently necessary by reason of any emergency or other extraordinary circumstances.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
17. Directions and instructions by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, from 
time to time, issue to the Board such directions and instructions as it may deem necessary for the efficient 
administration of this A ct and the Board shall carry out  such directions and instructions.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the 
Central Government may, while granting (whether directly or through the Board and after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in that behalf) any financial assistance, by way of loans or 
grants for the execution by any State Gove rnment of any dam or other project referred to in clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 13 after obtaining the approval of the State Government in this behalf , direct the 
Board to exercise all such powers as may be necessary for satisfying itself that t he works are being 
executed in accordance with the standards and specifications laid down therefor by the Board.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
18. Grants and loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board such sums of money as the 
Central Government may consider necessary.  
19. Constitution of Brahmaputra Board Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called 
the Brahmaputra Board Fund and there shall be credited thereto the sums paid to the Board by the Central 
Government or by any State Government and all other sums received by the Board.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for meeting the salary, allo wances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other 
employees of the Board and other administrative expenses of the Board;  
(b) for meeting the expenditure on surveys and investigations undertaken by the Board;  7 (c) for meeting the cost of construction, operation and maintenance of projects undertaken by the 
Board;  
(d) for meeting  the other expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act ; 
and 
(e) if any sums are received by the Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 7, for the payment of 
such sums to the State Governments concerned.  
20. Budget .—The Board shall prepare , in such form and at such time each year as may be prescribed, 
its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated expenditure, the amount of expenditure 
which any State Government has undertaken to provide for, and forward the same to the Central 
Government.  
21. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may b e 
prescribed, its annual report , giving a full  account of its activities during the previous year, and forward 
copies thereof to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
22. Accounts and audit .—The accounts of the Board shall be mainta ined and audited in such manner 
as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Disputes between the Board and the State Governments .—(1) If any dispute arises between 
the Board and any  State Government regarding any matter covered by this Act o r touching or arising out 
of it, it shall be referred to the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall endeavour to resolve the dispute by negotiations or conciliation in 
such manner as  may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), if the Central Government considers, 
whether before initiating action for resolving a dispute by negotiations or conciliation or at any stage after 
initiating such action, that the dispute is of such a nature that it is necessary or expedient to refer it to 
arbitration, the Central Government shall , in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, refer 
the matter in dispute to an arbitrator who shall be appointed by the Ch ief Justice of India.  
(4) The arbitrator may appoint two or more person s as assessors to assist him in the proceedings 
before him.  
(5) The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute and shall be 
given effect to by them.  
(6) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940  (10 of 1940) shall apply to any arbitration under this section.  
24. Removal , etc., of members .—(1) The Central Government may remov e from the Board any 
member who , in its opinion, — 
(a) refuses to act,  
(b) has become incapable to act,  
(c) has so abused his office as a member so as to render his continuance on the Board detrimental 
to the interests of the public , or 
(d) is otherwise unsuitable to continue as a member.  
(2) The Central Government may suspend any me mber pending an inquiry against him.  
(3) No order or removal under this section shall be made unless the member concerned has been 
given an opportunity to submit his explanation to the Central Government and when such order is passed, 
the seat of the membe r removed shall be declared vacant.  8 (4) A member who has been removed under this section shall not be eligible for reappointment as a 
member or in any capacity under the Board.  
(5) If the Board fails to carry out its functions or directions issued by the C entral Government under 
this Act, the Central Government shall have power to reconstitute the Board.  
25. Power to enter .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any officer of the Board generally or 
specially authorised by the Board in this behalf, may, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or 
premises and there do such things as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of lawfully carrying 
out any of its works or of making any survey, examination or investigation, preliminary or incidental to 
the exercise of powers or the performance of the functions by the Board under this Act:  
Provided that no such officer shall enter any building or any enclosed court or garden attached to a 
dwelling house, unless with the consent of the occupier thereof, wit hout previously giving such occupier 
at least seven days ’ notice in writing of his intention to do so.  
26. Member s, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants .—All members , officers 
and employees of the Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal                 
Code  (45 of 1860) . 
27. Prot ection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the Government or any officer of the Government or any member, officer or employee of 
the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or 
regulations.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Board for any damage caused, or likely to 
be caused by anything in good faith done or purported to be done under this Act or the rules or 
regulations, and in particular, it shall not be the responsibility of the Board to provide for relief measures 
necessitated by floods or by breaches and failures of works.  
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offici al Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the matters with respect to the standing committee of  the Board referred to in sub -section ( 8) 
and ( 9) of section 4;  
(b) the term of office of members (other than the ex officio  members), and other conditions of 
service of the membe rs, of the Board under section 5;  
(c) the powers and duties of the Chairman a nd Vice -Chairman under section 6;  
(d) the term s and conditions of service and the powers and duties of the General Manager under 
section 7;  
(e) the terms and conditions of service of the Financial Adviser under section 8;  
(f) the conditions and restriction s with respect to carrying out surveys and investigation s and 
preparation of a Master Plan under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 and other matters relating thereto;  
(g) the additional functions of the Board under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(h) the conditions and restrictions with respect to the general power of the Board under              
sub-section ( 1) of section 15 and other matters relating thereto;  
(i) the form in which , and the time when , the Board shall prepare its budget under sectio n 20 and 
its annual report under section 21, and the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be 
maintained and audited under section 22;  
(j) the manner in which the Central Government shall endeavour to resolve , under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 23 , the disputes referred to therein and the form and manner in which such disputes may be 
referred, under sub -section ( 3) of that section , to arbitration;  9 (k) the conditions and restrictions with respect to the exercise of the power to enter under       
section 25 and other matters relating thereto;  
(l) any other matter which is to be , or may be , prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be , 
or may be , made by rules . 
29. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the 
rules gen erally to carry out the purpose s of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such reg ulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which , and the purposes for which, the Board may associate with itself any 
person under sub -section ( 6) of section 4 ; 
(b) the powers and duties of the General Manager of the Board which may be determined under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 7;  
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the Chief Engineers, the Secretary and other officers 
and employees of the Board under sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(d) any other mat ter in respect of which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.  
30. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case m ay be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
 
--------------------------The Central Excises and Salt and Additional Duties of Excise (Amendment) Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND SALT AND ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF  
 EXCISE (AMENDEMENT) ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 6 OF 1980  
[12th February, 1980.]  
An Act fu rther to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944, and the Additional Duties of 
Excise (Go ods of Special Importance) Act, 1957.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1.  Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Central Excises and Salt and 
Additional Duties of Excise (Amendment) Act, 1980.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24 th day of November, 1979.  
1*                                       *                                     *                                     *                                 * 
5. Special provisions as to duties of excise on cotton fabrics, woo llen fabrics, man -made fabrics, 
etc., during a certain past period and validation. —(1) Every Central Act as in force at any time during 
the period commencing with the appointed day and en ding with the day immediately preceding the date 
of commencement of this Act, and providing for or relating to the levy of duties of excise on — 
(a) “cloth”, “cotton cloth” or, as the case may be, “cotton fabrics” , 
(b) “woollen fabrics”,  
(c) “ray on or artificial silk fabrics” or, as the case may be, “man -made fabrics”,  
shall have and shall be deemed to have always had effect during the said period as if — 
(i) such “cloth”, “cotton cloth” or, as the case may be, “cotton fabrics” comprised for the 
purposes of the duty leviable under that Act — 
(A) a sub -item covering such “cloth”, “cotton cloth” or “cotton fabrics” not subjected to any 
process mentioned in sub -clause ( v) of clause ( f) of section 2 of the Central Excises Act, as 
amended by this Act; and  
(B) a sub -item covering such “cloth ”, “cotton cloth” or “cotton fabrics” subjected to any such 
process or any two or more such processes,  
and the rate of duty specified in such Act with respect to such “cloth”, “cotton cloth” or “cotton 
fabrics” had been specified separately with respect to each of the aforementioned sub -items thereof;  
(ii) such “woollen fabrics” comprised for the purposes of  duty leviable under that Act — 
(A)  a sub -item covering such “woollen fabrics” not subjected to any process mentione d in 
sub-clause ( vi) of clause ( f) of section 2 of the Central Excises Act, as amended by this Act; and  
(B) a sub -item covering such “woollen fabrics” subjected to any such process or any two or 
more such processes,  
and the rate of duty specified in such Act with respect to such “woollen fabrics” had been specified 
separately with respect to each of the aforementioned sub -items thereof;  
(iii) such “rayon or artificial silk fabrics” or “man -made fabrics” comprised for the  purposes of 
duty leviable under that Act — 
(A) a sub -item covering such “rayon or artificial silk fabrics” or “man -made fabrics” not 
subjected to any process mentioned in sub -clause ( vii) of clause ( f) of section 2 of the C entral 
Excises  Act, as amended by  this Act; and  
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 4 rep.  by Act 19 of 1988, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  2 
 (B) a sub -item covering such “rayon or artificial silk fabrics” or “man -made fabrics” 
subjected to any  such process or any two or more  such processes,  
and the rate of duty specified in such Act with respect to such “rayon or artificial silk  fabrics” and 
“man -made fabrics” had been specified separately with respect to each of the aforementioned        
sub-items thereof; and  
(iv) the amendments to clause ( f) of section 2 of the Central Excises Act made by section 2 of this 
Act had been in force at all relevant times subject to the modifications that the reference therein — 
(A) to the “goods comprised in Item No. 19 I of the First Schedule” shall be construed as a 
reference to such “cloth”, “cotton cloth” or, as the case may be, “cotton fabri cs”; 
(B) to the “goods comprised in Item No. 21 ( 1) of the First Schedule” shall be construed as a 
reference to  “woollen fabrics”;  
(c) to the “goods comprised in Item No. 22 ( 1) of the First Schedule” shall be construed as a 
reference to such “rayon or art ificial silk fabrics” or, as the case may be, “man -made fabrics”;  
and subject to such further modifications as the context may require.  
(2) Any rule or notification or any action or thing made, issued, taken or done or purporting to have 
been made, issued,  taken or done under a Central Act referred to in sub -sectio n (1) before the date of 
commencement of this Act, with respect to or in relation to the levy of duties of excise on — 
(a) “cloth”, “cotton cloth” or, as the case may be, “cotton fabrics”,  
(b) “woollen fabrics”,  
(c) “rayon or artificial silk fabrics” or, as the case may be, “man -made fabrics”,  
shall for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been, as validly and effectively made, issued, 
taken or done as if the provisions of this sectio n had been in force at all material times and, accordingly, 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority — 
(a) all duties of excise levied, assessed or collected or purported to have been levied, assessed or 
collec ted, before the date of commencement of this Act, on — 
(i) “cloth”, “cotton cloth” and “cotton fabrics”, subjected to any process,  
(ii) “woollen fabrics” subjected to any process,  
(iii) “rayon or artificial silk fabrics” and “man -made fabrics”  subjected to any process,  
under any such Central Act shall  be deemed to be, and shall be deemed  always  to have  been, as validly 
levied, assessed or collected as if the  provisions of this section had been in force on and from the 
appointed day;  
(b) no suit  or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of, 
and no enforcement shall be made by any court of any decree or order directing the refund of, any 
such duties of excise which have been collected and which would have be en validly collected if the 
provisions of this section had been in force on and from the appointed day;  
(c) refunds shall be made of all such duties of excise which have been collected but which would 
not have been so collected if the provisions of this se ction had been in force on and from the 
appointed day; and  
(d) recoveries  shall be made of all such duties of excise which have not been collected or, as the 
case may be,  which  have  been refunded but which would have been collected  or, as the case may be, 
would not have been refunded  if the provisions of this section had been in force on and from the 
appointed day . 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or omission on the part of any person 
shall be punishable as an offence which would not have been so punishable if this section had not come 
into force.  3 
 Explanation. —In this section — 
(a) “appointed day”, in relation to — 
(i) “cloth”, means the 1 st day of January, 1949;  
(ii) “cotton cloth”, means the 28 th day of February, 1954;  
(iii) “cotton fabrics”, means the 1 st day of March, 1955;  
(iv) “woollen fabrics”, means the 1 st day of March, 1955;  
(v) “rayon or artificial silk fabrics”, means the 28 th day of February, 1954; and  
(vi) “man -made fabrics”, means the 18 th day of June, 1977;  
(b) “Central Act” includes any provision, in a Bill introduced in the House of the People, in 
respect of which a declaration was made unde r section 3 of the Provisional C ollection of Taxes Act, 
1931  (16 of 1931) ; 
(c) “duties of excise” means dut ies of excise l evied under any C entral Act whether as such or as 
additional duties of excise or auxiliary duties of excise or special duties of excise or by any other 
name.  
1*                                            *                             *                              *                                *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Section  6 rep. by Act 19 of 1988, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
--------------------------The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1980  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. [Repealed .] 
8. [Repealed .] 
9. [Repealed .] 
10. Saving of pending proceedings under sections 108, 109 and 110.  
11. [Repealed .] 
 
 
  2 
 THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 63 OF 1980  
[26th December , 1980.]  
An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 1980.  
2. It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd day of September, 1980.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
10. Saving of pending proceedings under sections 108, 109 and 110. —All proceedings under 
sections 108, 109 and 110 of the principal Act, pending bef ore any Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
be dealt with as if this Act had not been enacted.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 9 and 11 rep. by Act 19 of 1988, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
--------------------------The Company Secretaries Act, 1980--------------------------
1 THE COMPANY SECRETARIES ACT, 1980  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions and interpretation.  
CHAPTER II  
INSTITUTE OF COMPANY  SECRETARIES OF INDIA  
3. Incorporation  of the Institute.  
4. Entry of names in the Register.  
5. Associates and F ellows.  
6. Certificate of practice.  
7. Members to be known as Company Secretaries.  
8. Disabilities.  
CHAPTER III  
COUNCIL OF THE INSTITUTE  
9. Constitution of the Council of the Institute.  
10. Re -election or re -nomination to Council . 
10A. Settlement of disputes regarding election.  
10B. Establishment of Tribunal.  
11. Nomination in default of election.  
12. President and Vice -President.  
13. Resignation of membership and casual vacanc ies. 
14. Duration and dissolution of the Council.  
15. Functions of  Council.  
15A. Functions of Institute.  
15B. Imparting education by Universities and other bodies.  
16. Officers and employees, salary, allowances, etc.  
17. Committees of the Council.  
18. Fina nces of the Council.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTER OF MEMBERS  
19. Register.  
20. Removal from the Register.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCONDUCT  
21. Disciplinary Directorate.  
21A. Board of Discipline.  
21B. Disciplinary Committee.  
 2 SECTIONS  
21C. Authority, Disciplinary Committee, Board of Discipline and Director  (Discipline) to have 
powers of civil court.  
21D. Transitional provisions.  
22. Professional or other misconduct defined.  
22A. Constitution of Appellate Authority.  
22B. Term of office of members of Authority.  
22C. Procedure , etc., of Authority.  
22D. Officers and other staff of Authority.  
22E. Appeal to Authority.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGIONAL  COUNCILS  
23. Constitution and functions of Regional Councils.  
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
24. Penalty for falsely claiming to be a member, etc.  
25. Penalty for using name of the Council, or awarding degree of Company Secretary.  
26. Companies not to engage in Company Secretaryship.  
27. Unqualified persons not to sign documents.  
28. Offences by companies.  
29. Sanction to prosecute . 
CHAPTER VII A 
QUALITY REVIEW BOARD  
29A. Establishment of Quality Review Board.  
29B. Functions of Board.  
29C. Procedure of Board.  
29D. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and members of Board and its expenditure.  
30. Omitted.  
CHAPTER IX  
DISSOLUTION OF THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA REGISTERED UNDER THE 
COMPANIES ACT  
31. Dissolution of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India registered under the Companies Act.  
32. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the dissolved company to the Institut e. 
33. Provisions respecting employees of the dissolved company.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
34. Alteration in the Register and cancellation of certificate.  
35. Directions of the Central Government.  
36. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
36A. Members, e tc., to be public servants.  
37. Maintenance of branch offices.  
38. Reciprocity.  
38A. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
39. Power to make regulations.  
40. Rules, regulations and notifications to be laid before Parliament.  
     THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
     THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 3 THE COMPANY SECRETARIES ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1980  
[10th December , 1980.]  
An Act to make provision for the regulation and development of the profession of Company 
Secretaries.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Company Secretaries 
Act, 1980.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions and interpretation .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Associate ” means an Associate Member of the Institute;  
2[(aa) “Authority ” means the Appellate Authority referred to in section 22A;  
(aaa) “Board ” means the Quality Review Board constituted under section 29A;];  
(b) “Companies Act ” means the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(c) “Company Secretary ” means a person who is a member o f the Institute;  
(d) “Council ” means the Council of the Institute constituted under section 9;  
(e) “dissolved company ” means the Institute of Company Secretaries of India registered under the 
Companies Act;  
(f) “Fellow ” means a Fellow Member of the Institu te; 
3[(fa) “firm” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 
(9 of 1932), and includes, — 
(i) the limited liability partnership as defined in clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of 
the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009); or  
(ii) the sole proprietorship,  
registered with the Institute;]  
(g) “Institute ” means the Institute of Company Secretaries of India constituted under this Act;  
2[(ga) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;];  
3[(gb) “partner ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 
1932 (9 of 1932) or in clause ( q) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership 
Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), as the case  may be;  
(gc) “partnership ” means — 
(A) a partnership as defined in section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932); or  
(B) a limited liability partnership which has no company as its partner;]  
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1981, vide notification No. S.O. 989(E), dated 27th December, 1980, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
     Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-8-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -1-2012).  4 (h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made  under this Act;  
(i) “President ” means the President of the Council;  
(j) “Register ” means the Register of members of the Institute maintained under this Act;  
1[(jj) “sole proprietorship ” means an individual who engages himself in the practice of the 
profession of the company secretaries or offers to perform services referred to in clauses ( b) to ( f) of 
sub-section ( 2);] 
2[(ja) “specified ” means specified by rules made by the Central Gover nment under this Act;  
(jb) “Tribunal ” means a Tribunal established under sub -section ( 1) of section 10B;];  
(k) “Vice -President ” means the Vice -President of the Council;   
(l) “year” means the period commencing on the 1st day of April of any year and ending on the 
31st day of March of the succeeding year;  
(m) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a member of the Institute shall be deemed “to be in 
practice ” when, individually or in partnership with one or more members of the Institute in practice or in 
partnership with members of such other recognised profe ssions as may be prescribed, he, in consideration 
of remunerati on received or to be received, — 
(a) engages himself in the practice of the profession of Company Secretaries to, or in relation to, 
any company; or  
(b) offers to perform or performs services in  relation to the promotion, forming , incorporation, 
amalgamation, reconstruction, reorgani sation or winding up of companies; or  
(c) offers to perform or performs such s ervices as may be performed by — 
(i) an authori sed representative of a company with respe ct to filing, registering, presenting, 
attesting or verifying any documents (including forms, applications and returns) by or on behalf 
of the company,  
(ii) a share transfer agent,  
(iii) an issue house,  
(iv) a share and stock  broker,  
(v) a secretarial auditor or consultant,  
(vi) an adviser to a company on management, including any legal or procedural matter falling 
under the Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947 (29 of 1947), the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), the Companies Act, the Securities Contracts (Regulation) 
Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), any of the rules or bye -laws made by a recogni sed stock exchange, the 
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969), the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1 973 (46 of 1973), or under any other law for the time being in force,  
(vii) issuing certificates on behalf of, or for the purposes of, a company; or  
(d) holds himself out to the public as a Company Secretary in practice; or  
(e) renders professional service s or assistance with respect to matters of principle or detail 
relating to the practice of the profession of Company Secretaries; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -1-2012).  
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  5 (f) renders such other services as, in the opinion of the Council, are or may be rendered by a 
Company Secretary in practic e; 
and the words “to be in practice ”, with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions, shall be 
construed accordingly.  
CHAPTER II  
INSTITUTE OF COMPANY  SECRETARIES OF INDIA  
 3. Incorporation of the Institute .—(1) All persons whose names are entered in the Register of the 
dissolved company immediately before the commencement of this Act and all persons who may hereafter 
have their names entered in the Register to be maintained under this Act, so long as they continue to have 
their names borne on the Register to be maintained under this Act, are hereby constituted a body 
corporate by the name of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India and all such persons shall be 
known as members of the Institute.  
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall have power to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property, movable or immovable and shall by its name sue or be sued.  
4. Entry of names in the Register .—(1) Any of the following persons shall be entitled to have his 
name en tered in the Register, namely: — 
(a) any person who immediately before the commencement of this Act was an Associate or a 
Fellow (including an Honorary Fellow) of the dissolved company;  
(b) any person who is a holder of t he Diploma in Company Secretary ship awarded by the 
Government of India;  
(c) any person who has passed the examinations conducted by the dissolved company and has 
completed training either as specified by the dissolved company or as prescribed by the Council, 
except any such person who is not  a permanent resident of India;  
(d) any person who has passed such examination and completed such training, as may be 
prescribed for membership of the Institute;  
(e) any person who has passed such other examination and completed such other train ing without  
India as is recognis ed by the Central Government or the Council as being equivalent to the 
examination and training prescribed under this Act for membership of the Institute:  
Provided  that in the case of any person belonging to any of the classes mentione d in this sub -section 
who is not permanently residing in India, the Central Government or the Council may impose such further 
conditions as it may deem to be necessary or expedient in the public interest.  
(2) Every person belonging to the class mentioned i n clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall 
have his name entered in the Register without the payment of any entrance fee.  
1[(3) Every person belonging to any of the classes mentioned in clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of                       
sub-section  (1) shall have his name entered in the Register on application being made and granted in the 
prescribed manner and on payment of such fees, as may be determined, by notification, by the Council, 
which shall not exceed rupees three thousand:  
Provided that the Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees three thousand, which shall not in any case exceed rupees six thousand.].  
(4) The. Central Government may take such steps as may be necessary for the purp ose of having the 
names of all persons belonging to the classes mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 1) entered 
in the Register at the commencement of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Sub s. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 4, for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  6 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Council may confer on any person 
Honorary Fellow Membership, if the Council is of the opinion that such person has made a significant 
contribution to the profession of Company Secretaries and thereupon the Council shall enter the name of 
such person in the Register but such per son shall not have any voting rights in any election or meetings of 
the Institute and shall not also be required to pay any fee to the Institute.  
5. Associates and F ellows .—(1) The members of the Institute shall be divided into two classes 
designated respe ctively as Associates and Fellows.  
(2) Any person other than a person to whom the provisions of sub -section ( 4) apply, shall, on his 
name being entered in the Register, be deemed to have become an Associate and as long as his name 
remains so entered, shall  be entitled to use the letters “A.C.S. ” after his name to indicate that he is an 
Associate.  
1[(3) A person, being an Associate who has been in continuous practice in India as a Company 
Secretary for at least five years and a person who has been an Associate for a continuous period of not 
less than five years and who possesses such qualifications or practical experience as the Council may 
prescribe with a view to ensuring that he has experience equivalent to the experience normally acquired 
as a resu lt of continuous practice for a period of five years as a Company Secretary shall, on payment of 
such fees, as may be determined, by notification, by the Council, which shall not exceed rupees five 
thousand, and on application made and granted in the presc ribed manner, be entered in the Register as a 
Fellow:  
Provided that the Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees five thousand, which shall not in any case exceed rupees ten thousand.  
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this sub -section, a person shall be deemed to have practi sed in 
India for any period for which he has held a certificate of practice under section 6, notwithstanding that he 
did not actually practis e during that period.  
Explanation II.—In computing the continuous period during which a person has been an Associate of 
the Institute, there shall be included any continuous period during which the person has been an Associate 
of the dissolved company immediately before he became an Associate of the Institute.]  
(4) Any person who was a Fellow of the dissolved company and who is entitled to have his name 
entered in the Register under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4, shall be entered in the Register as 
a Fellow.  
(5) Any person whose na me is entered in the Register as a Fellow shall, so long as his name remains 
so entered, be entitled to use the letters “F.C.S.” after his name to indicate that he is a Fellow.  
6. Certificate of practice .—(1) No member of the Institute shall be entitled to  practi se, whether in 
India or elsewhere, unless he has obtained from the Council a certificate of practice.  
2[(2) A member who desires to be entitled to practi se shall make an application in such form and pay 
such annual fee, for his certificate as may be  determined , by notification, by the Council, which shall not 
exceed rupees three thousand, and such fee shall be payable on or before the 1st day of April in each year:  
Provided that the Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, deter mine the fee 
exceeding rupees three thousand, which shall not in any cas e exceed rupees six thousand.];  
3[(3) The certificate of practice obtained under sub -section ( 1) may be cancelled by the Council under 
such circumstances as may be pre scribed.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 4, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006)  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section (2) (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).   
3. Ins. by s. 5 , ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  7 7. Members to be known as Company Secretaries .—Every member of the Institute in practice 
shall, and any other member may, use the designation of a Company Secretary and no member using such 
designation shall use any other description, whether in addition the reto or in substitution therefor:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any such member from adding any 
other description or letters to his name , if entitled thereto, to indicate membership of such other institute 
whether in Ind ia or elsewhere as may be recogni sed in this behalf by the Council, or any other 
qualification that he may possess, or to prohibit a firm, all the partners of which are members of the 
Institute and in practice, from being known by its firm name as Company Secretaries.  
8. Disabilities .—Notwithstanding anything contained in  section 4, a person shall not be entitled to 
have his name entered in, o r borne on, the Register if he — 
(a) has not attained the age of twenty -one years at the time of his application for the entry of his 
name in the Register; or  
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so adjudged by a competent court; or  
(c) is an undercharged insolvent; or  
(d) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the court a certificate sta ting that his 
insolvenc y was caused by misfortune without any misconduct on his part; or  
(e) has been convicted by a competent court, whether within or without India, of an offence 
involving moral turpitude and punishable with imprisonment or of an offence, not of a technical 
nature, committed by him in his professional capacity unless in respect of the offence committed he 
has either been granted a pardon or, on an application made by him in this behalf, the Cent ral 
Government has, by an order in writing, removed the disability;  or 
(f) has been removed from membership of the Institute on being found on inquiry to have been 
guilty of professional or other misconduct:  
Provided  that a person who has been removed from membership for a specified period shall not be 
entitled to have hi s name entered in the Register until the expiry of such period.  
CHAPTER III  
COUNCIL OF THE INSTITUTE  
9. Constitution of the Council of the Institute .—(1) There shall be a Council of the Institute for the 
management of the affairs of the Institute and for discharging the functions assigned to it by or under this 
Act. 
1[(2) The Council shall be composed of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) not more than fifteen persons elected by the members of the Institute, from amongst the 
Fellows of the Institute chosen in such manner and from such regional constituencies as may be 
specified:  
Provided that a Fellow of the Institute, who has been found guilty of any professional or other 
misconduct and whose name is removed from the Register or has been awarded pena lty of fine, shall 
not be eli gible to contest the election, — 
(i) in case of misconduct falling under the First Schedule of this Act, for a period of three 
years;  
(ii) in case of misconduct falling under the Second Schedule of this Act, for a period of six 
years,  
from the completion of the period of removal of name from the Register or payment of fine, as the 
case may be;  
(b) not more than five persons nominated in the specified manner by the Central Government.]  
                                                           
1. Sub s. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 6, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 5-9-2006).  8 1[(3) No person holding a post under the Central Government or a State Government shall be eligible 
for election to the Council under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) No person who has been auditor of the Institute shall be eligible for election to the Council under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) for a period of three years aft er he ceases to be an auditor.]  
2[10. Re -election or re -nominatio n to Council —A member of the Council, elected or nominated 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 9, shall be eligible for re -election or, as the case may be, re-nomination:  
Provided that no member shall hold the office for more than two consecutive terms:  
Provided further that a member of the Council, who is or has been elected as President under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 12, shall not be eligible f or election or nominati on as a member of the Council.]  
3[10A.  Settlement of disputes regarding election .—In case of any dispute regarding any election 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9, the aggrieved person may make an application within 
thirty days from the date of declaration of the result of election to the Secretary of the Institute, who shall 
forward the  same to the Central Government . 
10B.  Establishment of Tribunal .—(1) On receipt of any application under section 10A, the Central 
Government shall, by notification, establish a Tribunal consisting of a Presiding Officer and two other 
Members to decide such dispute and the decision of such Tribunal shall be final.  
(2) A person shall not  be qualified for appointment, — 
(a) as a Presiding O fficer of the Tribunal unless he has been a member of the Indian Legal 
Service and has held a post in Grade I of the service for at least three years;  
(b) as a Member unless he has been a member of the Council for at least one full term and who is 
not a sitting member of the Council or who has not been a candidate in the election under dispute; or  
(c) as a Member unless he holds the post of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any 
other post under the Central Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of a Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal, their 
place of meetings and allowances shall be such as may be specified.  
(4) The exp enses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council.]  
11. Nomination in default of election .—If the members of the Institute fail to elect any member 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9 from any of the regional constituencies that may be 
notif ied under that clause, the Central Government may nominate any duly qualified person from such 
constituency to fill up the vacancy, and any person so nominated shall be deemed to be a duly elected 
member of the Council.  
12. President and Vice -President .—(1) The Council at its first meeting shall elect two of its 
members to be respectively the President and the Vice -President thereof, and so often as the office of the 
President or the Vice -President falls vacant, the Council shall choose a person to be the P resident or the 
Vice -President, as the case may be:  
Provided  that the President of the Council of the dissolved company shall continue to hold such office 
after the commencement of this Act, until such time as a President is elected under the provisions of  this 
sub-section.  
(2) The President shall be the  4[Head] of the Council.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 6 (w.e.f. 5-9-2006).  
2. Subs. by  s. 7, ibid.,  for section 10 (w.e.f. 8-8-2006).   
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “Chief Executive Authority” (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  9 (3) The President or the Vice -President shall hold office for a period of one year from the date on 
which he is chosen but so as not to extend beyond his term of office as a member o f the Council, and 
subject to his being a member of the Council at the relevant time, he shall be eligible for re -election  
1[under sub -section ( 1)]. 
2[(4) On the expiration of the duration of the Council, or of the term of office of the President and the 
Vice -President thereof, the President and the Vice -President shall continue to hold office until such time 
as a new President and the Vice -President is elected and takes over charge of their duties.]  
(5) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the  office of the President, the Vice -President 
shall act as President until the date o n which a new President elected in accordance with the provisions of 
this section to fill such vacancy enters upon his office and when the President is unable to discharge his 
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice -President shall discharge his functions 
until the date on which the President resumes his duties.  
13. Resignation of membership and casual vacancies .—(1) Any member of the Council may at any 
time resign his membership by writing under his hand addressed to the President, and the seat of such 
member shall become vacant when such resignation is notified in the Official Gazette.  
(2) A member of the Council shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is declared by the Council 
to have been absent without sufficient excuse from three consecutive meetings of the Council  3[or he has 
been found guilty of any professional or other misconduct and awarded penalty of fine,] or of any of the 
Committees which has been constituted by the Council and of which he is a member or if his name is, for 
any cause, removed from the Register under the provisions of section 20.  
(3) A casual vacancy in the office of a member of the Council shall be filled b y fresh election from 
the constituency concerned or by nomination by the Central Government, as the case may be, and the 
person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office until the dissolution of the Council:  
Provided  that no election shall  be held to fill a casual vacancy occurring within  4[one year] prior to 
the date of the expiration of the term of the Council, but such a vacancy may be filled by nomination by 
the Central Government after consultation with the President of the Council.  
(4) No act done by the Council shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of 
any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Council . 
14. Duration and dissolution of the Council .—(1) The duration of any Council constituted under 
this Act shall be  5[four years] from the date of its first meeting.  
(2) Notwithstanding the expiration  of the duration of a Council ( hereafter in this sub -section referred 
to as the former Council), the former Council shall continue to exercise its functions under this Act until a 
new Council is constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act and on such constitution the 
former Council shall stand dissolved.  
6[15. Functions of  Council .—(1) The Institute shall function under the overall cont rol, guidance and 
supervision of the Council and the duty of carrying out the provisions of this Act shall be vested in the 
Council.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, the dutie s of the 
Council shall include — 
(a) to approve academic courses and their contents;  
(b) the prescribing of fees for the examination of candidates for enrolment;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act  8 of 2006,  s. 9 (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “three years” (w.e.f. 19-1-2007 ). 
6. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  10 (c) the prescribing of qualifications for entry in the Register;  
(d) the recognition of foreign qualifications and training for purposes of enrolment;  
(e) the prescribing of guidelines for granting or refusal of certificates of practice under this Act;  
(f) the levy of fees from members, examinees and other persons;  
(g) the regulation and maintenance of the status and standard o f professional qualifications of 
members of the Institute;  
(h) the carrying out, by granting financial assistance to persons other than members of the 
Council or in any other manner, of research in such matters of interest to Company Secretaries as may 
be prescribed;  
(i) to enable functioning of the Director (Discipline), the Board of Discipline, the Disciplinary 
Committee and the Appellate Authority constituted under the provisions of this Act;  
(j) to enable functioning of the Quality Review Board;  
(k) con sideration of the recommendations of the Quality Review Board made under clause ( a) of 
section 29B and details of action taken thereon in its annual report; and  
(l) to ensure the functioning of the Institute in accordance with the provisions of this Act an d in 
performance of other statutory duties as may be entrusted to the Institute from time to time.].  
1[15A.  Functions of Institute .—The functions of the Institute shall include — 
(a) the examination of candidates for enrolment;  
(b) the regulation of training of students;  
(c) the maintenance and publication of a Register of persons qualified to practice as Company 
Secretaries;  
(d) collection of fees from members, examinees and other persons;  
(e) subject to the orders of the appropriate authorities unde r this Act, the removal of names from 
the Register and the restoration to the Register of names which have been removed;  
(f) the maintenance of a library and publication of books and periodicals relating to management 
of companies and allied subjects;  
(g) the conduct of elections to the Council of the Institute; and  
(h) the granting or refusal of certificates of practice as per guidelines issued by the Council.  
15B. Imparting education by Universities and other bodies .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, any University established by law or any body affiliated to the Institute, may impart education on the 
subjects covered by the academic courses of the Institute.  
(2) The Universities or bodies referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, while awarding degre e, diploma or 
certificate or bestowing any designation, ensure that the award or designation do not resemble or is not 
identical to one awarded by the Institute.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall enable a University or a body to adopt a name or 
nomenclature which is in any way sim ilar to that of the Institute.]  
2[16. Officers and emplo yees, salary, allowances, etc. —(1) For the efficient performance of  its 
duties, the Council shall — 
(a) appoint a Secretary of the Council to perform such duties as m ay be prescribed;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 13 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006)  [in respect of new section 15B (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006)] . 
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for section 16 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  11 (b) appoint a Director (Discipline) to perform such functions as assigned to him under this Act 
and the rules and regulations framed thereunder;  
(c) designate an officer of the Council or the Institute to carry out the administrative functions of 
the Institute as its chief executive.  
(2) The Council may also — 
(a) appoint such other officers and employees to the Council and the Institute as it considers 
necessary;  
(b) require and take from the Secretary or from any other officer or empl oyee of the Council and 
the Institute such security for the due performance of his duties, as the Council considers necessary;  
(c) prescribe the salaries, fees, allowances of the officers and employees of the Council and the 
Institute and their terms and c onditions of service;  
(d) with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix the allowances of the President, 
Vice -President and other members of the Council and members of its Committees;  
(3) The Secretary of the Council shall be entitled to partic ipate in the meetings of the Council but 
shall not be entitled to vote thereat.].  
17. Committees of the Council .—(1) The Council shall constitute from amongst its members the 
followin g Standing Committees, namely: — 
(a) an Executive Committee;  
1[(b) a Finance Committee; and]  
(c) an Examination Committee.  
(2) The Council may also constitute a Training and Educational Facilities Committee, Professional 
Research and Publications Committee and such other Committees from amongst its members as it deems 
necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
2[(3) Each of the Standing Committees shall consist of the President and the Vice -President ,              
ex officio , and minimum of three and maximum of five members to be elected by the Council from 
amongst its members.]  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any Committee formed under                              
sub-section ( 2), may, with the sanction of the Council co -opt such other members of the Institute not 
exceeding  4[one-third of the total membership of the Committee ] as the Committee thinks fit, and any 
member so co -opted shall be entitled to exercise all the rights of a member of the Committee.  
(7) Every Committee constituted under this section shall elect its own Chairman:  
Provided  that— 
(i) where the President is a member of such Committee, he shall be the Chairman of such 
Committee, and in his absence, the Vice -President, if he is a member of such Committee, shall be its 
Chairman; and  
(ii) where the President is not a member of such Committee but the Vice -President is a member, 
he shall be its Chairman.  
(8) The Standing Committees and other Committees formed under this section shall exercise such 
functions and be subject to such conditi ons in the exercise thereof as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 15, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Subs by s. 15, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f.  17 -11-2006)  
3. Sub -section s (4) and ( 5) omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “two -thirds of the total membership of the Committee” (w.e.f. 17-11-2006).  12 18. Finances of the Council .—(1) There shall be established a fund under the management and 
control of the Council into which shall be paid all moneys (including donations and grants) received by 
the Counci l and out of which shall be met all expenses including any donations made and liabilities 
properly incurred by the Council.  
(2) The Council may invest any money for the time being standing to the credit of the fund in any 
Government security or in any other security approved by the Central Government.  
1[(3) The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fund distinguishing capital from revenue in the 
manner prescribed.  
(4) The Council shall prepare in the manner prescribed and approve, prior to the start  of the financial 
year, an annual financial statement (the budget) indicating all its anticipated revenues as well as all 
proposed expenditures for the forthcoming year.  
(5) The annual accounts of the Council shall be prepared in such manner as may be pres cribed and be 
subject to audit by a Chartered Accountant in practice to be appointed annually by the Council:  
Provided that no member of the Council or a person who has been a member of the Council during 
the last four years or a person who is in partnersh ip with such member shall be eligible for appointment as 
an auditor under this sub -section:  
Provided further that, in the event it is brought to the notice of the Council that the accounts of the 
Council do not represent a true and fair view of its finance s, then, the Council may itself cause a special 
audit to be conducted:  
Provided also that if such information, that the accounts of the Council do not represent a true and fair 
view of its finances, is sent to the Council by the Central Government, then, t he Council may, wherever 
appropriate cause a special audit or take such other action as it considers necessary and shall furnish an 
action taken report on it to the Central Government.]  
2[(5A) As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, the Coun cil shall circulate the audited 
accounts to its members at least fifteen days in advance and consider and approve these accounts in a 
special meeting convened for the purpose.  
(5B) The Council shall cause to be published in the Gazette of India not later t han the 30th day of 
September of the year next following, a copy of the audited accounts and the Report of the Council for 
that year duly approved by the Council and copies of the said accounts and Report shall be forwarded to 
the Central Government and to  all the members of the Institute.]  
(6) Subject to such directions as the Central Government may, by order in writing, make in this 
behalf, the Council may borrow — 
(a) any money required for meeting its liabilities on capital account on the security of the  fund or 
on the security of any other assets for the time being belonging to it; or  
(b) for the purpose of meeting current liabilities pending the receipt of income by way of 
temporary loan or over -draft.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTER OF MEMBERS  
19. Register .—(1) The Council shall maintain in the prescribed manner a Register of the members of 
the Institute.  
(2) The Register shall include the following particulars about every member of the Institute,           
namely: — 
(a) his full name, date of birth, domicile, resi dential and professional addresses;  
(b) the date on which his name is entered in the Register;  
(c) his qualifications;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 8 of 2006, s. 16, for sub -section s (3), (4) and ( 5) (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 16 , ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  13 (d) whether he holds a certificate of practice; and  
(e) any other particulars which may be prescribed.  
(3) The Council shall cause to be published in such manner as may be prescribed a list of members of 
the Institute as on the 1st day of April of each year, and shall, if requested to do so by any such member, 
send him a copy of such list  1[on payment of suc h amount as may be prescribed].  
2[(4) Every member of the Institute shall, on his name being entered in the Register, pay such annual 
membership fee as may be determined, by notification, by the Council, which shall not exceed rupees five 
thousand:  
Provided that the Council may with the p rior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees five thousand which shall not in any case exceed rupees ten thousand.]  
20. Removal from the Register .—(1) The Council may remove from the Register the name of any 
member of the Ins titute — 
(a) who is dead; or  
(b) from whom a request has been received to that effect; or  
(c) who has not paid any prescribed fee required to be paid by him; or  
(d) who is found to have been subject at the time when his name was entered in the Register, or 
who at any time thereafter has become subject, to any of the disabilities mentioned in section 8, or 
who for any other reason has ceased to be entitled to have his name borne on the Register.  
(2) The Council shall remove from the Register the name of any m ember in respect of whom an order 
has been passed under this Act removing him from membership of the Institute.  
3[(3) If the name of any member has been removed from the Register under clause ( c) of                
sub-section ( 1), on receipt of an applicat ion, his name may be entered again in the Register on payment of 
the arrears of annual fee and entrance fee along with such additional fee, as may be determined, by 
notification, by the Council, which shall not exceed rupees two thousand:  
Provided that the  Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees two thousand, which shall not in any case exceed rupees four thousand.]  
CHAPTER V  
MISCONDUCT  
4[21. Disciplinary Directorate. —(1) The Council shall, by notification, establish a Disciplinary 
Directorate headed by an officer of the Institute designated as Director (Discipline) and such other 
employees for making investigations in respect of any information or complaint received by it.  
(2) On receipt of any  information or complaint along with the prescribed fee, the Director (Discipline) 
shall arrive at a prima facie opinion on the occurrence of the alleged misconduct.  
(3) Where the Director (Discipline) is of the opinion that a member is guilty of any profe ssional or 
other misconduct mentioned in the First Schedule, he shall place the matter before the Board of Discipline 
and where the Director (Discipline) is of the opinion that a member is guilty of any professional or other 
misconduct mentioned in the Sec ond Schedule or in both the Schedules, he shall place the matter before 
the Disciplinary Committee.  
(4) In order to make investigations under the provisions of this Act, the Disciplinary Directorate shall 
follow such procedure as may be specified.  
(5) Wher e a complainant withdraws the complaint, the Director (Discipline) shall place such 
withdrawal before the Board of Discipline or as the case may be, the Disciplinary Committee, and the 
said Board or Committee may, if it is of the view that the circumstance s so warrant, permit the 
withdrawal at any stage.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 8 of 2006, s. 17 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f.  17-11-2006).  
3. Ins. by s. 18 , ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 21 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  14 1[21A. Board of Discipline .—(1) The Council shall constitute a Boa rd of Discipline consisting of — 
(a) a person with experience in law and having knowledge of the disciplinary matters and the 
profession, to  be its presiding officer;  
(b) two members one of whom shall be a member of the Council elected by the Council and the 
other member shall be the person designated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
(c) the Director (Discipline) shall functi on as the Secretary of the Board.  
(2) The Board of Discipline shall follow summary disposal procedure in dealing with all the cases 
before it.  
(3) Where the Board of Discipline is of the opinion that a member is guilty of a professional or other 
misconduct  mentioned in the First Schedule, it shall afford to the member an opportunity of being heard 
before making any order against him and may thereafter take any one or more of the following actions, 
namely: — 
(a) reprimand the member;  
(b) remove the name of th e member from the Register up to a period of three months;  
(c) impose such fine as it may think fit which may extend to rupees one lakh.  
(4) The Director (Discipline) shall submit before the Board of Discipline all information and 
complaints where he is of  the opinion that there is no prima facie  case and the Board of Discipline may, if 
it agrees with the opinion of the Director (Discipline), close the matter or in case of disagreement, may 
advise the Director (Discipline) to further investigate the matter.  
21B. Disciplinary Committee .—(1) The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee 
consisting of the President or the Vice -President of the Council as the Presiding Officer and two members 
to be elected from amongst the members of the Council and two members to be nominated by the Central 
Government from amongst the persons of eminence having experience in the field of law, economics, 
business, finance or accountancy:  
Provided that the Council may constitute more Disciplinary Committees as and when it considers 
necessary.  
(2) The Disciplinary Committee, while considering the cases placed before it, shall follow such 
procedure as may be specified.  
(3) Where the Disciplinary Committee is of the opinion that a member is guilty of a professional or 
other mi sconduct mentioned in the Second Schedule or both the First Schedule and the Second Schedule, 
it shall afford to the member an opportunity of being heard before making any order against him and may 
thereafter take any one or more of the following actions, namely: — 
(a) reprimand the member;  
(b) remove the name of the member from the Register permanently or for such period, as it thinks 
fit; 
(c) impose such fine as it may think fit, which may extend to rupees five lakhs.  
(4) The allowances payable to the members nominated by the Central Government sha ll be such as 
may be specified.  
21C. Authority, Disciplinary Committee, Board of Discipline and Director  (Discipline) to have 
powers of civil court .—For the purposes of an inquiry under the provisions of this Act, the Authority, the 
Disciplinary Committee, Board of Discipline and the Director (Discipline) shall have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 8 of 2006, s. 20 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).   15 (b) the discovery and production of any document; and  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sections 21, 21A, 21B, 21C and 22, “member of the  Institute ” 
includes a person who was a member of the Institute on the date of the alleged misconduct although he 
has ceased to be a member of the Instit ute at the time of the inquiry.  
21D.  Transitional provisions .—All complaints pending before the Council  or any inquiry initiated 
by the Disciplinary Committee or any reference or appeal made to a High Court prior to the 
commencement of the Company Secretaries (Amendment) Act, 2006  (8 of 2006)  shall continue to be 
governed by the provisions of this Act, as i f this Act had not been amended by the Company Secret aries 
(Amendment) Act, 2006.]  
1[22. Professional or other misconduct defined .—For the purposes of this Act, the expression 
“professional or other misconduct ” shall be deemed to include any act or omission provided in any of the 
Schedules, but nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or abridge in any way the power 
conferred or duty cast on the Director (Discipline) under sub -section ( 1) of section 2 1 to inquire into the 
conduct of any member of the Institute under any other circumstances.]  
2[22A.  Constitution of Appellate Authority .—The Appellate Authority constituted under               
sub-section ( 1) of section 22A of the Chartered Accountants Act , 1949  (38 of 1949), shall be deemed to 
be the Appellate Authority for the purposes of this Act subject to the modification that for clause ( b) of 
said sub -section ( 1), the following clause  had been substituted, namely: — 
“(b) the Central Government shall, by notification appoint two part -time members from amongst 
the persons who have been members of the Council of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India 
for at least one full term and who is not a sitting member of the Council;].  
22B.  Term of office of  members of Authority .—A person appointed as a member shall hold office 
for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of 
sixty -two years, whichever is earlier.  
22C.  Procedure , etc., of Authority .—The provisions of section 22C, section 22D and section 22F of 
the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 1949) shall apply to the Authority in relation to allowances 
and terms and conditions of service of its Chairperson and members, and in the discharge of i ts functions 
under this Act as they apply to it in the discharge of its functions under the Ch artered Accountants Act, 
1949.  
22D.  Officers and other staff of Authority .—(1) The Council shall make available to the Authority 
such officers and other staff members as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions 
of the Authority.  
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff members of 
the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.  
22E.  Appeal to Authority .—(1) Any member of the Institute aggrieved by any order of the Board            
of Discipline or the Disciplinary Committee imposing on him any of the penalties referred to in                   
sub-section ( 3) of section 21A and sub -section ( 3) of section 21B, may within ninety days from the date 
on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Authority:  
Provided that the Director (Discipline) may also appeal against the decision of the Board of 
Discipline or the Disciplinary  Committee to the Authority if so authorised by the Council, within ninety 
days:  
Provided further that the Authority may entertain any such appeal after the expiry of the said period 
of ninety days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for no t filing the appeal in time.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 21, for section 22 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  16 (2) The Authority may, after calling for the records of any case, revise any order made by the Board 
of Discipline or the Disciplinary Committee under sub -section ( 3) of section 21A and sub -section (3) of 
section 21B and may — 
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order;  
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, or enhance the penalty imposed by the order;  
(c) remit the case to the Board of Discipline or Disciplinary Committee for such further enquiry 
as the Authority considers  proper in the circumstances of the case; or  
(d) pass such other order as the Authority thinks fit:  
Provided that the Authority shall give an opportunity of being heard to the parties conce rned before 
passing any order.]  
CHAPTER VI  
REGIONAL  COUNCILS  
23. Constitution and functions of Regional Councils .—(1) For the purpose of advising and 
assisting it on matters concerning its functions, the Council may constitute such Regional Councils as and 
when it deems fit for one or more of the regional constituencies t hat may be notified by the Central 
Government under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9.  
(2) The Regional Councils shall be constituted in such manner and exercise such functions as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, each Regional Council of the dissolved 
company shall, on the commencement of this Act, become the Regional Council of the Institute for the 
area for which it was functioning as a Regional Council immediately before such commencem ent and 
shall func tion as such — 
(i) for a period of two years from such commencement, or  
(ii) till a Regional Council is constituted for such area in accordance with the provisions of this 
section,  
whichever is earlier.  
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
24. Penalty for falsely claiming to be a member, etc. —Subject to the provision s of section 7, any 
person who, — 
(a) not be ing a member of the Institute, — 
(i) represent s that he is a member of the Institute; or  
(ii) uses the designation “Company Secretary ”; or 
(iii) uses the letters “A.C.S.” or “F.C.S. ” after his name; or  
(b) being a member of the Institute, but not having a certificate of practice, represents that he is in 
practice or practi ses as a Company Secretary,  
shall be punishable on first conviction wit h fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and on any 
subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
25. Penalty for using name of the Council, or awarding degree of Company                   
Secretary .—(1) Save as otherwise provide d in this Act, no person shall — 
(a) use a name or a common seal which is identical with the name or the common seal of the 
Institute or so nearly resembles it as to deceive or as is likely to deceive the public;  
(b) award any degree, diploma or certificate or bestow any designation which indicates or 
purports to indicate the position or attainment of any qualification or competence  in Company 
Secretary ship similar to that of a member of the Institute; or  
(c) seek to regulate in any manner whatsoever the profession of Company Secretaries.  17 (2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, without prejudice to any ot her 
proceedings which may be taken against him, be punishable on first conviction with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, and on any subsequent con viction with imprisonment which  may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to five th ousand rupees, or with both.  
1[*    *   *   *  *] 
 26. Companies not to engage in Company Secretaryship .—(1) No company, whether 
incorporated in I ndia or elsewhere, shall practis e as Company Secretaries.  
2[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the “company ” shall  include any 
limited liability partnership which has company as its partner for the purposes of this section .] 
(2) Any company contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable on first 
conviction with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.  
 27. Unqualified persons not to sign documents .—(1) No person other than a member of t he 
Institute shall sign any document on behalf of a Company Secretary in practice or a firm of such 
Company Secretaries in his or its professional capacity.  
3[(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, without prejudice to any 
other proceedings which may be taken against him, be punishable on first conviction with a fine not less 
than five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in the event of a second or 
subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term w hich may extend to one year or with a fine not less 
than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees or with both.]  
28. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every  person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwi thstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished a ccordingly:  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Sanction to prosecute .—No person shall be prosecuted under this Act except on a complaint 
made by or under the order of the Council or of the Central Government.  
4[CHAPTER VII A  
QUALITY REVIEW BOARD  
29A. Establishment of Quality Review Board. —(1) The Central Government shall, by  notification, 
constitute a Quality Review Board consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by Act 8 of 2006, s. 23 (w.e.f. 8-8-2006 ). 
2. Explanation  ins. by Act 4 of 2012, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8-1-2012 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 24, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
4.  Ins. by s. 25 , ibid. (w.e.f. 17-11-2006 ). 18 (2) The Chairperson and members of the Board shall be appointed from amongst the persons of 
eminence having experience in the field of law, economics, busi ness, finance or accountancy.  
(3) Two members of the Board shall be nominated by the Council and other two members shall be 
nominated by the Central Government.  
29B. Functions of Board. —The Board shall perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to make recommendations to the Council with regard to the quality of services provided by 
the members of the Institute;  
(b) to review the quality of services provided by the members of the Institute including secretarial 
services; and  
(c) to guide the members of t he Institute to improve the quality of services and adherence to the 
various statutory and other regulatory requirements.  
29C. Procedure of Board. —The Board shall meet at such time and place and follow in its meetings 
such procedure as may be specified.  
29D. Terms and conditions of service of Chairpers on and members of Board and its 
expenditure. —(1) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the members of the Board, 
and their allowances shall be such as may be specified.  
(2) The expenditu re of the Board shall be borne by the Council. ] 
30. [Amendment of Act 8 of 2006 ].—Omitted  by the Company Secretaries  Act, 2006  (8 of 2006 )       
s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 17-11-2006 ). 
CHAPTER IX  
DISSOLUTION OF THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA REGISTERED UNDER THE 
COMPANIES ACT  
31. Dissolution of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India registered under the Companies 
Act.—On the commencement of this Act — 
(a) the company known as the Institute of Company Secretaries of In dia registered under the 
Companies Act shall stand dissolved and thereafter no person shall make, assert or take any claims or 
demands or proceedings against the dissolved company or against any officer thereof in his capacity 
as such officer except in  so far as may be necessary, for enforcing the pr ovisions of this Act;  
(b) the right of every member to, or in respect of, the dissolved company shall be extinguished, 
and thereafter no member of that company shall make, assert or take any claims or demands or  
proceedings in respect of that company except as provided in this Act.  
32. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the dissolved company to the Institute. —(1) On the 
commencement of this Act, there shall be transferred to and vested in the Institute all the  assets and 
liabilities of the dissolved company.  
(2) The assets of the dissolved company shall be deemed to include all rights and powers, and all 
property, whether movable or immovable, of that company, including in particular, cash balances, reserve 
funds, investments, deposits and all other interests and rights in or arising out of such property as m ay be 
in the possession of the dissolved company and all books of accounts, papers or documents of the 
dissolved company ; and the liabilities shall be deeme d to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of 
whatever kind then existing of that company.  
(3) All contracts, debts, bonds, agreements and other instruments of whatever nature to which the 
dissolved company is a party, subsisting or having effect immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, shall be of as full force and effect against or in favo ur of the Institute, as the case may be, and may 
be enforced as fully and effectively as if instead of the dissolved company, the Institute had been a p arty 
thereto.  19 (4) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature 
by or against the dissolved company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any 
way p rejudicially affected by reason  of the transfer to the Institute of the assets and liabilities of the 
dissolved company or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be 
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Institute, in the same manne r and to the same extent 
as it would or may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the dissolved company if this Act 
had not been passed.  
33. Provisions respecting employees of the dissolved company. —(1) Every person employed in the 
dissolved company and continuing in its employment immediately before the commencement of this Act 
shall, as from such commencement, become an employee of the Institute, shall hold his office or service 
therein by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditio ns and with the same rights and 
privileges as to pension and gratuity as he would have held the same under the dissolved company if this 
Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Institute is 
terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment are duly altered by the 
Institute.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the serv ices of any employee of the dissolved 
company to the Institute shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under that Act or other 
law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
34. Alteration in the Register and cancellation of certificate. —(1) Where an order is made under 
this Act reprimanding a member, a record of the punishment shall be entered against his name in the 
Register.  
(2) Where the name of any member is removed, the certificate of practice granted to him under this 
Act shall be recalled and cancelled.  
35. Directions of the Central Government. —(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, 
issue such directions to the Council as in the opinion of the Central Govern ment are conducive to the 
fulfil ment of the objects of this Act and in the discharge of its functions, the Council shall be bound to 
carry out any such directions.  
(2) Directions issued under sub -section ( 1) may include directions to the Council to make an y 
regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made.  
(3) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Council has persistently committed default in 
giving effect to the directions issued under this section, the Central Government may, aft er giving an 
opportunity to the Council to state its case, by ord er, dissolve the Council, where after a new Council shall 
be constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be 
specified by the Central Government.  
(4) Where the Central Government passes an order under sub -section ( 3) dissolving the Council, it 
may, pending the constitution of a new Council in accordance with the provisions of this Act, authori se 
any person or body of persons to take over the manage ment of the affairs of the Institute and to exercise 
such functions as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government.  
1[36. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Council or the Authority or the Disciplinary Committee or the 
Tribunal or the Board or the Board of Discipline or the Disciplinary Directorate or any officer of that 
Government, Council, Authority, Disciplinary Committee, Tribunal, Board,  Board of Discipline or the 
Disciplinary Directorate, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made thereunder.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 27, for section 36  (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006)  20 1[36A. Members, etc. , to be public servants. —The Chairperson, Presiding Officer, members and 
other officers and employees of the Authority, Disciplinary Committee, Tribunal, Board, Board of 
Discipline or the Disciplinary Directorate shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21  of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860).]  
37. Maintenance of branch offices. —(1) Where a Company Secretary in practice or a firm of such 
Company Secretaries has more than one office in India, each one of such offices shall be in the separate 
charge of a member of the Institute:  
Provided that the Council may in suitable cases exempt any Company Secretary in practice or firm of 
such Company Secretaries from the operation of this sub -section.  
(2) Every Company Secretary in practice or firm of such Company Se cretaries maintaining more than 
one office shall send to the Council a list of offices and the persons in charge thereof and shall keep the 
Council informed of any changes in relation thereto.  
38. Reciprocity. —(1) Where any country, notified by the Central  Government in this behalf in the 
Official Gazette, prevents persons of Indian domicile from becoming members of any institution similar 
to the Institute established under this Act or from practi sing the profession of Company Secretary ship or 
subjects them  to unfair discrimination in that country, no subject of any such country shall be entitled to 
become a member of the Institute or practi se the profession of Company Secretaries in India.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Council may pr escribe the conditions, if any, 
subject to which foreign qualifications relating to Company Secret aryship shall be recogni sed for the 
purposes of entry in the Register.  
2[38A. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of election and nomination in respect of members to the Council under             
sub-section ( 2) of section 9;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal, 
place of meetings and allowances to b e paid to them under sub -section ( 3) of section 10B;  
(c) the procedure of investigation under sub -section ( 4) of section 21;  
(d) the procedure while considering the cases by the Disciplinary Committee under                     
sub-section (2) and fixation of allowances of the nominated members under sub -section ( 4) of     
section 21B;  
(e) the procedure to be followed by the Board in its meetings under section 29C; and  
(f) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the Board under         
sub-section ( 1) of section 29D.]  
39. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Council may, by notification in the Gazette of India , make 
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the professions that may be recogni sed under sub -section ( 2) of section 2 and 3[item  (2)]  and 
(4) of Part I of the First Schedule;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 8 of 2006, s. 28 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “items ( 1), (3)” (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  21 (b) the examinations and training for the purposes of clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(c) the manner of making an application and granting thereof under sub -section ( 3) of section 4 or 
sub-section ( 3) of section 5;  
(d) the fees payable under sub -section ( 3) of section 4, sub -section ( 3) of section 5,                       
sub-section ( 2) of section 6,  1[***]  sub-section ( 2) of section  15, sub -section ( 4) of section 19 and 
clause ( c) of  sub-section ( 1) of section 20;  
(e) the qualifications and practical experience for the purposes of sub -section ( 3) of section 5;  
(f) the form in which an application may be made under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(h) the transaction of business by the Council for the discharg e of its functions under section 
15and other provisions of this Act, the place at which and the interval s at which the Council shall 
hold its meetings for the transaction of such business, the procedure to be followed at such meetings 
and all other matters  connected therewith;  
(i) the regulation and maintenance of the status and standards of professional qualifications of 
members of the Institute, as required by  3[clause ( g)] of sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(j) the carrying out of research in matters of i nterest to Company Secretaries as required by  
4[clause ( h)] of sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(k) the maintenance of libraries and publication of books and periodicals relating to management 
of companies and allied subjects, as required by  5[clause ( f) of section 15A];  
6*  *   *   *   * 
(m) the transaction of business by the Standing Committees and other Committees referred to in 
section 17, the places at which and the intervals at which such Committees shall hold their meetings 
for the transaction of such business, the procedure to be followed at such meeting and all other 
matters connected therewith;  
(n) the manner in which the Register may be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(o) the other particulars to be included in the Register, as requi red by clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 19;  
(p) the manner in which the annual list of members of the Institute may be published under              
sub-section (3) of section 19;  
7*   *   *   *  * 
(r) the manner in which Regional Counci l may be constituted under sub -section ( 2) of                 
section 23 and the functions thereof;  
(s) the conditions subject to which foreign qualifications may be recogni sed under                           
sub-section ( 2) of section 38;  
(t) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act. 
                                                           
1. The words, brackets and letter “clause ( a) of” omitted by Act 8 of 2006, s. 30 (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
2. Clause ( g) omitted by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “clause ( i)” (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “clause ( j)” (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “clause ( k) of sub -section ( 2) of section 15” (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
6. Clause ( l) omitted by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
7. Clause ( q) omitted by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f . 8-8-2006).  22 (3) All regulations made by the Council under this Act shall be subject to the condition of previous 
publication and to the approval of the Central Government.  
1*    *    *  *  * 
2[40. Rules, regulations and notifications to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every 
regulation made and every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while  it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses a gree in 
making any modification in the rule, regulation or notification, or both Houses agree that the rule, 
regulation or notification should not be made, or issued, the rule, regulation or notification shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified f orm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule, regulation or notification.]   
                                                           
1. Sub-section ( 4) omitted by Act 8 of 2006, s. 30 (w.e.f.8 -8-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  23 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 21 (3), 21A( 3) and 22]  
PART I  
Professional misconduct in relation to company secretaries in practice  
A Company Secretary in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct,                 
if he— 
(1) allows any person to practice in his name as a  Company Secretary unless such person is also a 
Company Secretary in practice and is in partnership with or employed by him;  
(2) pays or allows or agrees to pay or allow, directly or indirectly, any share, commission or 
brokerage in the fees or profits of his professional business, to any person other than a member of the 
Institute or a partner or a retired partner or the legal representative of a deceased partner, or a member 
of any other professional body or with such other persons having such qualificati ons as may be 
prescribed, for the purpose of rendering such professional services from time to time in or outside 
India.  
Explanation .—In this item, “partner ” includes a person residing outside India with whom a 
Company Secretary in practice has entered into partnership which is not in contravention of item ( 4) 
of this Part;  
(3) accepts or agrees to accept any part of the profits of the professional work of a p erson who is 
not a member of the Institute:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting a member from entering 
into profit sharing or other similar arrangements, including receiving any share commission or 
brokerage in the fees , with a member of such professional body or other person having qualifications, 
as is referred to in item ( 2) of this part;  
(4) enters into partnership, in or outside India, with any person other than a Company Secretary in 
practice or such other person w ho is a member of any other professional body having such 
qualifications as may be prescribed, including a resident who but for his residence abroad would be 
entitled to be registered as a member under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 or whose 
qualifications are recognised by the Central Government or the Council for the purpose of permitting 
such partnerships;  
(5) secures, either through the services of a person who is not an employee of such company 
secretary or who is not his partner or by mean s which are not open to a Company Secretary, any 
professional business:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting any arrangement 
permitted in terms of items ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of this Part;  
(6) solicits clients or professional  work, either directly or indirectly, by circular, advertisement, 
personal communication or interview or by any other means:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing or prohibiting — 
(i) any company secretary from applying or requesting for or inviting or securing professional 
work from another company secretary in practice; or  
(ii) a member from responding to tenders or enquiries issued by various users of professional 
services or organisations from time to time and securing p rofessional work as a consequence;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2006, s. 32, for  the First Schedule and  the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  24 (7) advertises his professional attainments or services, or uses any designation or expressions 
other than Company Secretary on professional documents, visiting cards, letterheads or sign boards, 
unless it be a degree of a University established by law in India or recognised by the Central 
Government or a title indicating membership of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India or of 
any other institution that has been recognised by the Central Government or may be reco gnised by the 
Council:  
Provided that a member in practice may advertise through a write up setting out the services 
provided by him or his firm and particulars of his firm subject to such guidelines as may be issued by 
the Council;  
(8) accepts a position a s a Company Secretary in practice previously held by another Company 
Secretary in practice without first communicating with him in writing;  
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to accept, in respect of any professional 
employment, fees which are based on a percentage of profits or which are contingent upon the 
findings, or results of such employment, except as permitted under any regulation made under this 
Act; 
(10) engages in any business or occupation other than the profession of Company Sec retary 
unless permitted by the Council so to engage:  
Provided that nothing contained herein shall disentitle a Company Secretary from being a director 
of a company except as provided in the Companies Act, 1956(1 of 1956);  
(11) allows a person not being a m ember of the Institute in practice, or a member not being his 
partner to sign on his behalf or on behalf of his firm, anything which he is required to certify as a 
Company Secretary, or any other statements relating thereto.  
PART II  
Professional misconduct  in relation to members of the Institute in service  
A member of the Institute (other than a member in practice) shall be deemed to be guilty of 
professional misconduct, if he, being an employee of any company, firm or person — 
(1) pays or allows or agrees t o pay, directly or indirectly, to any person any share in the 
emoluments of the employment undertaken by him;  
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part of fees, profits or gains from a lawyer, a Company 
Secretary or broker engaged by such company, firm or p erson or agent or customer of such company, 
firm or person by way of commission or gratification.  
PART III  
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to b e guilty of professional 
misconduct, if he — 
(1) not being a Fellow of the Institute, acts as a Fellow of the Institute;  
(2) does not supply the information called for, or does not comply with the requirements asked 
for, by the Institute, Council or any of its Committees, Director (Discipline), Board of Discipline, 
Disciplinary Committee, Quality Review Board or the Appellate Authority;  
(3) while inviting professional work from another Company Secretary or while responding to 
tenders or enquiries or while ad vertising through a write up, or anything as provided for in items ( 6) 
and ( 7) of Part I of this Schedule, gives information knowing it to be false.  25 PART IV  
Other misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, wheth er in practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of other 
misconduct, if — 
(1) he is held guilty by any civil or criminal court for an offence which is punishable with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months;  
(2) in the opinion of the Council, he brings disrepute to the profession or the institute as a result 
of his action whether or not related to his professional work.   26 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 21( 3), 21B( 3) and 22]  
PART I  
Professional misconduct in relation to company secretaries in practice  
A Company Secretary in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he — 
(1) discloses information acquired in the course of his professional engagement to any person 
other than his client so engaging him, without the consen t of his client, or otherwise than as required 
by any law for the time being in force;  
(2) certifies or submits in his name, or in the name of his firm, a report of an examination of the 
matters relating to company secretarial practice and related statemen ts unless the examination of such 
statements has been made by him or by a partner or an employee in his firm or by another Company 
Secretary in practice;  
(3) permits his name or the name of his firm to be used in connection with any report or statement 
contingent upon future transactions in a manner which may lead to the belief that he vouches for the 
accuracy of the forecast;  
(4) expresses his opinion on any report or statement given to any business or enterprise in which 
he, his firm, or a partner in his firm has a substantial interest;  
(5) fails to disclose a material fact known to him in his report or statement but the disclosure of 
which is necessary in making such report or statement, where he is concerned with such report or 
statement in a professiona l capacity;  
(6) fails to report a material mis -statement known to him and with which he is concerned in a 
professional capacity;  
(7) does not exercise due diligence, or is grossly negligent in the conduct of his professional 
duties;  
(8) fails to obtain suf ficient information which is necessary for expression of an opinion or its 
exceptions are sufficiently material to negate the expression of an opinion;  
(9) fails to invite attention to any material departure from the generally accepted procedure 
relating t o the secretarial practice;  
(10) fails to keep moneys of his client other than fees or remuneration or money meant to be 
expended in a separate banking account or to use such moneys for purposes for which they are 
intended within a reasonable time.  
PART II  
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of professional 
misconduct, if he — 
(1) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations made thereunder or any 
guidelines issued by the Council;  
(2) being an employee of any company, firm or person, discloses confidential information 
acquired in the course of his employment, except as and when required by any law for the time bein g 
in force or except as permitted by the employer;  
(3) includes in any information, statement, return or form to be submitted to the Institute, Council 
or any of its Committees, Director (Discipline), Board of Discipline, Disciplinary Committee, Quality 
Review Board or the Appellate Authority any particulars knowing them to be false;  
(4) defalcates or embezzles moneys received in his professional capacity.  27 PART III  
Other misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute,  whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of other 
misconduct, if he is held guilty by any civil or criminal court for an offence which is punishable with 
imprisonment for a term exceeding six months.]  
 
--------------------------The Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act, 1980--------------------------
 
1 
 THE DELHI HIGH COURT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1980  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. Power of Chief Justice to transfer pending suits and proceedings to subordinate courts . 
 
   
2 
 THE DELHI HIGH COURT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1980  
[2nd July , 1980.]  
An Act further to amend the Delhi High Court Act,  1966.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Delhi High Court (Amendment) 
Act, 1980.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
4. Power of Chief Justice to transfer pending suits and proceedings to subordinate courts. —The 
Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi may transfer any suit or other proceedings which is or are 
pending in the High Court immediately before the commencement of this Ac t and in which no witnesses 
have been examined before such commencement to such subordinate court in the Union territory of Delhi 
as would have jurisdiction to entertain such suit or proceedings had such suit or proceedings been 
instituted or filed for the  first time after such commencement.  
                                                           
1. 1st October , 1980, vide notification No. G.S.R. 522(E), dated 6th September , 1980, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
2. Sections 2 and  3 rep. by  Act 19 of 1988, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
 
--------------------------The Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Amendment Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE DOCK WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT)  
AMENDMENT ACT, 1980  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. Validation.  
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
  2 
 THE DOCK WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT)  
AMENDMENT ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1980 
[29th November, 1980.]  
An Act further to amend the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Amendment 
Act, 1980.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
3. Validation. —Every fund created or purporting to have been created and every provision with 
respect thereto made or purporting to have been made under the principal Act before the  commencement 
of this Act shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be, and to have always been, as validly and effectively 
created or made as if the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, had been in 
force at all material times and accordingly, notwithstanding any judgment , decree or order of any court, — 
(a) all contributions to any such fund received or collected before the commencement of this Act 
shall be deemed to be and shall be deemed always to have been as validly received  or collected as if 
the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, were in force at all material 
times;  
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of, 
and no enforcement shall be made by any court of any decree or order directing the refund of, any 
such contribution which had been received or collected and which would have been validly received 
or collected if the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act , had been in 
force at all material times;  
(c) recoveries shall be made of all contributions to any such funds which have not been received 
or collected but which would have been received or collected if the provisions of section 3 of the 
principal Act, as  amended by this Act, had been in force at all material times.  
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that no act or omission on the part of 
any person, before the commencement of this Act, shall be punishable as an offence which woul d not 
have been so punishable if this Act had not come into force.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
 
                                                           
1. Section 2 rep.  by Act 19 of 1988, s. 3  and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
2. Sections 4 and 5, ibid.,  rep. by  s. 3 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
 
--------------------------The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
  THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) ACT, 1980   
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Restriction on the dereservation of forests or use of forest land for non -forest purpose . 
3. Constitution of Advisory Committee . 
4. Power to make rules . 
5. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 69 OF 1980  
[27th December, 1980 .] 
An Act to provide for the conservation of forests and for matters connected therewith or ancillary 
or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Y ear of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) 
Act, 1980.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu  and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 25th day of October, 1980.  
2. Restriction on the dereservation of forests or use of forest land for non -forest purpose .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force in a State, no State 
Government or other authority shall make, except with the prior approval of the Central G overnment, any 
order directing — 
(i) that any reserved forest (within the meaning of the expression “reserved forest ” in any law for  
the time being in force in that State) or any portion thereof, shall cease to be reserved;  
(ii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be used for any non -forest purpose.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section “non-forest purpose ” means th e breaking up or 
clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for  any purpose other than reafforestation.  
3. Constitution of Advisory Committee .—The Central Government may constitute a Committee 
consisting of such number of persons as it may deem fit to advise that Government with regard to — 
(i) the grant of approval under section 2; and  
(ii) any other matter connected with the conservation of forests which may be referred to it by the 
Central Government . 
4. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a tota l period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modificati on 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice t o the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
5. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Forest (Conservation) Ordinance, 1980  (17 of 1980)  is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the said 
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Hind Cycles Limited and Sen-Raleigh Limited (Nationalisation) Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE HIND CYCLES  LIMITED  AND SEN -RALEIGH LIMITED  (NATIONALISATION) 
ACT , 1980  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the two companies.  
4. General effect of vesting . 
5. Owners of the two Companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities . 
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakin gs of the two com panies in two 
Government Companies.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount . 
8. Payment of further amounts . 
CHAPTET IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the two companies.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of  the undertakings of the two companies to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
11. Duty o f persons to account for assets , etc., in their possession.  
12. Accounts and audit. 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
13. Continuance of employees  
14. Provident fund and other funds.  
CHAPTET VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments . 
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner.  
17. Certain powers of Central Government or Government companies . 
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
19. Priority of claims.  
20. Examination of claims . 
21. Admission or rejection of the claims . 
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner . 2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Disbursement of amounts to the two companies . 
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account . 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect . 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Government 
companies . 
27. Penalties . 
28. Offences by companies.  
29. Protect ion of action taken in good faith.  
30. Delegation of powers.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to remove difficulties.  
33. Repeal and saving.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE HIND CYCLES LIMITED AND SEN -RALEIG H LIMITED  (NATIONALISATION)              
ACT , 1980  
ACT NO. 70 OF 1980  
[27th Decembe r, 1980 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition of the undertakings of the Hind Cycles  Limited , and Sen -Raleigh 
Limited, with a view to securing the proper management of such undertakings so as to subserve the 
interest s of the general public by ensuring the continued manufacture, production and distribution of 
bicycles, and their component parts and accesso ries which are essential to the needs of the economy 
of the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Hind Cycles Limited and Sen -Raleigh Limited had  been engaged in the manufacture  
production of articles mentioned in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951(65 of 1951), namely, bicycle and their component parts and accessories;  
AND WHEAREAS  the management of the undertakings of Hind Cycles Limited and Sen -Raleigh 
Limited were taken over by the Central Government under the provisions of the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951(65 of 1951);  
AND WHEAREAS  it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of Hind Cycles  Limited  and Sen -Raleigh 
Limited to ensure that the interests of the general public are served by the continuance, by the 
undertakings of the  two companies, of the manufacture, production and distribution of the aforesaid 
articles which are essential to the needs of the economy of th e country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Hind Cycles Limited  and             
Sen-Raleigh Limited ( Nationalisation) Act, 1980.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th day of October, 1980.  
2. Definitions .—In this  Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 15th day of October, 1980;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 15;  
(c) “Custodian ” means the Custodian appointed under sub -sectio n (2) of section 9 to take over,  or 
carry on, the managemen t of the undertakings of either , or both, of the two companies;  
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “Sen-Raleigh Limited ” includes Sen and Pandit Industries Limited, Ancillary Industries (Lugs) 
Private Limited, Ancilla ry Industries (Forgings) Private Limited, Ancillary Industries (Cranks) 
Private Limited and Naokhali Machine Tools Limited, all having their registered offices at 1, 
Middeton Street, Calcutta;  
(g) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision of this Act,  means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of that provision and  different dates may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(h) “two companies ” means Hind Cycles Limited  and Sen -Raleigh Limited, being companies as 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), and having their registered offices at Birlagram, 
Nagda (Madhya Pradesh), and 1, Middleton Street, Calcutta, respectively;  
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act, 1956            
(1 of 1956), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act . 4 
 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings o f the two 
companies .—On the appointed day, the undertakings of each of the two companies, and the right, title 
and interest of each of the two companies in relation to such  undertaking s, shall, by virtue of the Act,  
stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of each company  referred to in section 3 shall be 
deemed to include all assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, an d all property, 
movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and 
equipment, cash balances, cash on hand, cheques, demand drafts, reserve fun ds, investments, book debts, 
and all other rights and inte rest in, o r arising out of, such  property as were immediately before the 
appointed day in the ownership, possession , power or control of such company whether within or outside 
India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature rela ting thereto, and 
shall also be deemed to include the liabilities specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharge d from any trust, obligation, mortga ge, charge, lien and all 
other e ncumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunctio n, decree or order of any court  
restricting the use of such properties in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the w hole or 
any part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or ot her interest in, or in relation  to, any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other  interest in, or in relation to , any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interest s, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount specified, in relation to the company owning 
such property, in the First Schedule, and also out of the amounts determined under  section 8, but  no such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceab le against any property which has vested in the 
Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to either of the two companies in relation to any 
undertaking which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed 
day and in force immediately before that day shall continue to be in force on and after such day in 
accordance with its tenor in relation to an d for the pu rposes of such undertaking, and , on and from the 
date of vesting of such undertaking under section 6 in a Government company, such Government 
company  shall be deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other 
instrument had been granted to such Government comp any and such Government company  shall hold it 
for the remainder of the period for which the company to which it was granted would have held it under 
the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any  suit, appeal or othe r proceeding of whatever nature  in relation to any 
matter specified in sub -section  (2) of section 5 , in respect of any undertaking of either of the two 
companies , instituted or preferred by or against either of the two companies , is pending, the same shall 
not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of  the transfer of the 
undertakings of either of two companies or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other 
proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the Central Government, or , where the 
undertakings of the two  companies are directed , under section 6 , to vest in Government  Companies,  by or 
against the concerned Government company.  
5. Owners of the two Companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability, 
other than the liability specified in  sub-section  (2), of each of the two companies in respect of any period   5 
 prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the concerned company and shall be enforceable 
against it and not against the Central Government, or , where the undertakings of the two companies are 
directed under section 6, to vest in Government companies , against the concerned Government company.  
(2) Any liability arising in respect of materials supplied to either of the two companies after the 
management of the undertakings  of the Company  had been taken  over by the Central Government  shall, 
on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the Central Government or of the concerned 
Government company aforesaid, and shall be discharged by that Government or Government Compan y, 
as and when repayment for such supplies becomes due and payable.  
(3) For the removal of dou bts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other provision of this Act, no 
liability, other than the liability specified in sub -section  (2), of either of the two companies in relation 
to its undertakings in respect of any period pr ior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the two companies  are directed, under section 6, 
to vest in Government companies , against the concerned Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of either of the two companies, passed on or after the appointed day, in respect of any 
matter, claim or dispute, not being a matter, claim or dispute in relation to any matter referred to in 
sub-section ( 2), which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or , 
where the undertakings of the two companies are directed, under section 6, to vest in Government 
companies , against the concerned Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by either of the two companies before the appointed day, for the 
contravention of any provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the two companies are directed, under section 6, 
to vest in Government compan ies, against the concerned Government company.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the two Companies in 
two Government Companies .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section s 3 and 4, the Central 
Government may, subject to such terms and conditions as it may think  fit to impose, direct, by 
notification, that each of the undertakings of the two companies and the right, title and interest of each of 
the two companies in relation to their respective undertakings which have vested in that Government 
under section 3, an d such of the liabilities of each of the two companies as are specified in sub -section ( 2) 
of section 5, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in two Government 
companies either on the date of the notification or on such earl ier or later date (not being a date earlier 
than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest, and the liabilities referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, of 
each of the two companies, in relation  to its undertakings , vest  in two Government companies under            
sub-section ( 1), the Government companies shall, on and from the date of such vesting , be deemed to 
have become  owners in relation to such undertakings, and all the rights and liabilit ies of the Central 
Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such ve sting, be deemed to 
have become  the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government companies.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
 7. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting  in, the Central Government, under          
section 3, of the undertakin gs of each of the two companies  and the right, title and interest of each of the 
two companies in relation to such undertakings, there shall be  given  by the Central Government to each of 
the companies, in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount equal to the amount 
specified against the name of such company in the First Schedule.  
8. Payment of further amounts .—(1) For the deprivation of the two companies of the management 
of their undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to each of the companies in cash, an 
amount calculated at the rate specified against the name of such company in the Second S chedule for the 6 
 period commencing on the date on which the management of the undertakings of such company was 
taken over in pursuance of the orders made by the Central Government under the provisions of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) and ending on the appointed day.  
(2) The amount specified in section 7 and the amount calculated in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum for the period 
commencing  on the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of such amount  is made by 
the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(3) The amount s determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -section s (1) and ( 2) shall be 
given by the Central Gover nment to the two companies in addition to the amount specified in  the First 
Schedule.  
CHAPTET IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the two companies .—The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of each of the two 
companies, the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Gov ernment under 
section 3, shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been  made  by the Central Government under sub -section  (1) of            
section 6, vest in the Government company specified in such direction; or  
(b) where  no such direction has been made by the Central Government, vest in one or more 
Custodians appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2), 
and thereupon the Government company so specified  or the Custodian or Custodians so appointed, as the 
case may be, shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion of all other persons, all such powers and do all 
such things as either , or both, of the two companies  is or are, authorised to exercise and do  in relation to 
its or their undertakings.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals or a Government company as the 
Custodian or Custodians of the undertakings of either, or both, of the two companies in relation to which 
no direction has been made by it under sub -section  (1) of section 6.  
(3) The Custodian or Custodians so appointed shall receive, from the funds of the undertakings of the 
two companies, such remuneration as the Central Government may fix and shall hold office during th e 
pleasure of the Central Government.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the two companies to 
deliver all assets, etc. —(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the two co mpanies 
in Government companies  or on the appointment of a Custodian or Custodians, all persons in charge of 
the management of the undertakings of either of the two companies immediately before such vesting or 
appointment, shall be bound to deliver to t he concerned Government company  or the Custodian or 
Custodians, as the case may be, all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in their custody 
relating to the undertakings.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Government companies  or  the Custodian or Custodi ans, and such Government 
companies  or the Custodian or Custodians may also, if it is considered necessary so to do, apply to the 
Central Government at any time for instructions as to the m anner in which the management of the 
undertakings of the two companies shall be conducted or in relation to any other matter arising in the 
course of such management.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession .—(1) Any person who has, on 
the appointed day, in his possession or under his control any assets, books, documents or other papers 
relating to any undertaking  owned by the two companies, which have vested in the Central Government 
or in Government companies under this Act, and which belong to the two companies , or would have so 
belonged, if the undertakings owned by the two companies had not vested in the Central Government or 
such Government companies , shall be liable to account for the said assets, books, documents and oth er 7 
 papers to the Central Gover nment or the Government companies  and shall deliver them up to the Central 
Government or such Go vernment companies  or to such person or persons as the Cent ral Government or 
the concerned  Government company may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government or the Governme nt companies aforesaid may take or cause to be taken  
all necessary steps for securing possession of the undertakings of the two companies which have vested in 
the Central Gove rnment or the Government compan ies under this Act.  
(3) The two companies shall  within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all their properties and assets, as on the appointed 
day, pertaining to the undertakin gs which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, and, for 
this purpose, the Central Government or the Governmen t companies  aforesaid shall afford to the two 
companies all reasonable facilities.  
12. Accounts and audit.—The Custodian or Custodians of the undertakings of either, or both, of the 
two companies shall maintain an account of the undertakings of the concerned company or companies in 
such form and manner and under such conditions as may be prescribed and the provisions of the 
Com panies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), shall apply to the audit of the accounts so maintained as they apply to 
the audit of the accounts of a company.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
13. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every  person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed in any undertaking of either of the two companies shall become ,— 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an empl oyee of the Central Government, and 
(b) where the undertakings of the two compan ies are directed, under sub-section  (1) of                   
section 6, to vest  in Government Companies, an employee of the concerned Government company on 
and from the date of such vesting or transfer;  
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the concerned Government company, as 
the case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pens ion, gratuity and other matters  as would 
have been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until 
his employment under the Central Government or the concerned Government company, as the case may 
be, is duly terminated or until his remune ration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the 
Central Government or the Concerned Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the  time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking of either of the two companies, to the Central Government or a Government company, 
shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compens ation under this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
14. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where either of the two companies has established a 
provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of its 
undertakings, the moneys relatable to the officers or other employees whose services have become 
transferred by or under this Act to the Central Government or Gover nment company shall, out of the 
moneys standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or 
other fund, stand transferred to , and vest in, the Central Government or the concerned Government 
company, as the case m ay be.  
(2) The moneys which stand transferred under sub -section  (1) to the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or Government 
company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 
 
 8 
 CHAPTET VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable under sections 7 and 8 to each of the two companies, by 
notification, appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such pe rsons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissio ner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed un der this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government shall, 
within thirty days from the specified date, pay in cash to the Commissioner, for payment to e ach of the 
two companies, — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified against the name of such company in the First 
Schedule; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount  payable to each of the two companies  under section 8 . 
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner in 
the Public Account of India and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited 
by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated by the 
Commissioner.  
(3) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of each 
of the two companies in relation to which payments have been made to him under this Act.  
(4) Int erest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in                    
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the two companies.  
17. Certain powers of Central Government or Government companies .—(1) The Central 
Government or the concerned Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive up to 
the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to either of the two companies in 
relation to the undertakings whi ch have vested in the Central Government or the Government company 
and realised after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the 
appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government, or the concerned Government company, as the case may be, may make 
a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by that Government or Government 
company after the appointed day, for discharging any liability of either of the two companies, not being 
any liability specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 5, in relation to any period prior to the appointed day, 
and every such claim shall have priority, in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the 
matter in relation to which such liability has been discharged  by the Central Government or the 
Government company.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities or either of the two companies in respect of 
any transaction prior to the appointed day which have not been discharged on or before the specif ied date 
shall be the liabilities of the respective company.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against either of the 
two companies with regard to any of the matters specified in the Third Schedule pertaining to any 
unde rtaking owned by it  shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the 
specified date:  9 
 Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said per iod of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days , but not thereafter.  
19. Priority of claims .—The claims made under section 18 shall have priorities in accordance with 
the following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such c laims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly; and  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities sp ecified in the immediately higher 
category.  
20. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the  Third Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shal l not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities specified in the Third Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before  which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than „fourteen days‟  notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the c ountry 
and in one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commissioner may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the period specified in the a dvertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the period specified by the 
Commissioner shall be  excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his  opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the concerned company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order in writing , admit or reject  the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions including the place or places a t which he may hold his sitting  and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Ac t, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect o f the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him o n oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 , and Chapter XXVI , of the Cod e of Criminal 
Procedure , 1973  (2 of 1974 ).  10 
 (7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner , may prefer an appeal 
against such decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdic tion the registered office of the concerned company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
such appeal, shall lie to the High Court exercising jurisdiction over the place in which the r egistered 
office of the concerned company is situated and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
than two Judges of that High Court.  
22. Disbursement of money by  the Commissioner .—After  admitting a claim under this Act, the 
amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons to whom 
such amount is due, and on such payment, the liability of each of the two companies in respect of such 
claim shall  stand discharged.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to the two companies .—(1) If, out of the moneys paid to him in 
relation to the undertakings of either of the two companies, there is a balance left after meeting the 
liabilities as specified in the Third Sched ule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the 
concerned company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property has vested in the Central 
Government or a Government company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or  other property 
does not belong to either of the two companies, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the 
concerned Government company, to continue to possess such machinery or equipment or other property 
on the same terms and conditions under w hich they were possessed by either of the companies 
immediately before the appointed day.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the  date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally would up, to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order, if any, for the payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refu nd of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tri bunal or other 
authority.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Central Government or Government 
companies .—Every contract entered into by either of the two companies in relation to any of its 
undertaking s which has  vested in the Central  Government under section 3 for any service, sale or supply, 
and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period of thirty day s 
from the appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry  of that period, 
ratified, in writing, by the Central Government or the Government company concerned , in which such 
undertaking  has been vested under this Act and in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or such 
Government company may make such a lteration or modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Governm ent or the such Government company shall not omit to ratify a 
contract and shall not make any alteratio n or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has  been entered into in bad faith  
or is detrimental to the interest s of the Central Government or such Government company; and  
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard a nd 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  11 
 27. Penalties .—Any person who ,— 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any undertaking of 
either of the two companies, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the 
Government company concerned; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of or retains, any property forming part of any undertaking of 
either of th e two companies; or 
(c) wil fully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the Government company 
concerned or any person or body of persons specified by that Government or such Government 
company, any document relating to such undertaking , which may be in his possession, custody or 
control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Government company concerned or any 
person or body of persons specified by that Government or Government company, any assets, books 
of account, r egisters or ot her documents in his possession , custody or control, relating to the 
undertakings of either of the two companies; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any undertaking of either of the 
two companies or prefers any  claim which he knows or has reason to believe to  be false or grossly 
inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
28. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the  time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shal l be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was commi tted without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved th at the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to b e guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose s of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm . 
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Custodian or the 
Government companies or other person authorised by that Government  or Government companies  for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding  shall lie against the Central Government or any  of its officers or 
other employee s or the Custodian or the Government companies or any officer or other person authorised 
by those companies for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act.  
30. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may,  by notification , direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section  and 12 
 section s 31 and 32  may also be exercised by such person or person s as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and superv ision of the Central Government.  
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules  may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely, — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the form and manner in which , and the conditions under which, t he Custodian or Custodians 
shall maintain the accounts as required by section 12;  
(c) the manner in which the money s in any provident fund or other fund, referred to in section 14, 
shall be dealt with;  
(d) any  other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament,  while it is in session, for a total period of thi rty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
33. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Hind Cycles Limited and Sen -Raleigh Limited (Nationalisation) 
Ordinance, 1980 (16 of 1980), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under t he corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  13 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 4( 4), 7, 8( 3) and 16( 1)(a)] 
Sl. No  Name of the Company   Amount (Rupees in 
lakhs )  
1. Hind Cycles Limited  241.47  
2. Sen-Raleigh Limited  708.00  
3. Sen and Pandit  Industries Limited  23.96  
4. Ancillary Industries (Lugs) Private Limited  1.31 
5. Ancillary Industries (Forgings) Private Limited  1.44 
6. Ancillary Industries (Cranks) Private Limited  2.33 
7. Naokhali Machine Tools Limited  2.87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 8( 1) ] 
 
Sl. No  Name of the Company  Rate per annum 
(Rupees)  
1. Hind Cycles Limited  8,000  
2. Sen-Raleigh Limited  8,000  
3. Sen and Pandit Industries Limited  500 
4. Ancillary Industries (Lugs) Private Limited  500 
5. Ancillary Industries (Forgings) Private Limited  500 
6. Ancillary Industries (Cranks) Private Limited  500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 
 THE THIRD  SCHEDULE  
[See sections 18, 20 ( 1), 21( 1) and 23  (1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE  TWO COMPANIES  
Post-take-over management period  
Category  I— 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the companies.  
(b) Deduction s made from the salaries and wages of the employee s for provident fund, the 
Employees ‟ State Insurance Fund, premium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India or for 
any other purpose.  
Category  II— 
Princip al amount of loans advanced by — 
(i) the Central Government;  
(ii) a State Government;  
(iii) Banks and financial institutions:  
(iv) any other sources.  
Category  III— 
(a) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the companies to provident fund, the 
Employees ‟ State Insurance Fund or under any other law for the time being in force providing for 
such contributions.  
(b) Any credits availed of by the companies for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations, other than those  specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(c) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government or semi -Government in stitutions 
against supply of goods or services, other than those specified in sub -section  (2) of section 5.  
(d) Arrears of interest on loans and advances .  
Category  IV— 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to Central Government, a State Governme nt or any 
local authority.  
(b) Any other dues.  
Pre-take-over management period  
Category  V— 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employee s of the companies.  
(b) Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the employee s for provident fund, the 
Employees ‟ State Insurance Fund, premium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India or for 
any other purpose.  
Category  VI— 
(a) Principal amoun t of secured loans advanced by — 
(i) the Central Government;  
(ii) a State Governm ent; 
(iii) Banks and financial institutions.  16 
 (b) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the companies to provident fund, the 
Employees ‟ State Insurance Fund or under any other law for the time being in force providing for 
such contributions.  
Category  VII— 
Principal amount  of unsecured loans advanced by — 
(i) the Central Government;  
(ii) a State Government;  
(iii) Banks and financial institutions.  
Category  VIII— 
(a) Any credits availed of by the companies for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government and semi -Government institutions 
against supply of goods or services.  
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances.  
(d) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or othe r dues to  the Central Government, a State Government or 
any local authority.  
(e) Any other loans or dues  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Hotel-Receipts Tax Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE HOTEL -RECEIPTS TAX ACT, 1980  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTION S 
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Application of the Act . 
4. Tax authorities . 
5. Charge of tax . 
6. Scope of chargeable receipts . 
7. Computation of chargeable receipts . 
8. Return of chargeable receipts . 
9. Self-assessment . 
10. Assessment . 
11. Best judgment assessment . 
12. Re-opening of assessment at the instance of the assesse e. 
13. Receipt s escaping assessment . 
14. Advance payment of hotel receipts tax . 
15. Penalty for failure to furnish returns, com ply with notices, concealment of receipts, etc . 
16. Penality for false estimat e of, or failure to pay, hotel -receipts tax payable in advance . 
17. Opportunity of being heard . 
18. Appeals to the Commissioner (Appeals) . 
19. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal . 
20. Rectification of mistakes . 
21. Hotel -receipts tax deductible in computing total income under Income -tax Act . 
22. Revision of order prejudicial to revenue . 
23. Revision of orders by Commissioner . 
24. Application of provisions of Income -tax Act . 
25. Income -tax papers to be available for the purposes of this Act . 
26. Wilful attempt to evade tax, etc . 
27. Failure to furnish returns of chargeable receipts . 
28. Failure to produce accounts and documents . 
29. False statement in verification, etc . 
30. Abetment of false return, etc . 
31. Punishment for second and subsequent offences . 
32. Certain offences to be non -cognizable . 
33. Institution of proceedings and composition of offences . 
34. Power to make rules . 
35. Power to exempt . 
36. Power to remove difficulties . 
37. [Repea led]. 
 
 
 2 
 THE HOTEL -RECEIPTS TAX ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1980  
[9th December , 1980.]  
An Act to impose a special tax on gr oss receipts of certain hotels.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the  Hotel -Receipts Tax Act, 1980.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “assessee ” means a person by whom hotel -receipts tax or any other sum of money is payabl e 
under this Act and includes — 
(a) every person in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act has been taken for the 
assessment of his chargeable receipts or of the amount of refund due to him or of the chargeable 
receipts of any other person in respect of which he is assessable or of the amount of r efund due to 
such other person;  
(b) every person who is deemed to be an assessee in default under any provision of this Act;  
(2) “assessment ” includes re assessment;  
(3) “assessment year ” means the period of twelve months commencing on t he 1st day of April 
every year;  
(4) “Board ” means the Central Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the Central Boards of 
Reve nue Act, 1963 (54 of 1963);  
(5) “chargeable receipts ” means the total amount of all charges referred to in section 6, computed 
in the  manner laid do wn in section 7;  
(6) “hotel ” includes a building or part of a building where residential accommodation is, by way 
of business, provided for a monetar y consideration;  
(7) “hotel -receipts tax ” or “tax” means the tax chargeable un der the provisions of this Ac t; 
(8) “Income -tax Act ” means the Inc ome-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(9) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(10) “room charges ” means the charges for a unit of residential accommodation in a hotel  and 
includes the charges for — 
(a) furniture, air -conditioner, refrigerator, radio, mu sic, telephone, television, and  
(b) such other services as are normally included by a hotel in ro om rent,  
but does not include charges for food, drink and any services other than those referred  to in  
sub-clauses ( a) and ( b); 
(11) all other words and expression s used herein but not defined and defined in the Income -tax 
Act shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Application of the Act .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) and sub -section ( 3), this 
Act shall apply in relation to every hotel wherein the room charges for residential accommodation 
provided to any person at any time during the previous year are seventy -five rupees or more per day per 
individual.  
Explanation .—Where the room charges are payable otherwise than on daily basis or per individual, 
then the room charges shall be computed as for a day and per individual based on the period of 
occupation of the residential accommodation for which the charges ar e payable and the number of 3 
 individuals ordinarily permitted to occupy such accommodation according to the rules and custom of  the 
hotel.  
(2) Where a composite charge is payable in respect of residential accommodation and food, the room 
charges included therein shall be deter mined in the prescribed manner.  
(3) Where — 
(i) a composite charge is payable in respect of residential accommodation, food, drink and other 
services, or any of them, and the case is not covered by the pr ovisions of sub -section ( 2), or 
(ii) it appears to the Income -tax Officer that the charges for residential accommodation, food, 
drink or other services are so arranged that the room charges are understated and th e other charges are 
overstated,  
the Income -tax Officer shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), determine the room charges on such 
reaso nable basis as he may deem fit.  
4. Tax authorities .—(1) Every Director of Inspection, Commissioner of Income -Tax, Commissioner 
of Income -tax (Appeals), Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Income -tax, Income -tax Officer and 
Inspector of Income -tax shall have the like powers and perform the like functions under this Act as he has 
and performs under the Income -tax Act, and for the exercise of his powers and  the performance of his 
functions, his jurisdiction under this Act shall be the same as h e has under the Income -tax Act.  
(2) All officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act shall observe and follow the orders, 
instructio ns and directions of the Board:  
Provided that no such orders, instructions or directions shall be issued — 
(a) so as to require any tax authority to make a particular assessment or to dispose of a particular 
case in a particular manner; or  
(b) so as to interfere with the discre tion of the Commissioner (Appeals) in the exerc ise of his 
appellate functions.  
(3) Every Income -tax Officer employed in the execution of this Act shall observe and follow the 
orders, instructions and directions issued for his guidance by the Director of In spection or by the 
Commissioner or by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner within whose jurisdic tion he performs his 
functions.  
5. Cha rge of tax .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be charged on every person 
carrying on the business of  a hotel in relation to which this Act applies, for every assessment year 
commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1981, a tax in respect of his chargeable receipts of the 
previous year at the rate of fift een per cent. of such receipts:  
Provided that w here such chargeable receipts include any charges received in foreign exchange, then, 
the tax payable by the assessee shall be reduced by an amount equal to five per cent. of the charges 
(exclusive of the amounts payable by way of sales tax, entertainment tax, tax on luxuries or tax under this 
Act) s o received in foreign exchange.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, — 
(a) charges received in Indian currency obtained by conversion of foreign exchange into Indian 
currency shall, in such cases an d in such circumstances as may be prescribed, be deemed to have been 
received in foreign exchange; and  
(b) “foreign exchange ” and “Indian currency ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in clauses ( h) and ( k) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973).   4 
 (2) Where, under an arrangement made between a person carrying on the business of a hotel to which 
this Act applies and any other person having close connection with him, any food, drink or other services 
is or are provided on the premises of such hotel by the second -mentioned person and the Income -tax 
Officer is of opinion that such arrangement has been made with a view to avoiding or reducing the 
liability under this Act by th e first -mentioned person, then, — 
(a) the second -mentioned person shall also be deemed to be a person carrying on the business of a 
hotel  to which this Act applies; and  
(b) hotel -receipts tax shall be charged on the second -mentioned person in respect of charges for 
food, drink or other servi ces so provided by him as if such charges were the  chargeable receipts of the 
business of a hotel deemed to be carried on by him under clause ( a), and all the provisions of th is Act 
shall apply accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, — 
(i) a close connection shall be deemed to exist between a person carrying on the business of a 
hotel and another person if, in relation to the person carrying on the business of a hotel, such 
other person is a person referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of sec tion 40A of the  
Income -tax Act;  
(ii) any  food, drink or other service shall be deemed to have been provided on the premises of 
a hotel if the same is or are provided in the hotel or any place appurtenant thereto and where the 
hotel is situate in a part of building, in any other part of the build ing. 
6. Scope of chargeable receipts .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the chargeable receipts of 
any previous year of an assessee shall be the total amount of all charges, by whatever name called, 
received by, or accruing or arising to, the asse ssee in connection with the provision of residential 
accommodation, food, drink and other services or any of them (including such charges from persons not 
provided with such accommodation 1[but excluding such charges from persons within the purview of the 
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1961 or the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, 
1963 ]) in the course of carrying on the business of a hotel to which this Act applies and shall also include 
every amount collected by the assessee by way of ta x under this Act, sales tax, entertainment  tax and tax 
on luxuries.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where any such charges have been included in 
the chargeable receipts of any previous year as charges accruing or arising to the assessee during that 
previous year, such charges shall not be included in the chargeable receipts of any subsequent previous 
year in which the y are received by the assessee.  
7. Comp utation of chargeable receipts .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sectio n (2), the 
following deductions shall be allowed in computing the chargeable receipts of any previous year — 
(i) the amount of charges accruing or arising in an earlier previous year which is established to 
have become a bad  debt during the previous year:  
Provided that such charges have been taken into account in computing the chargeable receipts of 
the assessee of any earlier previous year and the amount has been written off as irrecoverable in the 
accounts of the assessee for the previous year during which  it is establi shed to have become a bad 
debt;  
(ii) any amount payable by way of sales tax, entertainment tax or tax on luxuries in respect of any 
charges included in the chargeable  receipts of the previous year;  
(iii) the amount of tax chargeable under this Ac t. 
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that in computing the chargeable 
receipts of a previous year, no deduction, other than the deductions specified in this sub -section, shall be 
allowed fr om the total amount of charges received by, or accrui ng or arising to, the assessee.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 1982, s. 41 (w.e.f . 1-4-1982 ). 5 
 (2) In computing the chargeable receipts of a previous year, the amount of charges which is received 
by or which accrues or arises to the assessee before the expiry of one  month from the end of the month in 
which this Act comes into force 1[or after the 27th day of February, 1982] s hall not be taken into account.  
8. Return of cha rgeable receipts .—(1) Every person, who, during the previous year, carried on the 
business of a hotel in relation to which this Act applies or is assessable in respect of the chargeable 
receipts of any other person under this Act, shall furnish a return of his chargeable receipts or the 
chargeable receipts of such other person of the previous year in  the prescribed form and verified in the 
prescribed manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed, before the expiry of four 
months from the end of the previous year in respect of the business of the hotel or where there is more 
than one previous year in respect of such business, from the end of the previous year which expired last 
before the commencement of the assessment year, or before the 30th day of June of the asses sment year, 
whichever is later:  
Provided that, on an application  made in this behalf, the Income - tax Officer may, in his discretion, 
extend the date for furnishing the return.  
(2) In the case of any person who, in the Income -tax Officer ’s opinion is assessable under this Act, 
whether in respect of his own chargeable r eceipts or in respect of the chargeable receipts of any other 
person, the Income -tax Officer may, before the end of the relevant assessment year, issue a notice to him 
and serve the same upon him, requiring him to furnish within thirty days from the date o f service of the 
notice a return of his chargeable receipts or the chargeable receipts of such other person of the previous 
year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and setting forth such other pa rticulars 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided that on an application m ade in this behalf, the Income -tax Officer may, in his discretion, 
extend the date for furnishing the return.  
(3) Any assessee who has not furnished a return within the time allowed under sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2), or having furnished a return under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), discovers any 
omission or wrong statement therein, may furnish a return or a revised return, as the case may be, at any 
time before the assessment is made.  
9. Self -assessment .—(1) Where any hotel -receipts tax is payable on the basis of any return required 
to be furnished under section 8 or section 13 after taking into account the amount of hotel -receipts tax, if 
any, already paid under any provision of this Act, the assessee shall  be liable to pay such tax before 
furnishing the return and the return shall be accompanied b y proof of payment of such tax.  
(2) After an assessment under section 10 or section 11 has been made, any amount paid under  
sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to hav e bee n paid towards such assessment.  
(3) If any assessee fails to pay the hotel -receipts tax or any part thereof in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Income -tax Officer may direct that a sum equal to two per cent. of such 
tax or part t hereof, as the case may be, shall be recovered from him by way of penalty for every month 
during which the default continues:  
Provided that before levying any such penalty, the assessee shall be given a reasona ble opportunity of 
being heard.  
10. Assessment .—(1) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, the Income -tax 
Officer may serve on any person who has furnished a retu rn under section 8 or upon whom a no tice has 
been served under sub -section ( 2) of section 8 (whether a return has been furnished or not) a notice 
requiring him on a date therein to be specified, to produce or cause to be produced such accounts or 
documents or other evidence as the Income -tax Officer may require for the purposes of this Act and may, 
from time to time, serve  further notices requiring the production of such further accounts or documents or 
other evidence as he may require.  
(2) The Income -tax Officer, after considering such accounts, documents or other evidence, if any , as 
he has obtained under sub -section ( 1) and after taking into account any relevant material which he has 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 1982, s. 42 (w.e.f.  1-4-1982 ). 6 
 gathered, shall, by an order in writing, assess the chargeable receipts and the amount of the hotel -receipts 
tax payable o n the basis of such assessment.  
11. Best judgment assessment .—If— 
(a) any person fails to make the return required by any notice given under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8 and has not made a return or a revised return under sub -section ( 3) of that section, or  
(b) any person having made a return, fails to comply with all the  terms of a notice issued under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10, or  
(c) the Income -tax Officer is not satisfied about the correctness or the completeness o f the 
accounts of the assessee,  
the Income -tax Officer, after taking into account all relevant material  which he has gathered shall make 
the assessment of the chargeable receipts to the best of his judgment and determine the sum payable by 
the assessee or refundable to the assessee o n the basis of such assessment.  
12. Re -opening of assessment a t the instanc e of the assessee .—(1) Where an assessee assessed 
under section 11 makes an application to the Income -tax Officer, within one month from the date of 
service of a notice of demand issued in consequence of the assessment, for the cancellation of  the 
assessment on the ground — 
(i) that he was prevented by sufficient cause from making the return required under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 8, or  
(ii) that he did not receive the notice issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 10, or  
(iii) that  he had not a reasonable opportunity to comply, or was prevented by sufficient cause 
from complying, with the terms of the not ice referred to in clause ( ii), 
the Income -tax Officer shall, if satisfied about the existence of such ground, cancel the assessment and 
proceed to make a fresh assessment in accordance with the provisio ns of section 10 or section 11.  
(2) Every application made under sub -section ( 1) shall b e disposed of within ninety days from the 
date of receipt the reof by the Income -tax Officer:  
Provided that in computing the period of ninety days aforesaid, any delay in disposing of the 
application which is attributable to the assessee shall be excluded.  
13. Rece ipts escaping assessment .—If— 
(a) the Income -tax Officer has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or failure on the 
part of the assessee  to make a return under section 8 for any assessment year or to disclose fully and 
truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for any assessment year, chargeable receipts for 
that year have escaped assessment or have been under -assessed or have been made the subject of 
excessive relief under this Act, or  
(b) notwithstanding that there has been no omission or failure as mentioned in clause ( a) on the 
part of the assessee, the Income -tax Officer has, in consequence of information in his possession,  
reason to believe that chargeable receipts assessable for any assessment year have escaped assessment 
or have been under -assessed or have been the subject of e xcessive relief under this Act,  
he may, in cases falling under clause ( a), at any time, and in c ases falling under clause ( b), at any time 
within four years of the end of that assessment year, serve on the assessee a notice containing all or any of 
the requirements which may be included in a notice under section 8 and may proceed to assess or reasses s 
the amount chargeable to hotel -receipts tax, and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply, 
as if the notice were a no tice issued under that section.  
14. Advance  payment of hotel receipts tax .—(1) Hotel -receipts tax shall be payable in advance 
during the financial year in respect of the chargeable receipts of the period which would be the previous 
year for the immediately following assessment year in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
  7 
 (2) Hotel -receipts tax shall be payable in advance in two instalments on the following dates during  the 
financial year, namely:  
(i) the 15th day of September in respect of the chargeable receipts attributable to the first  half of 
the previous year; and  
(ii) the 15th day of March in respect of the chargeable receipts attributable to the se cond half of 
the previous year:  
Provided that the hotel -receipts tax payable in advance during the financial year commencing on 
the 1st day of April, 1980 shall be payab le in one sum on the 15th day of March, 1981.  
(3) Every assessee shall, in each financial year, on or before such of the dates on which an instalment 
of hotel -receipts tax is payable in advance, send to the Income -tax Officer, an estimate of the chargeable  
receipts attributable to the relevant part of the previous year and the hotel -receipts tax payable in advance 
on such chargeable receipts and shall pay such amount of hotel -receipts tax as accords with his estimate 
on or before the relevant date  specified  in sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that in respect of the hotel -receipts tax payable in advance during the financial year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1980, the assessee  shall send to the Income -tax Officer an estimate 
of the chargeable receipts attributable to the period which would be the previous year for the assessment 
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1981 and the hotel -receipts tax payable in advance on such 
chargeable receipts and shall pay such amount of hotel -receipts tax as accords with his estimate on or 
before t he 15th day of March, 1981.  
(4) Every estimate under this section shall be sent in the prescribed form and ver ified in the 
prescribed manner.  
(5) If any assessee does not pay on or before the specified date any instalment of hotel -receipts tax 
payable in advance, he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default  in respect of such instalment.  
15. Penalty for failure to furnish returns, comply with no tices , concealment of receipts, etc .—(1) 
If, in the course of any proceedings under this Act, the Income -tax Officer or the Commissioner (Appeals)  
is satisfied that any person — 
(a) has, without reasonable cause, failed to furnish the return of chargeable receipts which he was 
required to furnish under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 or by notice given under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8 or section 13 or has, without reasonable cause, failed to furnish it within the time allowed 
and the manner required by sub -section ( 1) of section 8 or by such  notice, as the case may be, or  
(b) has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply with the notice under su b-section ( 1) of 
section 10, or  
(c) has  concealed the particulars of his chargeable receipts or furnished inaccurat e particulars of 
such receipts,  
he may direct that such person  shall pay by way of penalty, — 
(i) in the cases referred to in clause ( a), in addition to the hotel -receipts tax payab le by him, a sum 
equal to two per cent. of the assessed tax for every month during which the default continued, but not 
exceeding in the aggregate fifty  per cent. of the assessed tax.  
Explanation .—In this clause, “assessed tax ” means hotel -receipts tax chargeable under the 
provisions of this Act, as reduced by the sum, if any, pa id in advance under section 14;  
(ii) in the cases referred to in clause ( b), in addition to the hotel -receipts tax payable by him, a 
sum which shall not  be less than ten per cent. but which shall not exceed fifty per cent. of the amount 
of the hotel -receipts tax which would have been avoided if the return made by hi m had been accepted 
as correct;  
(iii) in the cases referred to in clause ( c), in addition t o the hotel -receipts tax payable by him, a 
sum which shall not be less than, but which shall not exc eed twice, the amount of hotel -receipts tax 
which would have been avoided if the return made by hi m had been accepted as correct:   8 
 Provided that in a case f alling under clause ( c), the Income -tax Officer shall not impose any penalty 
without the previous approval of the Ins pecting Assistant Commissioner.  
(2) On making an order imposing a penalty under this section, the Commissioner (Appeals) shall 
forthwith se nd a copy of the same to the Income -tax Offic er. 
16. Penality for false estimat e of, or failure to pay, hotel -receipts tax payable in advance .—If, in 
the course of any proceedings in connection with the assessment under section 10 or section 11, the 
Income -tax Officer i s satisfied that any assessee — 
(a) has furnished under section 14, an estimate of the hotel -receipts tax payable in advance by 
him which he knew or had reason to believe to be untrue, or  
(b) has , without reasonable cause, failed to furnish an estimate of the hotel -receipts tax payable in 
advance by him in accordance with the provisions of section 14,  
he may direct that the assessee s hall, in addition to the hotel -receipts tax payable by him , pay  by way of 
penalty a sum — 
(i) which, in the case referred to in clause ( a), shall not be less than ten per cent. but  shall not 
exceed one and a half times the amount by which the hotel -receipts tax paid in advance during the 
financial year immediately preceding the assessment year, falls short of eighty -five per cent. of the 
hotel -receipts tax chargeable un der the provi sions of this Act;  
(ii) which, in the case referred to in clause ( b), shall not be less than ten per cent. but shall not 
exceed one and a half times of eighty -five per cent. of the hotel -receipts tax chargeable un der the 
provisions of this Act.  
17. Opportu nity of being heard .—No order imposing penalty under section 15 or section 16 shall 
be made unless the assessee has been heard, or has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
18. Appeals  to the Commissioner (Appeals) .—(1) Any person objecting to the amount of  
hotel -receipts tax for which he is assessed by the Income -tax Officer, or denying his liablility to be 
assessed under this Act, or objecting to an order under section 12 refusing to re -open an assessment made 
under section 11 or objecting to any penalty or fine imposed by the Income -tax Officer, or to the amount 
allowed by the Income -tax Officer by way of any relief under any provision of this Act, or to any refusal 
by the Income -tax Officer to grant relief, or to an  order of rectification having the effect of enhancing the 
assessment or reducing the refund, or to an order refusing to allow the claim made by the assessee for a 
rectification under section 20, may appeal  to the Commissioner (Appeals).  
(2) Every appeal s hall be in the prescribed form and shall be ver ified in the prescribed manner.  
(3) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the fo llowing date, that is to say, — 
(a) where the appeal relates to assessment or penalty or fine, the date of service of  the notice of 
demand relating to the as sessment or penalty or fine, or  
(b) in any other case, the date on which the intimation of the order sought to  be appealed against 
is served:  
Provided that the Commissioner (Appeals) may admit an appeal after the expiration of the said period 
if he is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not pr esenting it within that period.  
(4) The Commissioner (Appeals) shall hear and determine the appeal and, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, pass such orde rs as he thinks fit and such orders may include an order enhancing the assessment 
or penalty:  
Provided that an order enhancing the assessment or penalty shall not be made unless the person 
affected thereby has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing  cause against such enhancement.  
(5) The procedure to be adopted in the hearing and determination of the appeals shall, with any 
necessary modification, be in accordance with the procedure applic able in relation to income -tax.  9 
 19. Appeals to Appellate Tri bunal .—(1) Any assessee aggrieved by an order passed by a 
Commissioner under section 22, or an order passed by a Commissioner (Appeals) under any provision of 
this Act, may appeal to the Appella te Tribunal against such order.  
(2) The Commissioner may, if h e objects to any order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) under 
any provision of this Act, direct the Income -tax Officer to appeal to the Appell ate Tribunal against the 
order.  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be filed within sixty days of the date 
on which the order sought to be appealed against is communicated to the assessee or to the 
Commissioner, as the case may be.  
(4) The Income -tax Officer or the assessee, as the case may be, on receipt or a notice that an appeal 
against the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) has been preferred under sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2) by the other party may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed against such order 
or any part thereof, within thirty d ays of the receipt of the noti ce, file a memorandum of cross -objections, 
verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the order of the Commissioner (Appeals), and such 
memorandum shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were an app eal presented within the 
time specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit the filing of a memorandum of cross -
objections after the expiry of the relevant period referred to in sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), if it is 
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it w ithin that period.  
(6) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the 
prescribed manner and shall, except in the case of an appeal r eferred to in sub -section ( 2) or a 
memorandum of cross -objections referred to in sub -section ( 4), be accompanied by a  fee of 1[two hundred 
rupees].  
(7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, in hearing and making an order on any appeal under this 
section, the Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the same powers and follow the same procedure as it 
exercises and follows in hearing and making an order on any a ppeal under the Income -tax Act.  
20. Rectification of mistakes .—(1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, 
the Income -tax Officer, the Commissioner (Appeals), the Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal may, 
of his or its own motion or on an application by the assessee in this behalf, or where th e authority 
concerned is the Commissioner (Appeals), by the Income -tax Officer also, amend any order passed by 
him or it in any proceeding under this Act within four years of the date on which such order was passed.  
(2) An amendment which has the effect of  enhancing the assessment or reducing a refund or 
otherwise increasing the liability of the assessee shall not be made under this section unl ess the authority 
concerned has given notice to the assessee of its intention so to do and has allowed the assessee  a 
reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Where an amendment is made under this section, the order shall be passed in writing by the 
authority concerned.  
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, where any such amendment has the effect of reduci ng 
the assessment, the Income -tax Officer shall make any refund whi ch may be due to such assessee.  
(5) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhancing the assessment or reducing the refund 
already made, the Income -tax Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed 
form specifying the sum payable.  
21. Hotel -receipts tax deductible in computing tot al income under Income -tax Act.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income -tax Act, in computing the income chargeable to  
income -tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession ” in the case of an assessee 
carrying on the business of a hotel to which this Act applies, the hotel -receipts tax payable by the assessee 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1981, s. 45, for “one hundred and twenty -five rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1981).  10 
 for any assessment year shall be deductible fr om the profits and gains of the business of the hotel 
assessable for that assessment year.  
22. Revision o f order prejudicial to revenue .—(1) The Commissioner may call for and examine the 
record of any proceeding under this Act and if he considers that any order passed therein by the  
Income -tax Officer is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interests of the revenue, he may, after 
giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard and after making or causing to be made such enquiry as 
he deems necessary, pass such order thereon as the circumstances of the case justify, including an order 
enhancing or modifying the assessment, or canc elling the assessment an d directing a fresh assessment.  
(2) No order shall be made under sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) to revise an order of reasses sment made under section 13, or  
(b) after the expiry of two years from the date of the order sought to be revised.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), an order in revision under this section may 
be passed at any time in the case of an order which has been passed in consequence of, or to give effect 
to, any finding or direction contained in an order  of the Appellate Tribunal, the H igh Court or the 
Supreme Court.  
Explanation .—In computing the period of limitation for the purposes of sub -section ( 2), any period 
during which any proceeding under this section is stayed by an order or injunction of any court shall be 
excluded.  
23. Revi sion of orders by Commissioner .—(1) The Commissioner may, either of his own motion or 
on an application by the assessee for revision, call for the record of any proceeding under this Act which 
has been taken by an Income -tax Officer subordinate to him and may make such enquiry or cause such 
enquiry to be made and, subject to the provisions  of this Act, may pass such order thereon, not being an 
order prejudicial to the assessee, as he thinks fit.  
(2) The Commissioner shall not of his own motion revise any order under this section if the order has 
been made more than one year previously.  
(3) In the case of an application for revision under this section by the assessee, the application shall be 
made wi thin one year from the date on which the order in question was communicated to him or the date 
on which he otherwise came to kn ow of it, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied that the assessee was prevented by suffici ent 
cause from making the application within that period, admit an application made a fter the expiry of that 
period.  
(4) The Commissioner shall not revise any order under this se ction in the following cases: — 
(a) where  an appeal against the order lies to the Commissioner (Appeals) but has not been made 
and the time within which such appeal may be made has not expired, or the assessee has not  waived 
his right of appeal; or  
(b) where the order has been made the subject of  an appeal  to the Commissioner (Appeals).  
(5) Every application by an assessee for revision under this section shall be accompanied by a fee of 
twenty -five r upees.  
Explanation .—An order by the Commissioner declining to interfere shall, for the purposes of this 
section, be deemed not to be an ord er prejudicial to the assessee.  
24. Application of provisions of In come -tax Act .—The provisions of the following sections and 
Schedules of the Income -tax Act and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962, as in force 
from time to time, shall apply with necessary modifications as if the said provisions and the rules referred 
to hotel -receipts tax instead of to income -tax:— 
2(43B) an d (44), 41(4), 118, 125, 125A, 128 to 136 (both inclusive), 138, 140, 144A, 156, 159 to 
163 (both inclusive), 166, 167, 170, 171, 173 to 179 (both inclusive), 187, 188, 189, 219 to 227 (both 
inclusive), 228A, 229, 231, 232, 237 to 242 (both inclusive), 244 , 245, 254 to 262 (both inclusive), 11 
 265, 266, 268, 269, 278B, 278C, 278D, 281, 281B, 282, 283, 284, 287, 288, 288A, 288B, 289 to 293 
(both inclusive), the Second Schedule and the Thir d Schedule:  
Provided that references in the said provisions and the rules  to the “assessee ” shall be construed as 
references to an a ssessee as defined in this Act.  
25. Income -tax papers to be availabl e for the purposes of this Act .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Income -tax Act, all information contained in any statement or return made or furnished 
under the provisions of that Act or obtained or collected for the purposes of that Act may be use d for the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) All information contained in any statement or return made on furnished under the prov isions of 
this Act or obtained or collected for the purposes of this Act may be used for the purposes of the Income -
tax Act.  
26. Wi lful attempt to evade tax, etc .—(1) If a person wilfully  attempts in any manner whatsoever to 
evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to 
any penalty that may be imposable on him under any other provisio n of this  Act, be punishable, — 
(i) in a case wh ere the amount sought to be evaded exceeds one hundred thousand rupees, with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may exten d to 
seven years and with fine;  
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
months but which may exten d to three years and with fine.  
(2) If a person wilfully  attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade the payment of any tax, penalty 
or interest under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on him under 
any other provision of this Act, be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than three months but which may extend to three years and shall, in the discretion of the  court, also 
be liable to fine.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, a wilful  attempt to evade any tax, penalty or interest 
chargeable or imposable under this Act or the payment thereof shall inc lude a case where any person — 
(i) has in his possession or control any books of account or other documents (being books of 
account or othe r documents relevant to any proceeding under this Act) containing  a false entry or 
statement; or  
(ii) makes or causes to be made any false entry or statement in such books of  account or other 
documents; or  
(iii) wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any r elevant entry or statement in such books of 
account or other documents; or  
(iv) causes any other circumstance to exist which will have the effect of enabling such person to 
evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under t his Act or the pa yment thereof.  
27. Failure to furnish returns  of chargeable receipts .—If a person wilfully fails to furnish in due 
time the return of chargeable receipts which he is required to furnish under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 or 
by notice given under sub-section ( 2) of section 8 or section 13, he shall be  punishable, — 
(i) in a case where the amount of tax, which would have been evaded if the failure had not been 
discovered, exceeds one hundred thousand rupees, with rigorous imprisonment for a term whic h shall 
not be less than six months but which may exten d to seven years and with fine;  
(ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but 
which may extend to  three years and with fine:  
Provided that a person shall not be proceeded against under this section for failure to furnish in due 
time the retu rn of chargeable receipts under sub-section ( 1) of section 8, if — 
(a) the return is furnished by him before the ex piry of the assessment year; or  12 
 (b) the tax payable by him on the chargeable receipts determined on assessment as reduced by the 
tax paid in advance under section 14, if any, does no t exceed three thousand rupees.  
28. Failure to produce accounts and documents .—If a person wilfully fails to prod uce, or cause to 
be produced, on or before the date specified in any notice served on him under sub -section ( 1) of section 
10, such accounts and documents as are referred to in the notice, he shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine equal to a sum calculated at a rate 
which shall not be less than four rupees or more than ten rupees for every day during which the d efault 
continues, or with both.  
29. False statement in v erification, etc .—If a person makes a statement in any verification under 
this Act or under any rule made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which is false, and which 
he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable, — 
(i) in a  case where the amount of tax, which would have been evaded if the statement or account 
had been accepted as true, exceeds one hundred thousand rupees, with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than six months but which may exten d to se ven years and with fine;  
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
months but which may exten d to three years and with fine.  
30. Abetme nt of false return, etc .—If a person abets or induces in any manner another person to 
make and deliver an account or a statement or declaration relating to any chargeable receipts which is 
false and which he either knows to be false or does not believe to be true or to commit an offence under 
sub-section ( 1) of sect ion 26, he shall be punishable, — 
(i) in a case where the amount of tax, penalty or interest which would have been evaded, if the 
declaration, account or statement had been accepted as true, or which is wilfully attempted to be 
evaded, exceeds one hundred t housand rupees, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than six months but which may exten d to seven years and with fine;  
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
months but whi ch may exten d to three years and with fine.  
31. Punishment for second and subsequent offences .—If any person convicted of an offence under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 26 or section 27 or section 29 or section 30 is again convicted for an offence 
under any of the aforesaid provisions, he shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent 
offence with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may 
exten d to seven years and with fine.  
32. Certain  offences to be non-cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence punishable under section 26 or section 27 or section 29 
or section 30 shall be deemed to be non -cognizable w ithin the meaning of that Code.  
33. Institution of proceedings and com position of offences .—(1) A person shall not be proceeded 
against for any offence under section 26 or section 27 or section 28 or section 29 or section 30 for any 
offence under the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) relating to any matter connected with or arising ou t of 
this Act, except at th e instance of the Commissioner.  
(2) The Commissioner may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, compound any 
offence punishable under section 26 or section 27 or  section 28 or section 29 or section 30.  
34. Power to make rules .—(1) The Board may, subject to the control of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the room charges may be determined under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 
in cases where composite char ges are payable in respect of resi dential accommodation and food;  13 
 (b) the cases and the circumstances in which payments made in Indian currency by conversion of 
foreign exchange into Indian currency shall be deemed to have been made in foreign exchange for  the 
purposes of sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(c) the form in which returns under section 8 may be furnished, the manner in which they may be 
verified and the other partic ulars which a form may contain;  
(d) the form in which an estimate under section 14 may be sent and the mann er in which it may 
be verified;  
(e) the form in which appeals under section 18 or section 19 may be filed and the manner  in 
which they may be verified;  
(f) the form in which a memorandum o f cross -objections under sub -section ( 4) of section 19 may 
be veri fied; 
(g) the procedure to be followed on applications for rectificatio n of mistakes under section 20;  
(h) the form in which a notice of demand may be served on the assessee under  sub-section ( 5) of 
section 20;  
(i) any other matter which by this Act is to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall on the first occasion of the exercise 
thereof include the power to give retrospective effect t o the rules or any of them from a date not earlier 
than the date of commencem ent of this Act.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause every rule made under this section to be laid, as soon as may 
be, after it is made before each House of Parliament while it  is in sessi on for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree  in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment sha ll be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under  that rule.  
35. Power to exempt .—Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do either in the public interest or having regard to the peculi ar circumstances of the case, 
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in 
the notification, exempt any hotel or any class of hotels from t he levy of hotel -receipts tax.  
36. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of t his Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry  of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
37. [Consequential amendments ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 1988  (19 of 1988 ), s. 2 
and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31-3-1988 ). 
--------------------------The Jute Companies (Nationalisation) Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE JUTE COMPANIES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1980  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE JUTE COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the jute companies.  
4. General Power of vesting.  
5. Jute companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the jute compan ies in 
Jute Manufactures Corporation.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount.  
8. Payment of further amount . 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  JUTE  COMPANI ES 
9. Management, etc., of the under takings of the jute companies.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings to deliver all assets , etc. 
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO  EMPLOYEES OF THE JUTE COMPANIES  
12. Continuance of employees.  
13. Provident fund and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
15. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner.  
16. Certain powers of Central Gove rnment or  Jute Manufactures Corporation.  
17. Clai ms to be made to the Commissioner.  
18. Priority of C laims.  
19. Examination of claims.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Admission or rejection of claims.  
21. Disbursement of money by  the Commissioner.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the jute companies.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount s to be deposited with the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect.  
25. Assumption of liability.  
26. Management to continue to vest in certain persons unti l alternative arrangements have been 
made.  
27. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Jute 
Manufactures Corporation . 
28. Penalties.  
29. Offences by companies.  
30. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
31. Delegation of powers.  
32. Power to make rule s. 
33. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE JUTE COMPANIES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 62 OF 1980  
[21st December, 1980 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and trans fer of the undertakings of the jute c ompanies, 
specified in the First Schedule with a view to securing the proper management of such 
undertakings so as to subserve the interest s of the general public by ensuring the continued 
manufacture, producti on and distribution of articles  made of jute, which are essential to the 
needs of the economy of the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS  the said jute c ompanies had  been engaged in the manufacture and production of articles 
mentioned in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951), 
namely, textiles made wholly or in part of jute;  
AND WHEREAS the management of the undertakin gs of each of the said jute companies was          
taken over by the Central Government under the Industries (Development and Regulation)                             
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951);  
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire the  undertakings of the sai d jute c ompanies to ensure that the 
interests of the general public are served by the continuance, by the undertakings of the said jute 
companies, of the manufacture, production and distribution of the aforesaid articles which are essential to 
the needs of  the economy of the country;  
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1.  Short title .—This Act may be called the Jute Companies (Nationalisation) Act, 1980.  
2. Definitions .—In this  Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date of commencement of this Act;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 14;  
(c) “jute companies ” means the companies (being companies as defined in the Companies       
Act, 1956  [1 of 1956])  specified in the First Schedule;  
(d) “Jute Manufactures Corporation ” means   the National Jute Manufactures Corporation 
Limited, a company incorporated and regist ered under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956);  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “specified date ”,  in relation to any provision of this Act, mean s such date as the Central 
Government   may, by notification, specify for  the purposes of that provision and  different dates may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(h) words  and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE JUTE COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the jute 
companies .—On the appointed day,  the undertakings of every  jute company , and the right, ti tle and 
interest of every jute company  in relation to its underta kings  shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred 
to, and  vest in, the Central Government.  4 
 4. General Power of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of each  jute company  shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and pr ivileges  and all property, movable and 
immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash 
balances, cash on hand, reserve  funds, investments, book debts  and all other rights and interests in, or 
arising out of , such property as were , immediately before the appointed day , in the ownership, possession , 
power or control of  the jute company, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers 
and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto an d shall also be deemed to include the 
liabilities specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust , obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court or other 
authority restricting the use of such properties in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of th e 
whole or any part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in  relation  to, any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any prope rty referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other  interest in, or in relation to , any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interest s, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues,  in whole or in part, out of the amounts directed to be given under sections 7 and 8 to 
the jute company concerned but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable 
against any property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or other inst rument granted to a jute company in relati on to its undertakings which 
have  vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before that day shall continue to be in fo rce on and after such day in accordance with its 
tenor in relation to an d for the pur poses of such undertakings, and , on and from the date of vesting of such 
undertaking s under section 6 , in the Jute Manufactures Corporation, that Corporation shall be deemed to 
be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been granted 
to such Corporation and such Corporation shall hold it for the remainder o f the period for which the jute 
company would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature, in relation to any 
matter specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, in respect of th e undertakings of any jute company which 
has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by or against that company , 
is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of 
the transfer of the undertakings of such jute company or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, 
appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or  against the Central 
Government  or where the undertakings of such jute compan y are directed under section 6 , to vest in the 
Jute Manufactures Corporation, by or against that Corporation.  
5. Jute companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability, other than the 
liability specified in sub -section ( 2), of a  jute company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, 
shall be the liability of that company and shall be enforceable against it , and not against the Central 
Government, or, where the undertakings of the jute company vest in the Jute  Manufactures Corporation,  
against that Corporation.  
(2) Any liability arising in respect of loans advanced by the Central Government or any State 
Government, or both, to a   jute company (together with interest due ther eon) after the management of the  
unde rtakings of the said jute company   had been taken  over by the Central Government  shall, on and from 
the appointed day, be the liability of the Central Government and shall be discharged by that Government , 
or by  the Jute Manufactures Corporation  as and wh en repayment of such loans becomes due 
and  payable.  
  5 
 (3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability, other than the liability specified 
in sub -section ( 2), of any jute company  in relation to its undertakings in respect of any period prior to 
the appointed day , shall be enforceable  against the Central Government or  where the undertakings of  
such company are directed  under section 6, to vest in the Jute Manufactures Corporation,  against that 
Corporation;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of   any jute company, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute, which arose before that day,   not being a matter,   claim   or dispute in relation to any liability 
specified in sub -section (2), shall  be enforceable against the Central Government or where the 
undertakings of such company are directed under section 6, to vest in the Jute Manufacture s 
Corpora tion,  against that Corporation;  
(c) no liability incurred by   any jute company before the appointed day  for the contravention of a  
provision of  any law for the time being in force  shall be enforceable  against the Central Gov ernment 
or where the u ndertakings of   such company   are directed under section 6, to vest in the Jute 
Manufactures Corporation,   against that Corporation.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the jute companies in 
Jute Manufactures Corporation .—(1)  Notwithstanding anything contained in section s 3 and 4, the 
Central Government   shall, as soon as may be, after the appointed day, direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of every   jute company and the right, title and interest of every jute company in relation to 
its undert akings, which have vested in that   Government under section 3, and such of the liabili ties of 
every jute company as are  specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5,   shall, instead of continuing to vest in 
the Central Governm ent, vest in the Jute Manufactures Corporation   either on the date of the notification 
or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest , and  the liabilities referred to in sub -section ( 2) of s ection 5 , of 
the jute companies  in relation to their respective undertakings vest, under sub -section ( 1), in the Jute 
Manufactu res Corporation,  that Corporation shall, on and from the date of such vesting,  be deemed to 
have become the owner in relation to such undertakings , and all the rights and liabilities of the Central 
Government in relation to such undertakings  shall , on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to 
have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Jute Manufactures Corporation.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount .—Every jute company shall be given by the Central Government , for the 
transfer to and vesting in that  Government under section 3 of the undertakings of that company and the 
right, title and interest of that company in relation to its undertakings, in cash and in the manner specified 
in Chapter VI, such amount as is  specified against the nam e of that company in the First  Schedule.  
8. Payment of further amount .—(1) Every jute company shall be given by the Central Governme nt, 
for the deprivation of the  management of its undertakings, an  amount  of rupee s ten thousand per annum 
for the  period commencing on the d ate on which management of the  undertaking s of that company was 
taken over in pursuance of the ord er made by the Central Government under the provisions of the 
Industries (Develop ment  and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) and ending on the appointed day.  
(2) Every  amount specified in the First Schedule or calculated in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum for the period 
commencing on  the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of such amount  is made by 
the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(3) The amount s determined in relation to any jute company in acc ordance with the provisions of   
sub-section s (1) and (2) shal l be given by the Central Government to the jute company in addition to the 
amount specified in the First Schedule against that company.  6 
 CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  JUTE  COMPANIES  
9. Management, etc., of the under takings of the jute companies .—The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings   owned by each of the 
jute companies,   the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Government 
under section 3 , shall, where a direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 6 , vest in the Jute Manufactures Corporation and thereupon the Jute Manufactures Corporation 
shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion o f all other persons, all such powers and do all such things in 
relation to each such undertaking as the jute company which   owned it was authorised to exercise and do 
immediately before the appointed   day. 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the  undertakings to deliver all assets , etc.—(1) 
On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of   the jute companies in the Central 
Government   or the Jute Manufactures Corporation, as the case may be, the persons in charge of the 
management of such u ndertakings immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to the 
Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation, as the case may be , all assets , books of 
account , registers and all other documents in their custody relating to such unde rtakings . 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Jute Manufactures Corporation and the said Corporation may also , if it is considered 
necessary so to do , apply to the Central Go vernment at  any time for instructions as  to the manner in which 
the management of the undertakings of the jute companies shall be conducted or in relation to any other 
matter  arising in the course of such  management.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession .—(1) Any person who has, on 
the appointed day, in   his possession or under his control any assets, books, documents or other papers 
relating to any undertaking  owned by a jute company which has vested in the Central Govern ment or   the 
Jute Manufactures   Corporation   under this Act, shall be liable to account for the said assets, books, 
documents and other papers to the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures   Corporation and shall 
deliver them  up to the Central Governme nt or the Jute Manufactures   Corporation or to such person or 
persons as the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures   Corpo ration may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Gover nment or the Jute Manufactures  Corporation may take or cause to be taken  all 
necessary steps for securing possession of the undertakings of the jute companies which have vested in 
the Central Gover nment or the Jute Manufactures  Corporation under this Act.  
(3) Every  jute company shall  within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a  complete inventory of all its  property and assets, as on the appointed day, 
perta ining to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government unde r  section 3, and  for this 
purpose, the Central Government or the Jute Manufactur es Corporation shall afford to  such company all 
reasonable facilities.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATIN G TO  EMPLOYEES OF THE JUTE COMPANIES  
12. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every  person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed in any undertaking of  any of the companies shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government, and  
(b) where the undertakings of the jute companies ar e vested in the Jute Manufactur es 
Corporation, an employee of  the said  Corporation, on and from the date of such vesting,  
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation ,  as 
the case may be , with the same  right s and privileges as to pens ion, gratuity and other matters as would 
have been  admissible to him   if there had been no such vesting and shall   continue to do so unless and 
until his employment under the Central Government or the Jute Manufacture s Corp oration,   as the case 
may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by 
the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation, as the case may be.  7 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking of the jute companies, to the Central Government or  the Jute Manufactures 
Corporation, shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other 
authority.  
13. Provident fund and other fund s.—(1) Where a jute company  has established a  provident fund, 
superannuation  fund, welfare  fund or other fund s for the benefit of persons employed in any of the  
undertakings  owned by it,  the monies  relatable to its employees whose services have become tran sferred 
by  or under this Act to the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation shall, out of the 
monies standing, on the appointed day, to the   credit of such  provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare 
fund or other fund s, stand transferred  to, and vest in, the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures 
Corporation, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies  which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the Jute 
Manufactures Corporation, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or Corporation in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts pay able under sec tions 7 and 8 to  the jute companies, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of s uch persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Com missioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and othe r persons appointed under this s ection 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
15. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government shall, 
within thirty days from the specified date, pay in cash to the Commissioner, for paymen t to every  jute 
company, — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount sp ecified against the name of that  company in the First 
Schedule;  
(b) a further amount equal to the amount payable to  that company   under section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner in 
the Public Acc ount of India , and every amount  paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the  said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Separate records shall  be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of  each of the jute 
companies in  relation to which payment has  been made to him under this Act.  
(4) Interest accruing on th e amount in relation to a jute company standing to the credit of the deposit 
account referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall ensure to the bene fit of such  jute company.  
  8 
 16. Certain powers of Central Gove rnment or Jute Manufactures Corporation .—(1) The Centr al 
Government or the   Jute Manufactures Corporation, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive , up to 
the specified date, to the exclusion of all oth er persons, any money due to any  jute company  in relation to 
its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation, and 
realised after the appointed day , notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the 
appointed day.  
(2) The Central G overnment  or the Jute Manufactures Corporation, as the case may be, may make a 
claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by that Government or Corporation, after 
the appointed day for discharging any liability of a jute company, not being  any liability specified in   
sub-section ( 2) of section 5, in relation to any of the undertakings owned by it in respect of any pe riod 
prior to the appointed day ; and every such claim shall have priority, in accordanc e with the priorities 
attaching  under this Act to the matter   in relation to which such liability has been discharged by the 
Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the li abilities of a jute company  in relation to any of the 
undertak ings owned by it in   respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day , which have not been 
discharged on or before the specified date , shall be the liabilities of that company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim aga inst a jute company  
with regard to any of the matters specified in the Second Schedule , pertaining to any undertaking  owned 
by it, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thir ty days from the specified date : 
Provided that if the Commissioner  is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within th e said period of thirty days, he  may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days , but not thereafter.  
18. Priority of C laims .—The claims made under section 17 shall have priorities in accordance with 
the following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims spec ified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount pai d to the Commissioner under this Act is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall 
abate in equal proportions and be paid accordingly; and  
(c) the quest ion of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
19. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the cl aims made under section 17, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Second Schedule and examine the same 
in accordance with such order.  
(2) If, on  an examination of the claims against a jut e company,  the Commis sioner is of the opinion 
that the amount paid to him under this Act for payment to such company is not sufficient to meet the 
liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall  not be required to examine any claim  in respect of such 
lower category.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims against a jute company, with 
reference to the priorities set out  in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on   or before 
which every claimant against the company shall file th e proof of his claim.  
(2) Not  less than fourteen days’  notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any   daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major p art of   the   country 
and one issue of  any daily  newspaper in  such  regional  language  as  the  Commissioner  may   consider   9 
 suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the period specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursement s made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be ne cessary and 
after  giving the jute company concerned an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the 
claimant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole 
or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions , including the place or places a t which he may hold his sitting  and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same p owers as are vested in a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), while trying a suit  in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the dis covery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a Civil   Court for the   purposes of section 195 , and Chapter XXVI , of the Code of Criminal 
Proce dure, 1973  (2 of 1974).  
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against s uch decision to the High Court  within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office 
of the jute company concerned is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to b e the Commissioner, 
such appeal  shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court.  
21. Disbursement of money by  the Commissioner .—After ad mitting a claim against a jute 
company under this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to 
the person or per sons to whom such amount is due  and on such payment, the liability of such jute 
company in respect of such claim shall stand discharged.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the jute companies .—(1) If out of the monies paid to him in 
relation to a jute company,  there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the Second 
Schedule, the Commissioner  shall disburse such balance to such jute company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property possessed by a jute company 
has vested in the Central Government or the   Jute Manufactures  Corporation under this Act  but such 
machine ry, equipment or other property does not belong to such jute company, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government or ,  as the case may be, the Jute Manufactures Corporation, to continue to possess 
such machinery or equipment or other property on the same  terms and conditions under which they were 
possessed by such jute company immediately before the appointed day.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount s to be deposited with the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, b efore his office is finally woun d up, to the general revenue ac count of the Central 
Government,  but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order, if any, for payment of the claim being treat ed as an order for the refund of revenue.  
  10 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith  contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Assumption of liability .—(1) Where any liability of a jute  company arising out of any item in 
any category s pecified in Part I of the Second Schedule is not discharged fully by the  Commissioner out 
of the amounts paid to him under this Act, the Commissioner shall intimate in writing to the Central 
Government the extent of the liability which remains undischarged  and that liability shall be assumed by 
the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct the Jute Manufactures Corporation to take over the 
liability assumed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), and on receipt of such direction, it 
shall be the duty of the Jute Manufactures Corporation to discharge such liability.  
26. Management to continue to vest in certain persons until alternative arrangements have been 
made .—Notwithstanding the  vesting under this Act of the u nderta kings   of any jute company in the 
Central Government or the  Jute Manufactures Corporation — 
(a) any person who has been managing the affairs of such undertakings before the date on which 
the undertakings had so vested shall, until alternative arrangements h ave been made by the Central 
Government , or, as the case may be, the Jute Manufactures Corporation, for the management of such 
undertakings, continue to manage the affairs of the undertakings, as if such person had been authoried 
by the Central Government,  or, as the case may be, the Jute Manufactures Corporation, to manage 
such undertakings;  
(b) such person shall, until alternative arrangements have been made by the Central Government, 
or, as the case may be, the Jute Manufactures Corporation, continue to be authorised to operate, in 
relation to the undertakings of such jute company, any account of such undertakings in any bank as if 
he had been authorised by the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation to operate 
such account.  
27. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Jute 
Manufactures Corporation .—Every contract entered into by any jute company in relation to any of  the 
undertaking s owned by it, which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 , for any service, 
sale or supply  and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of 
a period of one hundred and eig hty days from the appointed day , cease to have effect unless such contract 
is, before the expiry  of that period, ratified  in writing  by the Central Government or the Jute Manufactur es 
Corporation , and in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation 
may make such alteration s or modification s therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation shall not omit to ratify  a 
contract and shall not make any alteration  or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous  or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interest s of the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures Corporation; and  
(b) except  after giving the parties to the contract a   reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
28. Penalties .—Any person who ,— 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertaking s 
owned by any jute company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the 
Jute Manufactures Corporation; or  11 
 (b) wrongfully obtains possessio n of, or retains  any property forming part of , the undertaking s 
owned by any jute company; or  
(c) wilfully  withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the Jute Manufactures 
Corporation or any person or body of persons specified by that Government or   Corporation, as the 
case may be, any docume nt or inventory relating to the  undertaking s, owned b y any jute company, 
which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or th e Jute Manufactures Corporation  or any person 
or body of persons specified by that Government or   Corporation, any assets, books of account, 
registers or ot her documents in his possession, custody or control  relating to the undertakings owned 
by any jute company; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the  undertaking s owned by any 
jute company or prefers any claim  under this Act  which he knows or has reason to believe to  be false 
or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term w hich may extend to two years and also  with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
29. Offences by c ompanies .—(1) Where an offence punishable under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well  as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a compan y and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such directo r, manager, secretary or other o fficer  shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose s of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
30. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer   of that Governmen t or the Jute  Manufactures 
Corporation or other  person authorised by that Government or   Corporation for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding  shall lie against the Central Governm ent or  any of  its officer s or 
other employee s or the Jute Manufactures Corporation or any officer or other pers on authorised by that  
Corporation for any damage caused or likely to be caused for  anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done un der this Act.  
31. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification , direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other tha n the powers conferred by this s ection  and      
sections 32 and 33, may also be exercised by such person or person s as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Whenever a ny delegation of power is made  under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
  12 
 32. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provid e for all or  any o f the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation   referred to in sub -section ( 3) 
of section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other fund , refer red to in               
sub-section ( 2) of section 13, shall be dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made,  before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following   the session or the succ essive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be;  so, however,  that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
33. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Governme nt may , by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( c), 7, 8 and 15( 1)(a)] 
 
Sl. No  Name of the  jute c ompany  Amount (Rupees in 
lakhs)  
1. Alexandra Jute Mills Limited, Chartered Bank Buildings ,  
 4, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta -700001        .      .     .    .  353.60  
2. Union Jute Company Limited , Chartered Bank Buildings,   
 4, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta -700001       .      .     .    .  461.32  
3. Khardah Company Limited, 7, Red Cross Place, Calcutta -700001  486.68  
4. The Kinnison Jute Mills Company Limited, Chartered Bank   
 Buildings,  4, Netaji Subhas  Road, Calcutta -700001       .      .          644.70  
5. R.B.H.M.  Jute Mills Private Limited, P.O.  Katihar Mills,   
 Katihar (Bihar)        .      .     .    .      .      .      .     .      .       .     . 17.04  
 TOTAL  1963.34  
 
 
  13 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 17, 19  (1), 20 (1), 22 (1) and 25  (1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES  
PART I 
Category I — 
Employees’ dues on account of unpaid salaries, w ages, provident fund, Employees’  State 
Insurance c ontribution or premium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India and any other 
amounts due to employees in respect of any period whether before or after the management of the 
undertakings of any jute company had been taken over by the Central Government.  
Category I I— 
Secured loans obtained by any jute company from nationalised banks and public financial 
institutions during any period whether before or after the management of the undertakings of that 
company had been taken over by the Central Government . 
Category III— 
Any credit  availed  of for trade or manufactu ring purpose during the post -take-over management 
period.  
Category I V— 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other d ues to the Central Government,  State G overnment s and 
local authorities  or State Electricity Board for any period whether before or after the mana gement of 
the undertakings of any jute company had been taken over by the Central Government.  
Category V — 
Any c redit availed of for trade or manufacturing purpose during the pre -take-over management 
period.  
 
--------------------------The National Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980--------------------------
1 THE NATIONAL COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1980  
_________  
  ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the  Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in an existing 
Government company.  
6. Transfer of undertakings of the Company from an existing Government company to a new 
Government company.  
7. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount.  
9. Payment of fu rther amount.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
 
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
12. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
13. Continuance of employees.  
14. Provident fund and other funds.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
 
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
16. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government company.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
19. Priority of claims.  
20. Examination of claims.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims.  
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited w ith the general revenue account . 2 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
25. Act to have overriding effect.  
26. Assumption of liability.  
27. Management to continue to vest in the  Custodian until alternative arrangements have been made.  
28. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the Government 
company.  
29. Penalties.  
30. Offences by companies.  
31. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
32. Delegation of powers.  
33. Power to make rules.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
 
  3 THE NATIONAL COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER                                                 
OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1980  
[19th July , 1980 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of Messrs. National 
Company Limited with a view to securing the proper management of such undertakings so as 
to subserve the interests of the general public by ensuring the conti nued manufacture, 
production and distribution of articles made of jute, which are essential to the needs of the 
economy of the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Messrs. National Company Limited had been engaged in the manufacture and           
production of articles mentioned in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , namely, textiles made wholly or in part of jute ; 
AND WHEREAS the management of the undertakings of Messrs. National Company Limited was taken 
over by the Central Government under section 18AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire t he undertakings of Messrs. National Company Limited to 
ensure that the interests of the general public are served by the continuance , by the undertakings of the 
Company, of the manufacture, production and distribution of the aforesaid articles, which are e ssential to 
the needs of the economy of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Company Limited 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.  
(2) The provisions of sections 29 and 30 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 27th day of April, 1980.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 27th day of April, 1980;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 15;  
(c) “Company ” means Messrs. National Company Limited, a company within the meaning         
of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at 18A -Brabourne Road , 
Calcutta -700001, in the State of West Bengal;  
(d) “existing Government company ” means a Government company which is carrying on 
business on the appointed day;  
(e) “new Government company ” means a Government company formed and registered on or after 
the appointed day;  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gaze tte; 
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of that provision and different da tes may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  4 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the           
Company .—On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of 
the Company in relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in , 
the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash 
on hand, reserve funds , investments, book debts and all other rights and i nterests in, or arising out of , such 
property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of 
the Company, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and other documents of 
whatever n ature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall , by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affe cting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any Court or other 
authority restricting the use of such properties in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the 
whole or any part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Ac t in the Central Government and  
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as  may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues , in whole or in part, out of the amounts specified in section 8 and  also out of the 
amounts determined under section 9, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Company in re lation to any undertaking which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be in force on and after such day in accordance 
with its tenor in relation to and for the purposes of such undertaking, and on and from the date of vesting 
of such undertaking, under section 5, in an existing Government company, or under section 6, in a new 
Government company, the existing, or new, Government company, as  the case may be, shall be deemed 
to be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been 
granted to such existing, or new, Government company and such existing, or new, Government company 
shall hold it for the  remainder of the period for which the Company would have held it under the terms 
thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding, of whatever nature, in relation to 
any property which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by or 
against the Company, is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of the Company, or of anything 
contained in this Act , but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced 
by or against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed under 
section 5, to vest in an existing Government company or become transferred  by virtue of the provisions of 
section 6 to a new Government company, by or against such Government company.  5 5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in an 
existing Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anythin g contained in sections 3 and 4, and 
subject to the provisions of section 6, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that an existing 
Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that 
Government may thi nk fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the Company, and 
the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to v est in the Central Government, vest in that 
existing Government company either on the date of publication of the notification or on such earlier or 
later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Wh ere the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings vest, under       
sub-section ( 1), in an existing Government company , that Government company shall, on and from the 
date of such vesting be deemed to have become, and until t he transfer of the undertakings by virtue of the 
provisions of section 6, to a new Government company, be deemed to be, the owner in relation to such 
undertakings and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings 
shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become, and until the date of such transfer, 
be deemed to be, the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that existing Government company.  
6. Transfer of undertakings of the Company from an existing Government company to a new 
Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, where the 
undertakings of the Company have been directed, under sub -section ( 1) of section  5, to vest in an existing 
Government company, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a new Government company is 
willing to comply, or has complied , with such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to 
impose, declare, by notifi cation, that the undertakings of the Company be transferred to that new 
Government company; and on the issue of such declaration, the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings, which had been directed under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 to vest in an 
existing Government company, shall, instead of continuing to vest in that existing Government company , 
vest in that new Government company with effect from the date on which such declaration is made.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the existing Government company in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company vest under sub -section ( 1) in a new Government company, that new 
Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner 
in relation to such undertakings and the rights and liabilities of the existing Government company in 
relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of that new G overnment company.  
7. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company in respect 
of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable 
against it, and not against the  Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company vest in an 
existing, or a new, Government company, against such Government company.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that— 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings, in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company vest in an existing, or a new, 
Government c ompany, against such Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company , passed after the appointed day in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute, which arose before t hat day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or where 
the undertakings of the Company vest in an existing, or a new, Government company, against such 
Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day for  the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force shall be enforceable against the Central Government , or 
where the undertakings of the Company vest in an existing, or a new, Government company, against 
such Government company.  6 CHAPTER  III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount .—(1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under 
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to such undertakings, there shall be given b y the Central Government to the Company in cash and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees ten crores and four lakhs.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company, in relation to 
its undertakings, shall be met, in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company, 
from the amount due to the Company under sub -section ( 1). 
9. Payment of further amount .—(1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of the 
undertakings owned by it, there shall be given, by the Central Government, to the Company, in addition 
to the amount specified in section 8, an amount computed at the rate of ten thousand rupees  per annum for 
the period commencing  on the date on which the management of the undertakings of the Company was 
taken over in pursuance of the order made by the Central Government under section 18AA of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , and ending on the appointed day.  
(2) The amount specified in section 8, and the amount computed in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1), shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum for the period 
commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is made by 
the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(3) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be 
given to the Com pany in addition to the amount specified in section 8.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—(1) The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings owned by the 
Company, the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Gov ernment under 
section 3, shall ,— 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section  (1) of              
section 5, vest, on and from the date, specified in such direction, in the existing Government company 
specified therein; or  
(b) where a declaration has been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, vest, on and from the 
date of such d eclaration, in the new Government company specified therein; or  
(c) where no direction referred to in clause ( a) or declaration referred to in clause ( b) has been 
made, vest, on and from the appointed day, in one or more Custodians appointed by the Central  
Government under sub -section ( 2), 
and thereupon the existing, or new, Government company or the Custodian or Custodians so appointed, 
as the case may be, shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion of all other persons, all such powers and 
do all such  things as the Company is authorised to exercise and do in relation to the undertakings owned 
by it.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals or a Government company as the 
Custodian or Custodians of the undertakings of the Company in  relation to which no direction has been 
made by it under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 or no declaration has been made by it under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 6, and the Custodian or Custodians so appointed shall receive, from the funds of the 
undertakings,  such remuneration as may be specified by the Central Government.  
(3) The Custodian or Custodians of the undertakings of the Company shall maintain an account of the 
undertakings of the Company in such form and manner and under such conditions as may be pr escribed, 
and the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , shall apply to the audit of the accounts so 
maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts of a company.  7 11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Comp any to deliver all 
assets, etc. —(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in an existing, or 
a new, Government company or on the appointment of a Custodian or Custodians , all persons in charge of 
the management of the undertak ings of the Company immediately before such vesting or appointment 
shall be bound to deliver to such Government company, or the Custodian or C ustodians, as the case may 
be, all assets, books of account, registers and other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings 
of the Company.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the existing, or new, Government company or the Custodian or Custodians, and such 
Government comp any, Custodian or Custodians may also, if it is considered necessary so to do, apply to 
the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the 
undertakings of the Company shall be conducted or in relation to any  other matter arising in the course of 
such management.  
12. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession .—(1) Any person who has , on 
the appointed day, in his possession or under his control, any assets, books, documents or other papers  
relating to any undertaking owned by the Company, which has vested in the Central Government or in an 
existing, or a new, Government company under this Act, and which belongs to the Company, or would 
have so belonged, if the undertakings owned by the Company had not vested in the Central Government 
or such Government company, shall be liable to account for the said assets, books, documents and other 
papers to the Central Government or the Government company and shall deliver them up to the Central 
Gove rnment or such Government company or to such person or body of persons as the Central 
Government or the Government company may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government may take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for securing possession 
of the undertakings of the Company which have vested in it under section 3.  
(3) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all its property and assets, as on the appointed day, 
pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, and, for this 
purpose, the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company shall afford to the 
Company all reasonable facilities.  
CHAP TER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
13. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every employee of the Company in connection with any 
undertaking owned by it, shall become, on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 
Government, and where such undertaking is vested in an existing, or a new, Government company under 
this Act, become, on and from the date of such vesting in such Government company, an employee 
thereof and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the existing, of new, 
Government company, as the case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and 
other matters as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue 
to do so unless and until his employment under the Central Government or the existing , or new, 
Government company, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other 
conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Government or the existing, or new , Government 
company, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the lime being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any und ertakings owned by the Company to the Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Government company shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act 
or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be  entertained by any court, tribunal 
or other authority.  8 14. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of persons employed in any of the 
undertakin gs owned by it, the monies relatable to the employees, whose services have become transferred 
by or under this Act to the Central Government or an existing, or a new, Government company shall , out 
of the monies standing , on the appointed day, to the  credit  of such provident fund, superannuation fund, 
welfare fund or other fund, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Cen tral Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or the 
Government company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable under sections 8 and 9 to the Company , by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint  such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person di rectly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
16. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commission er, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an amount equal to that specified in section 8;  
(b) a further amount equal to the amount payable to the Company under section 9.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissione r shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of the Company 
in relation to which  payment has been made to him under this Act.  
(4) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in                
sub-section ( 2) shall en sure to the benefit of the Company.  
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government company .—(1) The Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to 
receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any m oney due to the Company, in 
relation to any of the undertakings owned by it which have vested in the Central Government or such 
Government company, and realised after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains 
to a per iod prior to the  appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, may 
make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by that Government or 
Government company, after the appointed day, for discha rging any liability of the Company in respect of 
any of the undertakings owned by it, in relation to any period prior to the appointed day; and every such 
claim shall have priority in accordance with the priorities attaching under this Act, to the matter i n 
relation to which such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the Gov ernment 
company.  9 (3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in relation to any of the 
undertakings owned by it, in respect of any tra nsaction prior to the appointed day, which have not been 
discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities of the Company.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
with regard to any of the matters specified in the Schedule, pertaining to any undertaking owned by it, 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date : 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days , but not thereafter.  
19. Priority of claims .—The claims made under section 18 shall have priorities in accordance with 
the following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
preceden ce over Category III and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly; and  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
20. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section  18, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under t his Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine any claim in respect of such lower category.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before which every claimant 
shall file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the countr y 
and one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commissioner may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the period s pecified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursement made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and a fter giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his  functions, including the place or places at which he may hold his sitting and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act , have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while  trying a suit, in respect of t he following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  10 (6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Pen al Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may  prefer an appeal 
against such decision to the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office 
of the Company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court.  
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner .—After admitting a claim under this Act, the 
amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the pe rson or persons to whom 
such amount is due and on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of any claim relating to 
the undertakings owned by it shall stand discharged.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company .—(1) If out of the monies paid to him in relation to 
any undertaking owned by the Company there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in 
the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment  or other property has vested in the Central 
Government or any existing, or new, Government company under this Act, but such machinery, 
equipment or other property does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government or, as the cas e may be, the existing, or new, Government company, to continue to possess 
such machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which they were 
possessed by the Company, immediately before the appointed day.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited w ith the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the da te on which the office of the Commissioner is finally would up , shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such pa yment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order, if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Ac t shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act , or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
26. Assumption of liability .—(1) Where any liability of the Company arising out of any item 
specified in any category in Part I of the Schedule is not discharged fully by the Commissione r out of the 
amounts paid to him under this Act, the Commissioner shall intimate in writing to the Central 
Government the extent of the liability which remains undischarged and that liability shall be assumed by 
the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Gove rnment may, by order, direct the existing, or new, Government company in 
which the undertakings of the Company become vested by virtue of any direction made under sub -section 
(1) of section 5 or declaration made under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, to take over the liability assumed 
by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), and on receipt of such direction, it shall be the duty of 
such existing, or new, Government company to discharge such liability.  11 27. Management to continue to vest in the Custodian  until alternative arrangements have been 
made .—Notwithstanding the vesting under this Act of the undertakings of the Company in the Central 
Government or an existing,  or a new, Government company, — 
(a) the Custodian who has been managing the affairs of such undertaking before the da te on 
which the undertaking had so vested shall, until alternative arrangements have been made by the 
Central Government or, as the case may be, such Government company, for the management of such 
undertakings continue to mana ge the affairs of the undertakings, as if the Custodian had been 
authorised by the Central Government or, as the case may be, such Government company, to manage 
such undertakings;  
(b) the Custodian or any person authorised by him for this purpose shall, un til alternative 
arrangements have been made by the Central Government or, as the case may be, such Government 
company, continue to be authorised to operate, in relation to the undertakings of the Company, any 
account of such undertakings in any bank as if the Custodian or the person authorised by him had 
been authorised by the Central Government or such Government company to operate such account.  
28. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the 
Government company .—Every  contract entered into by the Company in relation to any of the 
underta kings owned by it, which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, for any service, 
sale or supply and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a 
period of one hundred and eighty days from the appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract 
is, bef ore the expiry of that period, r atified, in writing, by the Central Government, or the existing, or 
new, Government company, in which  such undertakings have been vested under this Act, and in ratifying 
such contract the Central Government or such Government company may make such alteration or 
modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or such Governme nt company shall not omit to ratify a 
contract and shall not make any alteration  or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government or such Government company; and  
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration  or modification therein.  
29. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings 
owned by the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the 
Government company; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of, the undertakings 
owned by the Company; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Go vernment or the existing , or new , 
Government company or any pe rson or body of persons specified by that Government or such 
Government company, as the case may be , any document relating to the undertakings owned by the 
Company, which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company or 
any perso n or body of persons specified by  that Government or Government company, any assets, 
books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control relating to the 
undertakings owned by the Company; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the undertakings owned by the 
Company or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reason to believe to be false or 
grossly inaccurate,  
shall be  punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.  12 30. Offences by Companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time  the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of  such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neg lect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of              
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
31. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Gov ernment or the existing, or new,  
Government company in which the undertakings of the Company have vested under this Act or other 
person authorised by that Government or Government company for anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other  legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or 
other employees or the existing, or new, Government company aforesaid or any officer or other person 
authorised by that Company for any damage caused or likely to be cause d by anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
32. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferr ed by this section and 
sections 33 and 34, may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall a ct under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
33. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, makes rules  for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the form and manne r in which and the conditions under which accounts shall be maintained 
by the Custodian or Custodians , as required by sub -section ( 3) of section 10;  
(c) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other fund, referred to in               
sub-section ( 2) of section 14, shall be dealt with;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  13 (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modif ied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modifica tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
34. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not i nconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
35. Repeal and saving .—(1) The National Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Ordinance, 1980  (4 of 1980) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of t his Act.   14 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 18, 20, 21, 23 and 26)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES  
Part I  
Category I — 
Employees ’ dues on account of unpaid salaries, wages, provident fund, Employees ’ State Insurance 
contribution or premium relating to Life Insurance Corporation of India and any other amounts due to 
employees, in respect of any period whether before or after the management of the undertaking of the 
Company had been taken over by the Ce ntral Government.  
Category II — 
Secured loans obtained by the Company from nationalised banks and public financial institutions 
during any period whether before or after the management of the underta king of the Company had been 
taken over by the Central Gov ernment.  
Category III — 
Amounts due to trade and other creditors in relation to any transaction which took place during the              
post-take-over management period.  
Part II  
Category IV — 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rules or other dues to the Central Government, State Governments and local 
authorities or State Electricity Board for the pre -take-over management period.  
Category V — 
Amounts due to trade and other creditors in relation to any transaction which  took place during the 
pre-take-over management  period.  
 
--------------------------The National Security Act, 1980--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL SECURITY ACT, 1980  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Power to make orders detaining certain persons . 
4. Execution of detention orders . 
5. Power to regulate place and conditions of detention . 
5A. Grounds of detention severable.  
6. Detention orders not to be invalid or inoperative on certain grounds . 
7. Powers in relation to absconding persons . 
8. Grounds of order of detention to be disclosed to persons affected by the order . 
9. Constitution of Advisory Boards . 
10. Reference to Advisory Boards.  
11. Procedure of Advisory Boards . 
12. Action upon the report of the Advisory Board . 
13. Maximum period of detention . 
14. Revocation of detention orders . 
14A. Circumstances in which persons may be detained for periods longer than three  months without 
obtaining the opinion of Advisory Boards.  
15. Temporary release of persons detained . 
16. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
17.  Act not to have effect with respect to detentions under State laws . 
18. Repeal and saving . 
  2 
  
THE NATIONAL SECURITY ACT,  1980  
ACT NO. 65 OF 1980  
[27th December , 1980.]  
An Act to provide for preventive detention in certain cases and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as foll ows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called t he National Security Act, 1980.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, as respects a detention order made by the Central 
Government or a person detained under such order, the Central Government, and as respects a 
detention order made by a State Government or by an officer subordinate to a State Government or as 
respec ts a person detained under su ch order, the State Government;  
(b) “detention order ” means  an order made under section 3;  
(c) “foreigner ” has the same meaning as in the For eigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946);  
(d) “person ” includes a foreigner;  
(e) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof.  
3. Power to make or ders detaining certain persons .—(1) The Central Government or the State 
Government may, — 
(a) if satisfied with respect to any person that with a view to prev enting him from acting in any 
manner prejudicial to the defence of India, the relations of India with foreign power s, or the security 
of India, or  
(b) if satisfied with respect to any foreigner that with a view to regulating his continued presence 
in India or with a view to making arrangement s for his expulsion from India,  
it is necessary so to do, make an order directin g that such person be detained.  
(2) The Central Government or the State Government may, if satisfied with respect to any person that 
with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State or from 
acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of  Public order or from acting in any manner 
prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community it is necessary so to do, 
make an order directin g that such person be detained.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section,  “acting in any manner prejudicial to the 
maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community ” does not include “acting in any manner 
prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodities essential to the community ” as defined in the 
Explan ation  to sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of 
Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 (7 of 1980), and accordingly, no order of detention shall be 
made under this Act on any ground on which an order of det ention  may be made under that Act.  
(3) If, having regard to the circumstances prevailing or likely to prevail in any area within the local 
limits of the jurisdiction of a District Magistrate or a Commissioner of Police, the State Government is 
satisfied th at it is necessary so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct, that during such period as may be 
specified in the order, such District Magistrate or Commissioner of Police may also, if satisfied as 
provided in sub -section ( 2), exercise the powers confer red by  the said sub -section:  
Provided that the period specified in an order made by the State Government under this sub -section 
shall not, in the first instance, exceed three months, but the State Government may, if satisfied as 3 
 aforesaid that it is necessary so to do, amend such order to extend such period from time to time by any 
period not exceedin g three months at any one time.  
(4) When any order is made under this section by an officer mentioned in sub -section ( 3), he shall 
forthwith report the f act to the State Government to which he is subordinate together with the grounds on 
which the order has been made and such other particulars as, in his opinion, have a bearing on the matter, 
and no such order shall remain in force for more than twelve days  after the making thereof unless, in the 
meantime, it has been approv ed by the State Government:  
Provided that where under section 8 the grounds of detention are communicated by the officer making 
the order after five days but not later than 1[fifteen days] from the date of detention, this sub -section shall 
apply subject to the modification that, for the words “twelve days ”, the words “2[twenty  days]” shall be 
substituted.  
(5) When any order is made or approved by the State Government under this section, th e State 
Government shall, within seven days, report the fact to the Central Government together with the grounds 
on which the order has been made and such other particulars as, in the opinion of the State Government, 
have a bearing on the necessity for the  order.  
4. Execu tion of detention orders .—A detention order may be executed at any place in India in the 
manner provided for the execution of warrants of arrest under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974).  
5. Power to regulate place and conditions of detention .—Every person in respect of whom a 
detention order has been made shall be liable — 
(a) to be detained in such place and under such conditions, including conditions as to 
maintenance, discipline and punishment for breaches of discipli ne, as the appropriate Government 
may, by general  or special order, specify; and  
(b) to be removed from one place of detention to another place of detention, whether within the 
same State or in another State, by order  of the appropriate Government:  
Provided that no order shall be made by a State Government under clause ( b) for the removal of a 
person from one State to another State except with the consent of the Government of that other State.  
3[5A. Grounds of detention severable .—Where a person has been detained in pursuance of an order 
of detention [whether made before or after the commencement of the National Security (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1984  (60 of 1984 )] under section 3 which has been made on two or more grounds, such 
order of detention shall  be deemed to have been made separately on each o f such grounds and 
accordingly — 
(a) such order shall not be deemed to be invalid or inoperative merely because one or  some of the 
grounds is or are — 
(i) vague,  
(ii) non -existent,  
(iii) not relevant,  
(iv) not connected or not proximately connected with such person, or  
(v) invalid for any other reason whatsoever,  
and it is not, therefore, possible to hold that the Government or officer making such order would have 
been satisfied as provided in section 3 with reference to the remaining ground or grounds and made 
the order of detention;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1984, s. 3, for “ten days” (w.e.f. 5 -4-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “fifteen days” (w.e.f. 5 -4-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 60 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -6-1984).  4 
 (b) the Government or officer making the order of detention shall be deemed to have made the 
order of detention under the said section after being satisfied as provided in that s ection with 
reference to the remaining ground or grounds.]  
 
6. Detention orders not to be invalid or inoperative on certain grounds .—No detention order shall 
be invalid or  inoperative merely by reason — 
(a) that  the person to be detained thereunder is outside the limits of the territorial jurisdiction of 
the Government or officer making the order, or  
(b) that the place of detention of such person is outside the said limits.  
7. Powers in relation to absconding per sons.—(1) If the Central Government or the State 
Government or an officer mentioned in sub -section ( 3) of section 3, as the case may be, has reason to 
believe that a person in respect of whom a detention order has been made has absconded or is concealing 
himself so that the order cannot be executed, t hat Government or officer may — 
(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of 
the first class having jurisdiction in the place where the said person ordinarily  resides;  
(b) by order notified in the Official Gazette direct the said person to appear before such officer, at 
such place and within such period as  may be specified in the order.  
(2) Upon the making of a report against any person under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1), the provisions 
of sections 82, 83, 84 and 85 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall apply in respect 
of such person and his property as if the detention order made against him were a wa rrant issued by the 
Magistrate.  
(3) If any person fails to comply with an order issued under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), he shall, 
unless he proves that it was not possible for him to comply therewith and that he had, within the period 
specified in the order, informed the officer mentio ned in the order of the reason which rendered 
compliance therewith impossible and of his whereabouts, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one ye ar, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every 
offence under sub -section ( 3) shall be cognizable.  
8. Grounds of order of detention to be disclosed to  persons affected by the order .—(1) When a 
person is detained in pursuance of a detention order, the authorit y making the order shall, as soon as may 
be, but ordinarily not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, not later than 1[fifteen days] from the date of detention, communicate to him the grounds on 
which the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation 
against the order to the appropriate Gov ernment.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall requ ire the authority to disclose facts which it considers to be 
against the public interest to disclose.  
9. C onstitution of Advisory Boards .—(1) The Central Government and each State Government 
shall, whenever necessary, constitute one or more Advisory Board s for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every such Board shall consist of three persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be 
appointed as, Judges of a High Court, and such persons shall be appointed by  the appropriate 
Government.  
(3) The appropriate Go vernment shall appoint one of the members of the Advisory Board who is, or 
has been, a Judge of a High Court to be its Chairman, and in the case of a Union territory, the 
appointment to the Advisory Board of any person who is a Judge of the High Court of a  State shall be 
with the previous approval of the State Government concerned.  
                                                           
1.Subs. by Act 24 of 1984, s. 4, for “ten days” (w.e.f. 5 -4-1984).  5 
 10. Reference to Advisory Boards .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, in every case 
where a detention order has been made under this Act, the appropriate Government shall, within three 
weeks from the date of detention of a person under the order, place before the Advisory Boa rd constituted 
by it under section 9, the grounds on which the order has been made and the representation, if any, made 
by the person affected by the order, and in case where the order has been made by an officer mentioned in 
sub-section ( 3) of section 3, also the report by such officer under sub -section ( 4) of that section.  
11. Procedure of Adv isory Boards .—(1) The Advisory Board shall, after considering the materials 
placed before it and, after calling for such further information as it may deem necessary  from the 
appropriate Government or from any person called for the purpose through the appropriate Government 
or from the person concerned, and if, in any particular case, it considers it essential so to do  or if the 
person concerned desires to be heard, a fter hearing him in person, submit its report to the appropriate 
Government within seven weeks from the date of det ention of the person concerned.  
(2) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a separate part thereof the opinion of the 
Advisory Boa rd as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person concerned.  
(3) When there is a difference of opinion among the members forming the Advisory Board, the 
opinion of the majority of such members shall be deemed to be the opinion of the Board.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person against whom a detention order has been made to 
appear by any legal practitioner in any matter connected with the reference to the Advisory Board; and 
the proceedings of the Advisor y Board and its report, excepting that part of the report in which the 
opinion of the Advisory Board is specified, shall be confidential.  
12. Action upon th e report of the Advisory Board .—(1) In any case where the Advisory Board has 
reported that there is,  in its opinion, sufficient cause for the detention of a person, the appropriate 
Government may confirm the detention order and continue the detention of the person concerned fo r such 
period as it thinks fit.  
(2) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there is, in its opinion, no sufficient cause 
for the detention of a person, the appropriate Government shall revoke the detention order and cause the 
person concerned to be released forthwith.  
13. Maximum period of detention .—The maximum period for which any person may be detained in 
pursuance of any detention order which has been confirmed under section 12 shall be twelve months from 
the date of detention:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the power of the appropriate Government 
to revoke or modify the detention order at any earlier time.  
14. Revocation of detention orders .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 21 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), a detention order may, at any time, be revoked or modified, — 
(a) notwithstanding that the order has been made by an officer mentioned in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3, by the State Government to which that officer is subordinate or by the Central Government;  
(b) notwithstanding  that the order has been made by a State Government, by the Central 
Government.  
1[(2) The expiry or revocation of a detention order (hereafter in this sub -section referred to as the 
earlier detention order) shall not [whether such earlier detention order h as been made before or after the 
commencement of the National Security (Second Amendment) Act, 1984  (60 of 1984) ] bar the making of 
another detention order (hereafter in this sub -section referred to as the subsequent detention order) under 
section 3 agains t the same person:  
Provided that in a case where no fresh facts have arisen after the expiry or revocation of the earlier 
detention order made against such person, the maximumperiod for which such person may be detained in 
pursuance of the subsequent deten tion order shall, in no case, extend beyond the expiry of a period of 
twelve months from the date of detention under the earlier detention order.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 60 of 1984, s. 3, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 21 -6-1984).  6 
 1[14A. Circumstances in which persons may be detained for periods longer than three months 
without obtaining the opinion of Advisory Boards .—(1) Nothwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this Act, or in any judgment, decree or order of an y court or other authority, any 
person in respect of whom an order of detention has been made under this Act at any time before the2[8th 
day of June, 1989] may be detained without obtaining the opinion of the Advisory Board for a period 
longer than three m onths, but not exceeding six months, from the date of his detention where such person 
had been detained with a view to preventing him, in any disturbed area — 
(i) from interfering with the efforts of Government in coping with the terrorist  and disruptive 
activities; and  
(ii) from acting in a ny manner prejudicial to — 
(a) thedefence of India; or  
(b) the security of India; or  
(c) the security of the State; or  
(d) the maintenance of public order; or  
(e) the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community.  
Explanation 1.—The provisions of the Explanation  to sub -section ( 2) of section 3 shall apply for the 
purposes of this sub -section as they apply for the purposes of that sub -section.  
Explanation  2.—In this sub -section, “disturbed area ” means any area which is for the time being 
declared by notification under section 3 of the Punjab Disturbed Areas Act, 1983 (32 of 1983), or under 
section 3 of the Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Act, 1983 (3 3 of 1983), to be a disturbed area.  
Explanation  3.—In this sub -section, “terrorist and disruptive activities ” means “terrorist acts ” and 
“disruptive activities ” within the meaning of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) 
Ordinance, 1987 (Ord . 2 of 1987).  
(2) In the case of any person to whom sub -section ( 1) applies, sections 3, 8 and 10 to 14 shall have 
effect subject to the fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
(a) in section 3, — 
(i) in su b-section ( 4), in the proviso, — 
(A) for the words “ten days”, the words “fifteen days ” shall be substituted;  
(B) for the words “fifteen  days” the words “twenty days ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in sub -section ( 5), for the words “seven days ”, the words “fifteen days ” shall be 
substituted;  
(b) in section 8, in sub -section ( 1), for the words “ten days ”, the words “fifteen days ” shall be 
substituted;  
(c) in section 10, for the words “shall, within three weeks ”, the words “shall, within four months 
and two weeks ” shall be substituted;  
(d) in section 11, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “seven weeks ”, the words “five months and three weeks ” 
shall be substituted;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9 -6-1987)  earlier section 14A was inserted vide the National Security (Amendment) Act, 
1984 (24 of 1984), s. 5 and subsequently  the said section was repealed by the National Security (Amendment ) Act, 1987         
(27 of 1987), s. 4 . 
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1988, s. 2, for “8th day of June, 1988” (w.e.f. 26 -5-1988).  
 
 7 
 (ii) in sub -section ( 2), for the words “detention of the person concerned ”, the words 
“continued detention of the person concer ned” shall be substituted;  
(e) in section 12, for the words “for the detention ”, at both the places where they occur, the words 
“for the continued detention ” shall be substituted;  
(f) in section 13, for the words “twelve months ”, the words “two years ” shall be substituted:  
(g) in section 14, in the proviso to sub -section ( 2), for the words “twelve months ” the words “two 
years ” shall be substituted.]  
15. Temporary release of person s detained .—(1) The appropriate Government may, at any time, 
direct that any person detained in pursuance of a detention order may be released for any specified period 
either without conditions or upon such conditions specified in the direction as that person accepts, and 
may, a t any time, cancel his release.  
(2) In directing t he release of any person under sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government may 
require him to enter into a bond with or without sureties for the due observance of the conditions speci fied 
in the direction.  
(3) Any person released under sub -section ( 1) shal l surrender himself at the time and place, and to the 
authority, specified in the order directing his release or cancelling h is release, as the case may be.  
(4) If any person fails without sufficient cause to surrender himself in the manner specified in  
sub-section ( 3), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two yea rs, or 
with fine, or with both.  
(5) If any person released under sub -section ( 1) fails to fulfil any of the conditions imposed upon him 
under the said sub -sectio n or in the bond entered into by him, the bond shall be declared to be forfeited 
and any person bound thereby shall be liable to pay the penalty thereof.  
16. Protection of action take n in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or a State Government, and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
17. Act not to have effect with respect to detention s under State laws .—(1) Nothing in this Act 
shall apply or have any effect with respect to orders of detention, made under any State law, which are in 
force immediately before the commencement of the National Security Ordinance, 1980 (11 of 1980), and 
accordingly every person in respect of whom an order of detention made under any State law is in force 
immediately before such commencement, shall be governed with respect to such detention by the 
provisions of such State law or where the State law under which  such order of detention is made is an 
Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the State Ordinance) promulgated by the Governor of that State and 
the State Ordinance has been replaced — 
(i) before such commencement, by an enactment passed by the Legislature o f that State, by such 
enactment; or  
(ii) after such commencement, by an enactment which is passed by the Legislature of that State 
and the application of which is confined to orders of detention made before such commencement 
under the State Ordinance, by s uch enactment,  
as if this Act had not been enacted.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to bar the making under section 3, of a detention order 
against any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) after the detention order in force in respect of him as 
aforesaid immediately before the commencement of the Na tional Security Ordinance, 1980 (11 of 1980), 
ceases to have effect  for any reason whatsoever.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “State law ” means any law providing for preventive 
detention on all or any of the grounds on which an order of detention may be made under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 3 and in force in any State immediately before the commencement of the said Ordinance.  8 
 18. Repeal and  saving .—(1) The Na tional Security Ordinance, 1980 (11 of 1980), is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act, as if this Act had 
come into force on the 23rd day of September, 1980, and, in particular, any reference made under section 
10 of the said Ordinance and pending before any Advisory Board immediately before the date on which 
this Act receives t he assent of the President may continue to be dealt with by that Board after that date as 
if such Board had been constituted under section 9 of this Act.  
--------------------------The Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980--------------------------
1 THE PREVENTION OF BLACKMARKETING AND MAINTENANCE OF SUPPLIES OF 
ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT, 1980  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power to make orders detaining certain persons.  
4. Execution of detention orders.  
5. Power to regulate place and conditions of detention . 
6. Detention orders not to be invalid or inoperative on certain grounds . 
7. Powers in relation to absconding persons . 
8. Grounds of order of detention to be disclosed to person affe cted by the order . 
9. Constitution of Advisory Boards . 
10. Reference to Advisory Boards . 
11. Procedure of Advisory Boards . 
12. Action upon the report of Advisory Board . 
13. Maximum period of detention.  
14. Revocation of detention orders . 
15. Temporary release of persons detained . 
16. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
17. Repeal and saving.  
  2 THE PREVENTION OF BLACKMARKETING AND MAINTENANCE OF SUPPLIES OF 
ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 7 OF 1980  
[12th February , 1980.]  
An Act to provide for detention in certain cases for the  purpose of prevention of black  marketing 
and maintenance of supplies of commodities essential to the community and for matters 
connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Black  
marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have  come into force on the 15th day of October, 1979.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, as respects a detention order made by the Central 
Government or by an officer of the Central Governm ent or a person detained under such order, the 
Central Government, and as respects a detention order made by a State Government or by an officer 
of a State Government or as respects a person detained under such order, the State Government;  
(b) “detention o rder” means an order made under section 3;  
(c) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof.  
3. Power to make orders detaining certain persons. —(1) The Central Government or a State 
Government or any officer of the Central Government, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that 
Government specially empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government, or any officer of a 
State Government, not below the rank of a Secretary to that Government specially emp owered for the 
purposes of this section by that Government, may, if satisfied, with respect to any person that with a view 
to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodities 
essential to the community it i s necessary so to do, make an order directing that such person be detained.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “acting in any manner prejudicial 
to the maintenance of supplies of commodities essential to the community ” means— 
(a) committing or instigating any person to commit any offence punishable under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955), or under any other law for the time being in force relating to 
the control of the production, supply or distribution of, or trade and commerce in, any commodity 
essential to the community; or  
(b) dealing in any commodity — 
(i) which is an essential commodity as defined in the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 
1955), or  
(ii) with respect to which provisions have been made in  any such other law as is referred to in 
clause ( a), 
with a view to making gain in any manner which may directly or indirectly defeat or tend to defeat 
the provisions of that Act or other law aforesaid.  
(2) Any of t he following officers, namely: — 
(a) district magistrates;  
(b) Commissioners of Police, wherever they have been appointed,  
may also, if satisfied as provided in sub -section ( 1), exercise the powers conferred by the said sub -section.  3 (3) When any order is made under this section by an officer mentioned in sub -section ( 2), he shall 
forthwith report the fact to the State Government to which he is subordinate together with the grounds on 
which the order has been made and such other particulars as in his opinion have a bearing on the matter, 
and no  such order shall remain in force for more than twelve days after the making thereof unless in the 
meantime it has been approved by the State Government:  
Provided that where under section 8 the grounds of detention are communicated by the authority 
making the order after five days but not later than ten days from the date of detention, this sub -section 
shall apply subject to the modification that for the words “twelve days ”, the words “fifteen days ” shall be 
substituted.  
(4) When any order is made or approv ed by the State Government under this section or when any 
order is made under this section by an officer of the State Government not below the rank of Secretary to 
that Government specially empowered under sub -section ( 1), the State Government shall, withi n seven 
days, report the fact to the Central Government together with the grounds on which the order has been 
made and such other particulars as, in the opinion of the State Government, have a bearing o n the 
necessity for the order.  
4. Execution of detenti on orders. —A detention order may be executed at any place in India in the 
manner provided for the execution of warrants of arrest under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974).  
5. Power to regulate place and conditions of detention. —Every  person in respect of whom a 
detention order has bee n made shall be liable — 
(a) to be detained in such place and under such conditions, including conditions as to 
maintenance, discipline and punishment for breaches of discipline, as the appropriate Governm ent 
may, by general or special order, specify; and  
(b) to be removed from one place of detention to another place of detention, whether within the 
same State or in another State, by order  of the appropriate Government:  
Provided that no order shall be made by a State Government under clause ( b) for the removal of a 
person from one State to another State except with the consent of the Government of that other State.  
6. Detention orders not to be invalid or inoperative on certain grounds. —No detention order sh all 
be invalid o r inoperative merely by reason — 
(a) that the person to be detained thereunder is outside the limits of the territorial jurisdiction of 
the Government or officer making the order, or  
(b) that  the place of detention of such person is outside the said limits.  
7. Powers in relation to absconding persons. —(1) If 1[the appropriate Government or an officer 
mentioned in sub -section (2) of section 3, as the case may be,] has reason to believe that a p erson in 
respect of whom a detention order has been made has absconded or is concealing himself so that the order 
cannot be executed, that Government 2[or officer]  may— 
(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of 
the first class having jurisdiction in the place where the said person ordinarily resides; and thereupon 
the provisions of sections 82, 83, 84 and 85 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 
shall apply in respect of the said pers on and his property as if the order directing that he be detained 
were a warrant issued by the Magistrate;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1982, s. 2, for “appropriate Government” (w.e.f. 5 -8-1982).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -8-1982).  4 (b) by order notified in the Official Gazette direct the said person to appear before such officer, at 
such place and within such period as may be sp ecified in the order; and if the said person fails to 
comply with such direction he shall, unless he proves that it was not possible for him to comply 
therewith and that he had, within the period specified in the order, informed the officer mentioned in 
the order of the reason which rendered compliance therewith impossible and of his whereabouts, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal P rocedure, 1973 (2 of1974), every 
offence under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.  
8. Grounds of order of detention to be disclosed to person affected by the order. —(1) When a 
person is detained in pursuance of a detention order, the authori ty making the order shall, as soon as may 
be, but ordinarily not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, not later than ten days from the date of detention, communicate to him the grounds on which 
the order has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against 
the order to the appropriate Government.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall require the authority to disclose facts which it considers to be 
against the public interest to disclose.  
9. Constitution of Advisory Boards. —(1) The Central Government and each State Government 
shall , whenever necessary, constitute one or more Advisory Boards for the purposes of this Act.  
1[(2) Every such Board shall consist o f three persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be 
appointed as, Judges of a High Court, and such persons shall be appointed by the appropriate 
Government.  
(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint one of the members of the Advisory Board who  is, or 
has been, a Judge of a High Court to be its Chairman, and in the case of a Union territory, the 
appointment to the Advisory Board of an y person who is a Judge of the High Court of a State shall be 
with the previous approval of the State Government concerned.]  
10. Reference to Advisory Boards. —Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, in every case 
where a detention order has been made under this Act, the appropriate Government shall, within three 
weeks from the date of detention of a person  under the order, place before the Advisory Board constituted 
by it under section 9, the grounds on which the order has been made and the representation, if any, made 
by the person affected by the order, and in case where the order has been made by an offi cer referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3, also the report by such officer under su b-section ( 3) of that section.  
11. Procedure of Advisory Boards. —(1) The Advisory Board shall, after considering the materials 
placed before it and, after calling for such further information as it may deem necessary from the 
appropriate Government or from any person called for the purpose through the appropriate Government 
or from the person concerned, and if, in any particular case, it considers it essential so to do or if the 
person concerned desires to be heard, after hearing him in person, submit its report to the appropriate 
Government within seven weeks from the date of detention of the person concerned.  
(2) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a sepa rate part thereof the opinion of the 
Advisory Board as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person concerned.  
(3) When there is a difference of opinion among the members forming the Advisory Board, the 
opinion of the majority of such members shall be deemed to be the opinion of the Board.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person against whom a detention order has been made to 
appear by any legal practitioner in any matter connected with the reference to the  Advisory Board, and 
the proceedings of the Advisory Board, and its report, excepting that part of the report in which the 
opinion of the Advisory Board is specified, shall be confidential.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1981, s. 2, for “sub-sections ( 2) and (3) and the Explanation ” (w.e.f. 2-9-1981).  5 12. Action upo n the report of Advisory Board. —(1) In any case wher e the Advisory Board has 
reported that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for the detention of a person, the appropriate 
Government may confirm the detention order and continue the detention of the person concerned for such 
period as it thinks fit.  
(2) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported that there is in its opinion no sufficient cause 
for the detention of the person concerned, the appropriate Government shall revoke the detention order 
and cause the person to be released forthwith.  
13. Maximum period of detention. —The maximum period for which any person may be detained in 
pursuance of any detention order which has been confirmed under section 12, shall be six months from 
the date of detention:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sect ion shall affect the power of the appropriate Government 
to revoke or modify the detention order at any earlier time.  
14. Revocation of detention orders. —(1) Without  prejudice to the provisions of section 21 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), a detention order may, at any time, be revoked or modified — 
(a) notwithstanding that the order has been made by an officer of a State Government, by that 
State Govern ment or by the Central Government;  
(b) notwithstanding that the order has been made by an officer of the Central Government or by a 
State Governme nt, by the Central Government.  
(2) The revocation or expiry of a detention order shall not bar the making of a  fresh detention order 
under section 3 against the same person in any case where fresh facts have arisen after the date of 
revocation or expiry on which the Central Government or a State Government or an officer, as the case 
may be, is satisfied that such an order should be made.  
15. Tempora ry release of persons detained. —(1) The appropriate Government may, at any time, 
direct that any person detained in pursuance of a detention order may be released for any specified period 
either without conditions or upon such conditions specified in the direction as that person accepts, and 
may, at any time, cancel his release.  
(2) In directing the release of any person under sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government may 
require him to enter into a bond with or with out sureties for the due observance of the conditions 
specified in the direction.  
(3) Any person released under sub -section ( 1) shall surrender himself at the time and place, and to the 
authority, specified in the order directing his release or cancelling his release, as the case may be.  
(4) If any person fails without sufficient cause to surrender himself in the manner specified in sub -
section ( 3), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both . 
(5) If any person released under sub -section ( 1) fails to fulfil any of the conditions imposed upon him 
under the said sub -section or in the bond entered into by him, the bond shall be declared to be forfeited 
and any person bound thereby shall be liable  to pay the penalty thereof.  
16. Protection  of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or a State Government, and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person, fo r anything in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
17. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Prevention of Black  marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of 
Essential Commodities Ordinance, 1979 (10 of 1979), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum Act, 1980--------------------------
  
1 THE SREE CHITRA TIRUNAL INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL  SCIENCES AND 
TECHNOLOGY, TRIVANDRUM, ACT, 1980  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced Studies in 
Specialities, Trivandrum, as an institution of national importance.  
3. Definition s. 
4. Incorporation of Institute.  
5. Composition of Institute.  
6. Term of office of and vacancies among members.  
7. President of Institute.  
8. Allowances of President and members.  
9. Meeting s of Institute.  
10. Governing Body and o ther committees of Institute.  
11. Staff of Institute.  
12. Objects of Institute.  
13. Functions of Institute.  
14. Vesting of property.  
15. Payment to Institute.  
16. Fund of Institute.  
17. Budget of Institute.  
18. Accounts and audit.  
19. Annual report.  
20. Pension and provident funds.  
21. Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute.  
22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
23. Grant of medical degrees, diplomas, etc., by Institute.  
24. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Inst itute.  
25. Control by Central Government.  
26. Disputes between Institute and Central Government.  
27. Returns and information.  
28. Transfer of service of existing employees.  
29. Continuance of facilities at Institute.  
30. Power to remove difficulties.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to  make regulation s. 
33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
    
2 THE SREE CHITRA TIRUNAL INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL  SCIE NCES AND 
TECHNOLOGY, TRIVANDRUM  ACT, 1980  
ACT NO. 52 OF 1980  
[3rd December , 1980.]  
An Act to declare the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical  Centre Society for Advanced Studies in 
Specialities, Trivandrum, in the State of Kerala, to be an institution of national importance 
and to provide for its incorporation and matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -first Year  of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for 
Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum, Act, 1980.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Soci ety for Advanced Studies in 
Specialities, Triv andrum,  as an institution of national importance. —Whereas the objects of the Sree 
Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced Studies in Specialities, Trivandrum, in the State of 
Kerala, are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the 
institution, known as the Sre e Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced Studies in 
Specialities, Trivandrum, is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Governing Body;  
(b) “Director” means the Director of the Institute;  
(c) “Fund” means the Fund of the Institute referred to in section 16;  
(d) “Governing Body ” means the Governing Body of the Institute;  
(e) “Institute” means the i nstitution known as the Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical 
Sciences and Technology , Trivandrum, incorporated under this Act;  
(f) “member” means a member of the Institute;  
(g) “President” means the President of the Institute;  
(h) “regulation ” means a  regulation made by the Institute;  
(i) “rule” means a rule made by the Central Government.  
4. Incorporation of Institute.—The Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced 
Studies in Specialities, Trivandrum, is hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of Sree Chitra 
Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum, and as such body corporate, it shall 
have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and  dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that name, sue and be sued.  
5. Composition of Institute.—The Institute shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor of the Kerala University, ex officio ; 
(b) the Director -General of Health Services, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(c) the Director, ex officio ; 
(d) four members to be nominated by the Central Government to represent respectively the 
Departments or, as the case may be, Ministries of that Govern ment dealing with Science and 
Technology, Health, Finance and Education;  
                                                           
1. 1st March , 198 1, vide notification No. G.S.R. 254(E), dated 17th February , 198 1, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary,  
     Part I I, sec. 3( i).   
3 (e) two members to be nominated by the Government of the State of Kerala to represent 
respectively the Departments or, as the case may be, Ministries of that Government dealing with 
Planning, Science and Technology and Health;  
(f) three scientists of whom two shall be medical scientists and one shall be a social scientist, to 
be nominated by the Central Government in the manner prescribed by rules;  
(g) three scientists representing eng ineering and technology to be nominated by the Central 
Government in the manner prescribed by rules;  
(h) the Head of the Biomedical Technology Wing of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(i) three representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities to be nominated by the 
Central Government in the manner prescribed by rules; and  
(j) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of the House of the People and one from among themselves by the members of the C ouncil 
of States.  
6. Term of office of and vacancies among members. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this 
section, the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomination or election.  
(2) The term of office of a member elected u nder clause ( j) of section 5 shall come to an end as soon 
as he ceases to be a member of the House from which he was elected.  
(3) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is such a membe r. 
(4) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is nominated or elected.  
(5) An outgoing member other than a member elected under clause ( j) of section 5 shall, unless the 
Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated as a member 
in his place.  
(6) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re -nomination or reelection.  
(7) A member may resign his office b y writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government 
but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government.  
(8) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.  
7. President o f Institute.—(1) There shall be a President of the Institute who shall be nominated by 
the Central Government from among the members other than the Director.  
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this  Act 
or as may be prescribed by rules or regulations.  
8. Allowances of President and members. —The President and other members shall receive such 
allowances, if any, from the Institute as may be prescribed by rules.  
9. Meeting s of Institute. —The Institute s hall hold its first meeting at such time and place as may be 
appointed by the Central Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government; and thereafter the 
Institute shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by regulations.  
10. Governing Body and o ther committ ees of Institute. —(1) There shall be a G overning Body of 
the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute in such manner as may be prescribed by 
regulations:  
Provided that the number of persons who are not members of the Institute shall not exceed one -third 
of the total membership of th e Governing Body.    
4 (2) The Governing Body shall be the Executive Committee of the Institute and shall exercise such 
powers and discharge such functions as the Institute may, by regulations made in this behalf, confer or 
impose upon it.  
(3) The President shall be the Chairman of the Governing Body and as Chairman thereof shall 
exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(4) The procedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions b y the 
Governing Body, and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of 
the Governing Body shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(5) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed by rules, the  Institute may constitute 
as many standing committees and as many ad hoc  committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power or 
discharging any function of the Institute or for inquiring into, or reporting or advising upon, any matter 
which the Institute may refer to them.  
(6) The Chairman and members of the Governing Body and Chairman and members of a standing 
committee or an ad hoc  committee shall receive such allowances, if any, as may be prescribed by 
regulations.  
11. Staff of Institute. —(1) There shal l be a chief executive officer of the Institute who shall be 
designated as the Director of the Institute and shall, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, 
be appointed by the Institute:  
Provided that the first Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as well as the Governing Body.  
(3) The Director shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by 
regula tions or as may be de legated to  him by the Institute or the President or by the Governing Body or 
the Chairman.  
(4) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Institute may appoint such number of 
other officers and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its 
functions and may determine the designations and grades of such other officers and employees.  
(5) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Director and other officers and employees 
of the Institute shall b e entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be governed by such conditions of 
service in respect of leave, pension, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as may be prescribed by 
regulations made in this behalf.  
12. Objects of Institute. —The ob jects of the Institute shall be — 
(a) to promote biomedical engineering and technology;  
(b) to provide and demonstrate high standards of patient care in advanced medical                  
specialities; and  
(c) to develop post -graduate training programmes of t he highest quality in advanced medical 
specialities and biomedical engineering and technology.  
13. Functions of Institute. —With a view to the promotion of the objects specified in section 12, the 
Institute may ,— 
(a) provide for post -graduate teaching in the science of modern medicine and other allied 
sciences, including physical and biolog ical sciences ; 
(b) provide facilities for research in the va rious branches of such sciences;  
(c) conduct experiments  in integrated methods of post -graduate medical and t echnological 
education in order to arrive at satisfactory standards of such educatio n; 
(d) prescribe courses and curricula for post -graduate studies;    
5 (e) provide for post -graduate teaching and training in biomedical sciences and technology;  
(f) notwithstan ding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, establish and 
maintain— 
(i) one or more well equipped hospitals ; and 
(ii) one or more centers for research and develo pment in biomedical technology;  
(g) hold examinations and grant such degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles 
in post -graduate medical education and biomedical technology as may be laid down in the 
regulations;  
(h) institute and appoint persons to professorships, readerships, lecturerships and posts of a ny 
description in accordance with the regulations;  
(i) receive grants from the Governments and gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers 
of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or transferors, as the 
case may be ; 
(j) deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner which is 
considered necessary for promoting the objects specified in section l2;  
(k) demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by regulati ons; and  
(l) do all other acts and things as may be necessary to further the objects specified in section 12 . 
14. Vesting of property. —All properties which had vested in the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre 
Society for Advanced Studies in Specialities, T rivandrum, immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, shall, on and from such commencement, vest in the Institute.  
15. Payment to Institute .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as may be considered necessary by that Government for the exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
16. Fund of Institute. —(1) The Institute shall maintain a  Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government and the Government of Kerala;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute ; 
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other mann er or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Institute may, with the a pproval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under section 13.  
17. Budget of Institute. —The I nstitute shall prepare, in such form and at such time every year, as 
may be prescribed by rules, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure of the Institute and shall forward to the Central Governm ent such number of 
copies thereof as may be prescribed by rules.  
18. Account s and audit. —(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form as the  Central 
Government may, by rules, prescribe, and in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by 
that Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.    
6 (2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the C omptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person app ointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Governmen t accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute as well as of the institutions established and maintained by it.  
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Governm ent shall cause the same to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament.  
19. Annual report. —The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that 
year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before su ch date as may be 
prescribed by rules and a copy of the report shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
20. Pension and provident funds. —(1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, 
teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by 
regulations, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit.  
(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, (19 of 1925) shall apply to such fund as if it 
were a Government Provident Fund.  
21. Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute. —All orders and decisions of the 
Institute shall be authenticated by the signature of the President or any other member authorised by the 
Institute in this behalf, and all other instruments shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director or 
any other officer of the Institute authorised in like manne r in this behalf.  
22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc. —No act done or proceeding 
taken by the Institute, Governing Body or any standing or ad hoc  committee under this Act shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existenc e of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the 
Institute, Governing Body or such standing or ad hoc  committee.  
23. Grant of medical degrees,  diplomas, etc., by Institute. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in  force, the Institute shall have power to grant medical degrees, 
diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act.  
24. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Institute. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the I ndian Medical Co uncil Act, 1956  (102 of 1956) , the medical degrees and diplomas 
granted by the Institute under this Act shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of that 
Act and shall be deemed to be included in the First Schedule to that Act.  
25. Contro l by Central Government. —The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued 
to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
26. Disputes between In stitute and Central Government. —If in, or in conn ection with, the 
exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any dispute arises 
between the I nstitute and the Central Government, the decision of the Central Government on such 
dispute shall be final.  
27. Returns and information. —The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, 
returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time.    
7 28. Transfer of  service of existing employees. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, every  person 
who was employed in the Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre Society for Advanced Studies in 
Specialities, Trivandrum, immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, on and from such 
commencement, become an employee of the Institute and shall  hold his office or service therein by the 
same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights 
and privileges as to leave, pension, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the 
same on the date of commencement of this Act if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do 
so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and 
conditions are duly altered by regulations:  
Provided that th e tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such person shall 
not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government.  
29. Continua nce of facilities at Institute. —The Institute shall continue to prov ide facilities to the 
Government and people of the State of Kerala and the Central  Government and such facilities shall not, in 
any respect, be less favourable to the said Governments and people than what were being provided to 
them before the commencement  of this Act and shall be made available for such period and upon such 
terms and conditions (including those relating to any contributions to be made for the provision of such 
facilities) as may be agreed upon between the Institute , the Government of the S tate of Kerala and the 
Central Government.  
30. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, within a period of three years from the commencement of this Act, by 
order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.  
31. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government , after consultation with the Institute, may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that consultation with the Institute shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the making 
of rules under  this section, but the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions 
which the Institute may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after they are made.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of nomination of members under clause s (f), (g) and ( i) of section 5 ; 
(b) the manner of filling vacancie s among members under section 6;  
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President under                      
sub-section ( 2) of section 7;  
(d) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the President and other members under section 8;  
(e) the control  and restrictions in relation to the  constitution of standing and ad hoc  committees 
unde r sub -section ( 5) of section 10;  
(f) the appointment of the Director unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 11 ; 
(g) the number of officers and employees that may be appointed by the Institute and the manner 
of such appointment unde r sub -section ( 4) of section 11 ; 
(h) the salaries and allowances to be paid to the Director and other officers and employees of the 
Institute unde r sub -section ( 5) of section 11 ; 
(i) the form in which, and the time at which, the budget  shall be prepared by the Institute and the 
number of copies thereof to be forwarded to the Central Government unde r section 17 ; 
(j) the form in which an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet shall be 
prepared by the Institute under sub-section ( 1) of section 18;  
(k) the form in which and the date before which, the report of the activities of the Institute shall 
be submitted to the Centr al Government under section 19;    
8 (1) the form and manner in which reports, returns and other informa tion are to be furnished by the 
Institute to the Central Government under section 27;  
(m) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by rules.  
32. Power to make regulation s.—(1) The Institute may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the 
purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of this power, s uch regulations may provide 
for— 
(a) the powers and functions to be exercised  and discharged by the President und er                   
sub-section ( 2) of section 7;  
(b) the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first meeting, of the Institute under 
section 9, the time and place where such meetings are to be held, the con duct of business at such 
meetings and the number of mem bers necessary to form a quorum;  
(c) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc  committees under 
section 10, the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among,  the members of the 
Governing Body and standing and ad hoc  committees;  
(d) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the Governing Body and the 
Chairman under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 10;  
(e) the allowances, if any, to be paid t o the Chairman and the members of the Governing Body 
and of standing and ad hoc  committees under sub -section ( 6) of section 10;  
(f) the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc  committees          
in the conduct of their business, exercise of their powers and discharge of t heir functions under 
section 10 ; 
(g) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the Director unde r sub -section ( 3) 
of section 11 ; 
(h) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances and oth er conditions of service of the Director 
and other officers and employees of the Institute including teachers appointed by the Institute under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 11;  
(i) the management of the properties of the Institute under section 13;  
(j) the de grees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles which may be granted by the 
Institute  under clause ( g) of section 13 ; 
(k) the professorships, readerships, lecturerships and other posts which may be instituted and 
persons who may be appointed to such professorships, readerships, lecturerships and other posts  
under clause ( h) of section 13;  
(l) the fees and other charges which may be demanded and received by the Institute under            
clause ( k) of section 13 ; 
(m) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, pension and provident funds may 
be constituted for the benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the Institute unde r          
sub-section ( 1) of section 20 ; 
(n) matters relating to tenure of office, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of the 
persons referred to in section 28 ; 
(o) any other matter for which under this Act provisions may be made by regulations.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the first regulations under this Act s hall be  
made by the Central Government ; and any regulations so made may be altered or rescinded by the 
Institute in exercise of its power under sub -section ( 1).   
9 33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before e ach House of Parliament, while i t 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both H ouses agree in making any modi fication i n the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation sh all thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously don e under 
that rule or regulation.  
