--------------------------The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981--------------------------
1 
 THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1981  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CENTRAL AND STATE  BOARDS  FOR THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL  OF AIR POLLUTION  
3. Central Pollution Control Board . 
4. State Pollution Control Boards constituted under section 4 of Act 6 of 1974 to be State Boards 
under this Act.  
5. Constitution of State Boards.  
6. Central Board to exercise the powers and perform the funct ions of a State Board in the Union 
territories.  
7. Terms and conditions of service of members.  
8. Disqualifications.  
9. Vacation of seats  by members . 
10. Meetings of Board.  
11. Constitution of committees  
12. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purpose . 
13. Vacancy in Board not to invalidate acts or proceedings . 
14. Member -secretary and officers and other employees of State Boards . 
15. Delegation of powers . 
 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF  BOARDS  
16. Functions of Central Board . 
17. Functions of State Boards . 
18. Power to give directions . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION  
19. Power to declare air pollution control areas . 
20. Power to give instructions for ensuring standards for emission from automobiles . 
21. Restrictions on use of certain industrial plants . 
22. Persons carrying on industry, etc., not to allow emission of air pollutants in excess of the standard 
laid down by State Board . 
22A. Power of Board to make application to court for restraining person s from causing air pollution.  2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Furnishing of information to State Board and other agencies in certain cases . 
24. Power of entry and inspection . 
25. Power to obtain information . 
26. Power to take samples of air or emission and procedure to be followed in connection therewith . 
27. Reports of the result of analysis on samples taken under section 26.  
28. State Air Laboratory . 
29. Analysis . 
30. Reports of analysis . 
31. Appeals . 
31A. Power to give directions . 
 
CHAPTER V  
FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
32. Contribution by Central Government . 
33. Fund of Board . 
33A. Borrowing powers of Board.  
34. Budget.  
35. Annual report . 
36. Accounts and audit . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
37. Failure to comply with the provisions of section 21 or section 22 or with the directions issued 
under section 31A . 
38. Penalties for certain acts.  
39. Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of the Act . 
40. Offences by companies . 
41. Offences by Government Departments . 
42. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
43. Cognizance of offences . 
44. Members, officers and employees of Board to be public servants . 
45. Reports and returns . 
46. Bar of jurisdiction . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
47. Power of State Government to supersede State Board . 
48. Special provision in the case of supersession of the Central Board or the State Boards constituted 
under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.  
49. Dissolution of  State Boards constituted under the Act.  
50. [Omitted ]. 
51. Maintenance of register.  3 
 SECTIONS  
52. Effect of other laws . 
53. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
54. Power of State Government to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE [ Omitted ]. 
  4 
 THE AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 14 OF 1981  
[29th March, 1981 .] 
An Act to provide for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution, for the 
establishment, with a view to carrying out the aforesaid purposes, of Boards, for conferring 
on and assigning to such Boards powers and functions relating thereto and for matters 
connected therewith.  
WHEREAS decisions were taken at the Unite d Nations Conference on the Hum an Environment held in 
Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take appropriate steps for the preservation of the 
natural resources of the earth which, among other things, include the preservation of the quality of air and 
control of air pollution;  
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the decisions aforesaid  in so far as they relate 
to the preservation of the quality of air and control of air pollution;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It sh all come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “air pollutant ” means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance  2[(including noise)] present in the 
atmosphere in such concentration as may be or tend to be injurious to human beings or other living 
creatures or plants or property or environment;  
(b) “air pollution ” means the presence in the atmosphere of any air  pollutant ; 
(c) “approved appliance ” means any equipment or gadget used for the bringing of any 
combustible material or for gene rating or consuming any fume, gas of particulate matter and 
approved by the State Board for the purpose s of this Act;  
(d) “approved fuel ” means any fuel approved by the State Board for the purposes of this Act;  
(e) “automobile ” means any vehicle powered ei ther by internal combustion engine or by any 
method of generating power to drive such vehicle by burning fuel;  
(f) “Board ” means the Central Board or a State Board;  
(g) “Central Board ” means the  3[Central Pollution Control Board ] constituted under section 3 of 
the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974) ; 
(h) “chimney ” includes any structure with an opening or outlet from or through which a ny air 
pollutant may be emitted;  
(i) “control equipment ” means any apparatus, device, equipmen t or system to control the quality 
and manner of emission of any air pollutant and includes any device used for securing the efficient 
operation of any industrial plant;  
                                                           
1.16th May, 1981,  vide notification   No.  G.S.R. 3 51(E), dated 15th  May, 1981 , see Gazette of India,   Extraordinary,  Part II,  
sec. 3 ( i). 
2. Ins. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  5 
 (j) “emission ” means any solid or liquid or gaseous substance coming out of any chimne y, duct or 
flue or any other outlet;  
(k) “industrial plant ” means any plant used for any industrial or trade purposes and emitting any 
air pollutant into the atmosphere;  
(l) “member ” means a member of the Central Board or a State Board, as the case may be,  and 
includes the Chairman thereof;  
1[(m) “occupier ”, in relation to any factory or premises, means the person who has control over 
the affairs of the factory or the premises, and includes, in relation to any  substance, the person in 
posse ssion of the substance;]  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central Government or , as 
the case may be, the State Government;  
(o) “State Board ” means, — 
(i) in relation to a State in which the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)  Act, 1974  
(6 of 1974) , is in force and the State Government has constituted for that State a  2[State Pollution 
Control Board ] under section 4 of that Act, the said State Board; and  
(ii) in relation to any other State, the State Board for the Prevention and Control of Air 
Pollution constituted by the State Government under section 5 of this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
CENTRAL AND STATE BOARDS FOR THE  PREVENTION AND  CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION  
3[3. Central Pollution  Control Board .—The Central Pollution Control Board  constituted under 
section 3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974), shall, without 
prejudice to the exercise and performance of its powers and functions under th at Act, exercise the powers 
and perform the functions of the  Central Pollution Control Board for the prevention and control of air 
pollution under this Act.  
4. State Pollution Control  Boards constituted under section 4 of Act 6 of 1974 to be State Boards 
under this Act .—In any State in which the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 
1974), is in force and the State Government has constituted for that State a State Pollution Control Board 
under section 4 of that Act, such State Board shall be deemed t o be the State Board for the Prevention and 
Control of air Pollution constituted under section 5 of this Act , and accordingly that State Pollution 
Control Board shall, without prejudice to the exercise and performance of its powers and functions under 
that Act, exercise the powers and perform the functions of the State Board for the prevention and control 
of air pollution under this Act.]  
5. Constitution of State Boards .—(1) In any State in which the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974), is not in force, or that Act is in force but the State Government has not 
constituted a  4[State Pollution Control Board ] under that Act, the State Government shall, with effect 
from such date as it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, ap point, constitute a State Board for the 
Prevention and Control of Air Pollution under such name as may be specified in the notification, to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and perform the functions assigned to, that Board under this Act.  
(2) A State Boar d constituted under this Act shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) a C hairman, being a person, having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of 
matters relating to environmental protection, to be nominated by the State Governmen t:  
Provided that the Chairman may  be either whole -time or part -time as the State Government may 
think fit;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 2, for clause ( m) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution”  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sections 3 and 4 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “ State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  6 
 (b) such number of officials, not exceeding five, as the State Government may think fit, to be 
nominated by the State Government to represe nt that Government;  
(c) such number of persons, not exceeding five, as the State Government may think fit, to be 
nominated by the State Government from amongst the members of the local authorities functioning 
within the State;  
(d) such number of non -offici als, not exceeding three, as the State Government may think fit, to 
be nominated by the State Government to represent the interest of agriculture, fishery or industry or 
trade o r labour or any other interest, which , in the opinion of that Government, ought  to be 
represented;  
(e) two persons to represent the companies or corporations owned, controlled or managed by the 
State Government, to be nominated by that Government;  
1[(f) a full -time member -secretary having such qualifications knowledge and experience of 
scientific, engineering or management aspects of pollution control as may be prescribed, to be 
appointed by the State Government :] 
Provided that the State Government shall ensure that not less than two of the members are 
persons having special knowledge  or practical experience i n respect of matters relating to the 
improvement of the quality of air or the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution.  
(3) Every State Board constituted under this Act shall be a body corporate with the name specified by  
the State Government in the notification issued under sub -section ( 1), having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire and dispose of property and to 
contract, and may by the said name sue or be sued.  
6. Central Board to exercise the powers and perform the functions of a State Board in the 
Union territories .—No State Board shall be constituted for a Unio n territory and in relation to a Union 
territory, the Central Board shall exercise the powers a nd perform the functions of a State Board under 
this Act for t hat Union territory:  
Provided that in relation to any Union territory the Central Board may delegate all or any of its 
powers and functions under this section to such person or body of persons a s the Central Government 
may specify.  
7. Terms and conditions of service of members .—(1) Save as otherwise provided by or under this 
Act, a member of a State Board constituted under this Act, other than the member -secretary, shall hold 
office for a term of  three years from the date on which his nomination is notified in the Official Gazette:  
Provided that a member shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until 
his successor enters upon his office.  
(2) The terms of office of  a member of a State Board constituted under this Act and nominated under 
clause ( b) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5 shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to hold 
the office under the State Government  or, as the case may be, the company o r corporation owned, 
controlled or managed by the State Government, by virtue of which he was nominated.  
(3) A member of a State Board constituted under t his Act, other than the member -secretary, may at 
any time resign his office by wr iting under his hand addressed, — 
(a) in the case of the Chairman, to the State Government; and  
(b) in any other case, to t he Chairman of the State Board,  
and the seat of the Chairman or such other member shall thereupon become vacant.  
(4) A member of a State Board constituted under this Act, other than the member -secretary, shall be 
deemed to have vacated his s eat, if he is absent without reason, sufficient in the opinion of the State 
Board, from three consecutive meetings of the State Board or where he is nominated under claus e (c) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 5, he ceases to be a member of the local authority and such vacation of s eat 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 4, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  7 
 shall, in either case, take effect from such  date as the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify.  
(5) A casual vacancy in a State Board constituted under this Act shall be filled by a fresh nomination 
and the person nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which 
the member whose place he takes was nominated.  
(6) A member of a State Board constituted under this Act shall be eligible for re -nomination  1*** 
(7) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members (except the 
member -secretary) of a State Board constituted under this Act shall be such as may be prescribed.  
8. Disqualifications .—(1) No person shall be a member of a State Board constituted under this  Act, 
who— 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent, or  
(b) is of unsound mind and has been so declared by a compete nt court,  or 
(c) is, or has been, convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the State Government, 
involves moral turpitude, or  
(d) is, or at any time has been, convicted of an offence under this Act,  or 
(e) has directly or indirectly by him self on by any partner, any share or interest in any Fi rm or 
company carrying on the business of manufacture, sale, or hire of  machinery, industrial plant, co ntrol 
equipment or any other apparatus for the improvement of the quality of air or for the preven tion, 
control or abatement of air pollution, or  
(f) is a director or a secretary, manager or other salaried officer or employee of any company or 
firm having any contract with the Board, or with the Government constituting the Board or with a 
local authori ty in the State, or with a company or corporation owned, controlled or managed by the 
Government, for the carrying out of programmes for the improvement of the quality of air or for the 
prevention, control or abatement of air pollution, or  
(g) has so abus ed, in the opinion o f the State Government, his position as a member, as to render 
his continuance on the State Board detrimental to the interest of the general public.  
(2) The State Government shall, by order in writing, remove any member who is, or has become, 
subject to any disqualification mentioned in sub -section (1). 
Provided that no order of removal shall be made by the State Government under this section unless 
the member concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same.  
(3) Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 6) of section 7, a member 
who has been removed under this section shall not be eligible to  continue to hold office until his 
successor enters upon his office, or, as the case may be, for re -nomination as a member.  
9. Vacation of seats  by members .—If a member of a State Board constituted under this Act becomes 
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in section 8, his seat shall become vacant.  
10. Meetings of Board .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, a Board shall meet at least once in every 
three months and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if , in the opinion of the Chairman, any business of an urgent nature is to be transacted, 
he may convene a m eeting of the Board at such time as he thinks fit for the aforesaid purpose.  
(2) Copies of minutes of the meetings under sub -section ( 1) shall be forwarded to the Central Board 
and to the State Government concerned.  
                                                           
1. The words “but not for more than two terms” omitted by Act 47 of 1987, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  8 
 11. Constitution of committees .—(1) A Board may constitute as many committees consisting 
wholly of members or partly of members and partly of other persons and for such purpose or purposes as 
it may think fit.  
(2) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at such time and at such p lace, and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The members of a committee other than the members of the Board shall be paid such fees and 
allowances, for attending its mee tings and for attending to any other work of the Board as may be 
prescribed.  
12. Temporary association of persons wi th Board for particular purpose .—(1) A Board may 
associate with itself in such manner, and for such purposes, as may be prescribed, any person whose 
assistance or advice it may desire to obtain in performing any of its functions under this Act.  
(2) A person associated with the Board under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall have a right to 
take part in the discussions of the Board relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a 
meeting of the Board and shall not be a member of the Board for any other purpose.  
(3) A person associated w ith a Board under sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled to receive such fees and 
allowances as may be prescribed.  
13. Vacancy in Board not to invalidate acts or proceedings .—No act or proceeding of a Board or 
any committee thereof shall be called in question o n the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy 
in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or such committee, as the case may be.  
14. Member -secretary and officers and other employees of State Boards .—(1) The terms and 
conditions of service of the member -secretary of a State Board constituted under this Act shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
1[(2) The member -secretary of a State Board,  whether constituted under this Act or not, shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed , or as may, from time to time, be delegated to 
him by the State Board or its Chairman.]  
(3) subject to such rules as may be made by the Stat e Government in this behalf, a State Board, 
whether constituted under this Act or not, may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers 
necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Act.  
(4) The method of appointment, the  conditions of service and the scale s of pay of the officers (other 
than the member -secretary) and other employees of a State Board appointed under sub -section ( 3) shall be 
such as may be determined by regulations made by the State Board under this Act.  
(5) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, a State Board constituted under this Act may 
from time to time appoint any qualified person to be a consultant to the Board and pay him such salary 
and allowances or fees, as it thinks fit.  
15. Delegation of powers .—A State Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the 
Chairman or the member -secretary or any other officer of the Board subject to such cond itions and 
limitations, if any , as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it 
may deem necessary.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF  BOARDS  
16. Functions of Central Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice to 
the performance, of its functions under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 
1974), the main functions of the Central Board shall be to improve the quality of air and to prevent, 
control or abate air pollution in the country.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 6, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  9 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing f unctions, the Central Board 
may— 
(a) advise  the Central Government on any matter concerning the improvement of the quality of 
air and the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution;  
(b) plan and cause to be executed a nation -wide programme for the prevention, control or 
abatement of air poll ution;  
(c) co-ordinate the activities of the State and resolve disputes among them;  
(d) provide technical assistance and guidance to the State Boards, carry out and sponsor 
investigations and research relating to problems of air pollution and prevention, c ontrol or abatement 
of air pollution;  
1[(dd) perform such of the func tions of any State Board as may be specified in and order made 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 18;]  
(e) plan and organise the training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes f or the 
prevention, control or abatement of air pollution on such terms and conditions as the Central Board 
may specify;  
(f) organise through mass media a comprehensive programme regarding the prevention, control or 
abatement of air pollution;  
(g) collect, compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to air pollution and the 
measures devised for its effective prevention, control or abatement and prepare manuals, codes or 
guides relating to prevention, control or abatement of air pollution;  
(h) lay down st andards for the quality of air;  
(i) collect and disseminate information in respect of matters relating to air pollution;  
(j) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Central Board may establish or recognise  a laboratory or laboratories to enable the Central 
Board to perform its functions under this section efficiently.  
(4) The Cent ral Board may — 
(a) delegate any of its functions under this Act generally or specially to any of the committees 
appointed by it;  
(b) do such other things and perform such other acts as it may think necessary for the proper 
discharge of its functions and generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of this 
Act. 
17. Functions of State Boards .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and without prejudice to 
the performance of its functions, if any, under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
(Act 6 of 1974), the func tions of a State Board shall be — 
(a) to plan a comprehensive programme for t he prevention, control or abatement of air pollution 
and t o secure the execution thereof;  
(b) to advise the State Government on any matter concerning the prevention, control or abatement 
of air pollution;  
(c) to collect and disseminate information relating  to air pollution;  
(d) to collaborate with the Central Board in organising the training of persons engaged or to be 
engaged in programmes relating to prevention, control or abatement of air pollution and to organise 
mass -education programme relating theret o; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  10 
 (e) to inspect, at all reasonable times, any control equipment, industrial plant or manufacturing 
process and to give, by order, such directions to such persons as it may consider necessary to take 
steps for the prevention, control or abatement of air p ollution;  
(f) to inspect air pollution control areas at such intervals as it may think necessary, assess the 
quality of air therein and take steps for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution in such 
areas;  
(g) to lay down, in consultation with the Central Board and having regard to the standards for the 
quality of air laid down by the Central Board, standards for emission of air pollutants into the 
atmosphere from industrial plants and automobiles or for the discharge of any air pollutant i nto the 
atmosphere from any other source whatsoever not being a ship or an aircraft:  
Provided that different standards for emission may be laid down under this clause for different 
industrial plants having regard to the quantity and composition of emission  of air pollutants into the 
atmosphere from such industrial plants;  
(h) to advise the State Government with respect to the suitability of any premises or location for 
carrying on any industry which is likely to cause air pollution;  
(i) to Perform such othe r functions as may be prescribed or as may, from time to time, be 
entrusted to it by the Central Board or the State Government;  
(j) to do such other things and to perform such other acts as it may think necessary for the proper 
discharge of its functions a nd generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) A State Board may establish or recognise a laboratory or laboratories to enable the State Board to 
perform its functions under this section efficiently.  
18. Power to give directions .—1[(1)] In the performance of its functions under this Act — 
(a) the Central Board shall be bound by such directions in writing as the Central Government may 
give to it; and  
(b) every  State Board shall be bound by such directions in writing as the Central Board or the 
State Government may give to it:  
Provided that where a direction given by the State Government is inconsistent with the direction 
given by the Central Board, the matter s hall be referred to the Central Government for its decision.  
2[(2) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that any State Board has defaulted in 
complying with any directions given by the Central Board under sub -section ( 1) and as a result of such 
default a grave emergency has arisen and it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it 
may, by order, direct the Central Board to perform any of the functions of the State Board in relation to 
such area, for such period and for such purp oses, as may be specified in the order.  
(3) Where the Central Board performs any of the functions of the State Board in pursuance of a 
direction under sub -section ( 2), the expenses, if any , incurred by the Central Board with respect to the 
performance of s uch functions may, if the State Board is empowered to recover such expenses, be 
recovered by the Central Board with interest (at such reasonable rate as the Central Government may, by 
order, fix) from the date when a demand for such expenses is made until it is paid from the person or 
persons concerned as arrears of land revenue or of public demand.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any directions to perform the functions of any 
State Board given under sub -section ( 2) in respect of a ny area would not preclude the State Board from 
performing such functions in any other area in the State or any of its other functions ’ in that area.]  
 
                                                           
1. Section 18 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 47 of 1987, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  11 
 CHAPTER IV  
PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF AIR POLLUTION  
19. Power to declare air pollution control areas .—(1) The State Government may, after 
consultation with the State Board, by notification in the Official Gazette declare in such manner as may 
be prescribed, any area or areas within the State as air pollution control area or areas for the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the State Board, by notifi cation in the Official 
Gazette, — 
(a) alter any air pollution control area whether by way of exte nsion or reduction ; 
(b) declare  a new air pollution control area in which may be merged one or more existing air 
pollution control areas or any part or parts thereof.  
(3) If the State Government, after consultation with the State Board, is of opinion that the use of any 
fuel, other than  an approved fuel, in any air pollution control area or part thereof, may cause or is likely to 
cause air pollution, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the use of such fuel in such 
area or part thereof with effect from such date (bei ng not less than three months from the date of 
publication of the notification) as may be specified in the notification.  
(4) The State Government may, after consultation with the S tate Board, by notification in the Official 
Gaze tte, direct that with effect  from such date as may be specified therein, no appliance, other than an 
approved appliance, shall be used in the premises situated i n an air pollution control area : 
Provided that different dates may be specified for different parts of an air pollution con trol area or for 
the use of different appliances.  
(5) If the State Government, after consultation with the State Board, is of opinion that the burning of 
any material (not being fuel) in any air pollution control area or part thereof may cause or is likely  to 
cause air pollution, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the burning of such material in 
such area or part thereof.  
20. Power to give instructions for ensuring standards for emission from automobiles .—With a 
view to ensuring that the standards for emission of air pollutants from automobiles laid down by the State 
Board under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17 are complied with, the State Government shall, in 
consultation with the State Board, g ive such instructions as may be deemed necessary to the concerned 
authority in charge of registration of motor vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939), and 
such authority shall, notwithstanding anything contained in that Act or the rules ma de thereunder be 
bound to comply with such instructions.  
21. Restrictions on use of certain industrial plants .—1[(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, 
no person shall, without the previous consent of the State Board, establish or operate any industrial plant 
in an air pollution control area : 
Provided that a person operating any industrial plant in any air pollution control area immediately 
before the commencement of section 9 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Act, 
1987 , for which no consent was necessary prior to such commencement, may continue to do so for a 
period of three months from such commencement or, if he has made an application for such consent 
within the said period of three months, till the disposal of such application.]  
(2) An application for consent of the State Board under sub -section ( 1) shall be ac companied by such 
fees as may be prescribed and shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the particulars of the 
industrial plant and such other p articulars as may be prescribed : 
Provided that where any person, immediately before the declaration of any area as an air pollution 
control area, operates in such area any industrial plant,  2***such person shall make the application under 
this sub -section within such period (being not less than three months from the date of such declaration) as 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 9, for sub -sectio n (1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. The words “for the purpose of any industry specified in the Schedule ” omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  12 
 may be prescribed and where such person makes such application, he shall be deemed to be operating 
such industrial plant with the consent of the State Board until th e consent applied for has b een refused.  
(3) The State Board may make such inquiry as it may deem fit in respect of the application for 
consent referred to in sub -section ( 1) and in making any such inquiry, shall follow such procedure as may 
be prescribed.  
(4) Within a period of four months after the receipt of the application for consent referred to in  
sub-section ( 1), the State Board shall, by order in writing,  1[and for reasons to be recorded in the order, 
grant the consent applied for subject to such conditions and for such period as may be specified in the 
order, or refuse  such consent ]: 
2[Provided that it shall be open to the State Board to cancel such consent before the expiry of the 
period for which it is granted or refuse further consent after suc h expiry if the conditions subject to which 
such consent has been granted are not fulfilled:  
Provided f urther that before cancelling a consent or refusing a further consent under the first 
provision, a reaso nable opportunity of being hear d shall be given t o the person concerned.]  
(5) Every person to whom consent has been granted by the State Board under sub -section ( 4), shall 
comply with th e following conditions, namely :— 
(i) the control equipment of such specifications as the State Board may approve in this behalf 
shall be installed and operated in the premises where the industry is carried on or proposed to be 
carried on;  
(ii) the existing control equipment, if any, shall be altered or replaced in accordance with the 
directions of the State Board;  
(iii) the control equipment referred to in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) shall be kept at all times in good 
running condition;  
(iv) chimney, wherever necessary, of such specifications  as the State Board may approve in this 
behalf shall be erected o r re-erected in such premises; and 
(v) such other conditions as the State Board, may specify in this beha lf; and  
(vi) the conditions referred to in clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iv) shall be complie d with within such period 
as the State B oard may specify in this behalf:  
Provided that in the case of a person operating any industrial plant  3*** in an air pollution control 
area immediately before the date of declaration of such area as an air pollution control area, the period so 
specified sh all not be less than six months : 
Provided further that — 
(a) after the installation of any control equipment in accordance with the specifications under 
clause ( i), or 
(b) after the alteration or replacement of any co ntrol equipment in accordance with the directions 
of the State Board under clause ( ii), or 
(c) after the erection or re -erection of any chimney under clause ( iv),  
no control equipment or chimney shall be altered or replaced or, as the case may be, erected  or re -erected 
except with the previous approval of the State Board.  
(6) If due to any technological improvement or otherwise the State Board is of opinion that all or any 
of the conditions referred to in sub -section ( 5) require or requires variation (incl uding the change of any 
control equipment, either in whole or in part), the State Board shall, after giving the person to whom 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. The words “for the purpose of any industry specified in the Schedule ” omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  13 
 consent has been granted an opportunity of being heard, vary all or any of such conditions and thereupon 
such person shall be bou nd to comply with the conditions as so varied.  
(7) Where a person to whom consent has been granted by the State Board under sub -section ( 4) 
transfers his interest in the industry to any other person, such consent shall be deemed to have been 
granted to such other person and he shall be bound to comply with all the conditions subject to which it 
was granted as if the consent was granted to him originally.  
22. Persons carrying on industry, etc., not to allow emission of air pollutants in excess of the 
standard laid down by State Board .—No person  1**** operating any industrial plant, in any air 
pollution control area shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged the emission of any air pollutant 
in excess of the standards laid down by the State Board u nder clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17.  
2[22A. Power of Board to make application to court for restraining person from causing air 
pollution .— (1) Where it is apprehended by a Board that emission of any air pollutant, in excess of the 
standards laid down by the State Board under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 17, is likely to occur 
by reason of any person operating an industrial plant or otherwise in any air pollution control area, the 
Board may make an application to a court, not inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class for restraining such person from emitting such air pollutant.  
(2) On receipt of the application under sub -section ( 1), the court may make such order as it deems fit.  
(3) Where under sub -section ( 2), the court makes an order restraining any person from discharging or 
causing or permitting to be discharged the emission of any air po llutant, it may, in that order, — 
(a) direct such person to desist from taking such action as is likely to cause emission;  
(b) authorise the Board, if the direction under clause ( a) is no t complied with by the person to 
whom such direction is issued, to implement the direction in such manner as may be specified by the 
court.  
(4) All expenses inc urred by  the Board in implementing the dir ections of the court under clause ( b) of 
sub-section (3) shall be recoverable from the person concerned as arrears of land revenue or of public 
demand. ] 
23. Furnishing of information to State Board and other agencies in certain cases .—(1) Where in 
any 3*** area the emission of any air pollutant into the atmosphere in excess of the standards laid down 
by the State Board occurs or is apprehended to occur due to accident or other unforeseen act or event, the 
person in charge of the premises from where such emission occurs or is apprehended to occur shall 
forthwith intimate the fact of such occurrence or the apprehension of such occurrence to the State Board 
and to such authorities or agencies as may be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of information with respect t o the fact or the apprehension of any occurrence of the 
nature referred to in sub -section ( 1), whether through intimation under that sub -section or otherwise, the 
State Board and the authorities or agencies shall, as early as practicable, caus e such remedi al measure to 
be taken as are necessary to mitigate the emission of such air pollutants.  
(3) Expenses, if any, incurred by the State Board, authority or agency with respect to the remedial 
measures referred to in sub -section ( 2) together with interest ( at such reasonable rate, as the State 
Government may, by order, fix) from the date when a demand for the expenses is made until it is paid, 
may be recovered by that Board, authority or agency from the person concerned, as arrears of land 
revenue, or of public  demand.  
24. Power of entry and inspection .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person 
empowered by a State Board in this behalf shall have a right to enter, at all reasonable times with such 
assistance as he c onsiders necessary, any place — 
(a) for the purpose of performing any of the functions of t he State Board entrusted to him ; 
                                                           
1. The words “carrying on any industry specified in the Schedule or” omitted by Act 47 of 1987, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. The words “air pollution control ” omitted  by s. 12 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  14 
 (b) for the purpose of determining whether and if so in what manner, any such functions are to be 
performed or whether any provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any notice, order, 
direction or authorisation served, made, given or granted under this Act is being or has been complied 
with;  
(c) for the purpose of examining and testing any control equipment, industrial plant, record, 
register, document o r any other material object or for conducting a search of any place in which he 
has reason to believe that an offence under this Act or the rules made  thereunder  has been or is being 
or is about to be committed and for seizing any such control equipment, industrial plant, record, 
register, document or other material object if he has reasons to believe that it may furnish evidence of 
the commission of an offence pu nishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) Every person  1*** operating any control equipment or any industrial plant, in an air pollution 
control area shall be bound to render all assistance to the person empowered by the State Board under 
sub-section ( 1) for carrying out the functions under that sub -section and if he fails to do so without any 
reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act.  
(3) If any person willfully delays or obstructs any person empowered by t he State Board under  
sub-section ( 1) in the discharge of his duties, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act.  
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , or, in relation to the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir, or any area, i n which that Code is not in force, the provisions of any corresponding 
law in force in that State or area, shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this section 
as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warra nt issued under section 94 of the 
said Code or, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the said law.  
25. Power to obtain information .—For the purposes of carrying out the functions entrusted to it, the 
State Board or any officer empowered by it in that behalf may call for any information (including 
information regarding the types of air pollutants emitted into the atmosphere and the leve l of the emission 
of such air pollutants) from the occupier or any other person carrying on any industry or operating any 
control equipment or industrial plant and for the purpose of verifying the correctness of such information, 
the State Board or such of ficer shall have the right to inspect the premises where such industry, control 
equipment or industrial plant is being carried on or operated.  
26. Power to take samples of air or emission and procedure to be followed in connection 
therewith .—(1) A State Board or any officer empowered by it in this behalf shall have power to take, for 
the purpose of analysis, samples of air or emission from any chimney, flue or duct or any other outlet in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The result of any analysis of a sample of emission taken under sub -section ( 1) shall not be 
admissible in evidence in any legal proceeding unless the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) are 
complied with.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), when a sample of emission is  taken for analysis under 
sub-section ( 1), the  person taking the sample shall — 
(a) serve on the occupier or his agent, a notice, then and there, in such form as may be prescribed, 
of his intention to have it so analysed;  
(b) in the presence of the occupier  or his agent, collect a sample of emission for analysis;  
(c) cause the sample to be placed in a container or containers which shall be marked and sealed 
and shall also be signed both by the person taking the sample and the occupier or his agent;  
(d) send,  without delay, the container  or containers to the laboratory established or recognised by 
the State Board under section 17 or, if a request in that behalf is made by the occupier or his agent 
when the notice is served on him under clause ( a), to the labor atory established or specified under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 28.  
                                                           
1. The words “carrying on any industry specified in the Schedule and every person” omitted by Act  47 of 1987, s. 13  
(w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  15 
 (4) When a sample of emission is taken for analysis under sub -section ( 1) and the person taking the 
sample serves on the occupier or his agent, a notice under claus e (a) of sub -section ( 3), then, — 
(a) in a case wher e the occupier or his agent wil fully absents himself, the person taking the 
sample shall collect the sample of emission for analysis to be placed in a container or containers 
which shall be marked and sealed and shall also be si gned by the person taking the sample, and  
(b) in a case where the occupier or his agent is present at the time of taking the sample but r efuses 
to sign the marked and se aled container or containers of the sample of emission as required under 
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 3), the marked and sealed container or containers shall be signed b y the 
person taking the sample,  
and the container or containers shall be se nt without delay by the person t aking the sample for analysis to 
the laboratory established or specif ied under sub -section ( 1) of section 28 and such person shall inform 
the Government analyst appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 2 9, in writing, about the wilful  
absence of the occupier or his agent, or, as the case may be, his refusal to si gn the co ntainer or containers.  
27. Reports of the result of analysis on samples taken under section 26 .—(1) Where a sample of 
emission has been sent for analysis to the laboratory established or recognised  by the State Board, the 
Board analyst appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 29 shall analyse the sample and submit a report 
in the prescribed form of such analysis in triplicate to the State Board.  
(2) On receipt of the report under sub -section ( 1), one copy of the report shall be sent by the State 
Board to the occupier or his agent referred to in section 26, another copy shall be preserved for production 
before the court in case any legal proceedings are taken against him and the other copy shall be kept by 
the State Board.  
(3) Where a sample has been se nt for analysis under clause of sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of 
section 26 to any laboratory mentioned therein, the Government analyst referred to in the said  
sub-section ( 4) shall analyse  the sample and submit a report in the prescribed form of the result of the 
analysis in triplicate to the State Board which shall comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Any cost incurred in getting any sample analysed at the request of the occu pier or his agent as 
provided in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 26 or when he wilfully absents himself or refuses to 
sign the marked and s ealed container or containers of sample of emission under sub -section ( 4) of that 
section, shall be payable by such occupier or his agent and in case of default the same shall be recoverable 
from him as arrears of land revenue or of public demand.  
 28. State Air Laboratory .—(1) The State Government may, by notifi cation in the Official  
Gazette,  — 
(a) establish  one or more State Air Laboratories; or  
(b) specify one or more laboratories or institutes as State Air Laboratories to carry out the 
functions entrusted to the State Air Laboratory under this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the State Board, make rules prescribing — 
(a) the functions of the State Air Laboratory;  
(b) the procedure for the submission to the said Laboratory of samples of air or emission for 
analysis or tests, the form of the Laboratory ’s report thereon and the fees payable in respect of such 
report;  
(c) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable that Laboratory to carry out its 
functions.  
29. Analys ts.—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such 
persons as it  thinks fit and having the prescribed qualifications to be Government analysts for the purpose 
of analysis of samples of air or emission sent for analysis to any laboratory established or specified under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 28.  16 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 14, the State Board may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, and with the approval of the State Government, appoint such persons as it thinks fit and 
having the prescribed qualifications to be Board ana lysts for the purpose of analysis of samples of air or 
emission sent for analysis to any laboratory established or recognised under section 17.  
30. Reports of analys ts.—Any document purporting to be a report signed by a Government analyst  
or, as the case m ay be, a State  Board analyst may be used as evidence of the facts stated therein in any 
proceeding under this Act.  
31. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State Board under this Act may, 
within thirty day from the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to such 
authority (hereinafter referred to as the Appellate Authority) as the State Governm ent may think fit to 
constitute : 
Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if such authority is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the 
appeal in time.  
(2) The Appellate Authority shall consist of a single person or three persons as the State Government 
may think fit to be appoint ed by the State Government.  
(3) The form and the manner in which an appeal may be preferred under sub -section ( 1), the fees 
payable for such appeal and the procedure to be followed by the Appellate Authority shall be such as may 
be prescribed.  
(4) On receipt of an appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Authority shall, after giving 
the appellant and the  State Board an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as 
possible.  
1[31A. Power to give directions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, but subject 
to the provisions of this Act, and to any directions that the Central Government may give in this behalf, a 
Board may, in the exercise of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act, issue any 
directions in writing to any person, officer or authority, and such person, officer or authority shall be 
boun d to comply with such directions.  
Explanation .—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue directions 
under this sectio n includes the power to direct — 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or  process; or  
(b) the stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water or any other service.]  
CHAPTER V  
FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
32. Contribution s by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf make in each financial year such contributions to the State 
Boards as it may think necessary to enable the State Board s to perform their functions under this Act:  
Provided that not hing in this section shall apply to any  2[State Pollution Control Board ] constituted 
under section 4 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974) , which is 
empowered by that Act to expend money fro m its fund thereunder also for performing its functions, under 
any law for the time being  in force relating to the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution.  
33. Fund of Board .—(1) Every State Board shall have its own fund for the purposes of this Act and 
all sums which may, from time to time, be paid to it by the  Central Government an d all other receipts (by 
way of contributions, if any, from the State Government, fees, gifts, grants, donations benefactions or 
otherwise) of that Board shall be carried to the fund of the Board and all payments by the Board shall be 
made therefrom.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 47 of  1987, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “State Board for the Prevention and Control of water Pollution” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  17 
 (2) Every State Board may expend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this 
Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the fund of that Board.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any  1[State Pollution Contro l Board ] constitut ed under 
section 4 of the Water  (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (6 of 1974) , which is empowered 
by that Act to expend money from its fund thereunder also for performing its functions , under any law for 
the time being in fo rce relating to the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution.  
2[33A.  Borrowing powers of Board .—A Board may, with the consent of, or in accordance with the 
terms of any general or special authority given to it by, the Central Government or, as the  case may be, 
the State Government, borrow money from any source by way of loans or issue of bonds, debentures or 
such other instruments, as it may deem fit, for discharging all or any of its functions under this Act.]  
34. Budget .—The Central Board or , as the case may be , the State Board shall, during each financial 
year, prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year 
next ensuing showing the estimated receipt and expenditure under this Act, and copies thereof shall b e 
forwarded to the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government.  
3[35. Annual report .—(1) The Central Board shall, during each financial year, prepare, in such form 
as may be prescribed, an annual report giving full account of its activities under this Act during the 
previous financial year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central  Government within four 
months from the last date of the previous financial year and that Government  shall cause every such 
report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament within nine months of the last date of the previous 
financial year.  
(2) Every State Board shall, during each financi al year, prepare, in such form  as may be prescribed, 
an annual report giving full account of its activities under this Act during the previous financial year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the State Governmen t within four months from the last date of the 
previous financial year and that Government shall cause every such report to be laid before the State 
Legislature within a period of nine months from the  last date of the previous financial year.]  
36. Accounts  and audit .—(1) Every Board shall, in relation to its functions under this Act, maintain 
proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by an auditor duly qualified to act as an auditor of 
companies under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
(3) The said auditor shall be appointed by the Central Governm ent or, as the case may be, the State 
Government on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
(4) Every auditor appointed to audit the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Board.  
(5) Every such auditor shall send a copy of his report together with an audited copy of the accounts to 
the Central Government or, as the case may be, the Sta te Government.  
(6) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of the audit report under  
sub-section ( 5), cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(7) The State Government shall, as soon as may be after the receipt  of the audit report under  
sub-section ( 5), cause the same to be laid before the State Legislature.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 15, for “ State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution” (w.e.f. 1-4-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 16 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by  s. 17, ibid., for section 35 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  18 
 CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
1[37. Failure to comply with the provisions of section 21 or section 22 or with the directions 
issued under section 31A.—(1) whoever fails to comply with the provisions of section 21 or section 22 
or di rections issued under section 3 1A, shall, in respect of each such failure, be punishab le with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six months  but which may extend to 
six years and with fine, and in case the failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues after the conviction for the first such 
failure.  
(2) If the failure referred to in sub -section ( 1) continues beyond a period of one year after the date of 
conviction, the offender shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
two years but which may extend to seven years and with  fine.]  
38. Penalties for certain acts .—Whoever — 
(a) destroys, pulls down, removes, injures or defaces any pillar, post or stake fixed in the ground 
or any notice or other matter put up, inscribed  or placed, by or under the authority of the Board, or  
(b) obstructs any person acting under the orders or directions of the Board from exercising his 
powers and performing his functions under this Act, or  
(c) damages any works or property belonging to the Board, or  
(d) fails  to furnish to the Board or any officer or other employee of the Board any information 
required by the Board or such officer or other employee for the purpose of this Act, or  
(e) fails to intimate the occurrence of the emission of air pollutants into the a tmosphere in excess 
of the standards laid down by the State Board or the apprehension of such occurrence, to the State 
Board and other prescribed authorities or agencies as required under sub -section ( 1) of section 23, or  
(f) in giving any information whic h he is required to give under this Act, makes a statement which 
is false in any material particular, or  
(g) for the purpose of obtaining any consent under section 21, makes a statement which is f alse in 
any material particular,  
shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which 
may extend to  2[ten thousand rupees] or with both.  
3[39. Penalty for contravention of  certain provisions of the Act .—Whoever contravenes any of the 
provisions of this Act or any order or direction issued thereunder, for which no penalty has been 
elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or  with both, and in the case of 
continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees for every day 
during which such contravention continues after conviction fo r the first such contravention.]  
40. Offences by companies .—(1) Wher e an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in cha rge of, and was 
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he  proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has b een committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 18, for section 37 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for section 39 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  19 
 officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other  officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this  section, — 
(a) “company ” means any bod y corporate, and includes a firm or other association  of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
41. Offences by Government Departments .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any Department of Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was com mitted without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a Department of Government and i t is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head 
of the Department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shal l be liable to be 
proceeded aga inst and punished accordingly.  
42. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government  or any officer of the Government or any member or any officer or other 
employee of the Board in respect of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in 
pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
1[43. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Ac t 
except on a complaint made by — 
(a) a Board or any officer authorised in this behalf by it; or  
(b) any person who has given notice of not less than sixty days, in the manner prescribed, of the 
alleged offence and of his intention to make a complaint to the Board or officer authorised as 
aforesaid,  
and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall 
try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) Where a complaint has been made under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall, on demand 
by such person, make available the relevant reports in its possession to that person:  
Provided that the Board may refuse to make any such report available t o such person if the same is, in 
its opinion, against the public interest.]  
44. Members, officers and employees of Board to be public servants .—All the members and all 
officers and other employees of a Board when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of  any of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be public servant s within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
45. Reports and returns .—The Central Board shall, in relation to its functions under this Act, 
furnish to the Central Government , and a State Board shall, in relation to its functions under this Act, 
furnish to the State Government and to the Central Board such reports, returns, s tatistics, accounts and 
other information as that Government, or, as the case may be, the Central Board may, from time to time, 
require.  
46. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of any matter which an Appellate Authority constituted under this Act is empowered by or under 
this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any 
action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power confer red by or under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 21, for section 43 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  20 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
47. Power of State Government to supersede State Board .—(1) If at any time the State 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that  a State Board constituted under this Act has persistently made default in the performance 
of the functions imposed on it by or under this Act, or  
(b) that circumstances exist which render it necessary i n the public interest so to do,  
the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the State Board for such 
period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in 
clause (a), the State Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the State Board to show cause 
why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the 
State Board.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification und er sub -section ( 1) superseding the State Board, — 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under this Act, be exercised, performed 
or discharged by the State Board shall, until the State Board is reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), be 
exercised, performed or discharged by such person or persons as th e State Government may direct ; 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the State Board shall, until th e Board is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the State Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under  
sub-sectio n (1), the State Government may — 
(a) extend the period of supersession f or such further term, not exceeding six months, as it may 
consider necessary; or  
(b) reconstitute the State Board by a fresh nomination or appointment , as the case may be, and in 
such case any person who vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall also be eligible  
for nomination or appointment:  
Provided that the State Government may at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession , whether originally specified under sub -section ( 1) or as extended under this sub -section, 
take action under clause ( b) of this sub -section.  
48. Special provision in the case of supersession of the Central Board or the State Boards 
constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 .—Where the Central 
Board or any State Board constituted under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
(Act 6 of 1974), is superseded by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
under that Act, all the powers, functions and duties of the Central Board or s uch State Board under this 
Act shall be exercised, performed or discharged during the period of such supersession by the person or 
persons, exercising, preforming or discharging the powers, functions and duties of the Central Board or 
such State Board unde r the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, during such period.  
49. Dissolution of State Boards constituted under the Act .—(1) As and when the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (Act 6 of 1974), comes into force in any S tate and the 
State Government constitutes 1[State Pollution Control  Board ] under that Act, the State Board constituted 
by the State Government under this Act shall stand dissolved and the Board first -mentioned shall exercise 
the powers and perform the functions of the Board  second -mentioned in that State.  
(2) On the dissolution of the State Boa rd constituted under this Act, — 
(a) all the members shall vacate their offices as such;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 15, for “ State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  21 
 (b) all moneys and other property of whatever kind (including the fund of the State Board) owned 
by, or vested in, the State Board, immediately before such dissolution, shall stand transferred to and 
vest in the  1[State Pollution Control Board ]; 
(c) every officer and other em ployee serving under the State Board immediately before such 
dissolution shall be transferred to and become an o fficer or other employee of the 1[State Pollution 
Control Board ] and hold office by the same tenure and at the same remuneration and on the same 
terms and conditions of service as he would have  held the same if the State Board constituted under 
this Act had not been dissolved and shall continue to do so unless and until such tenure, remuneration 
and terms and conditions of service are duly altered by the 1[State Pollution Control Board ]: 
Provide d that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such officer or 
other employee shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the State 
Government;  
(d) all liabilities  and obligations of the State Board  of whatever kind, immediately before such 
dissolution, shall be deemed to be the liabilities or obligations, as the case may be, of the  1[State 
Pollution Control Board ] and any proceeding or cause of action, pending or existing immediately 
before such dissolution by or against the State Board constituted under this Act in relation to such 
liability or obligation may be continued a nd enforced by or against the 1[State Pollution Control 
Board .] 
50. [Power to amend the Schedule.] .—Omitted by the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution ) 
Amendment Act, 1987 (47 of 1987 ), s. 22 (w.e.f. 1-4-1988 ). 
51. Maintenance of register .—(1) Every State Board shall maintain a register containing particulars 
of the persons to whom consent has been granted under section 21, the standard s for emission laid down 
by it in relation to each such consent and such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) The register maintained under sub -section ( 1) shall be open to inspection at all reasonable hours 
by any person int erested in or affected by such standards for emission or by any other person authorised 
by such person in this behalf.  
52. Effect of other laws .—Save as otherwise provided by or under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962  
(33 of 1962), in relation to radioactive ai r pollution the provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act.  
53. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, in 
consultation with the  Central Board , by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules in respect of the 
following matters , namely: — 
(a) the intervals and the time and place at which meetings of the Central Board or any committee 
thereof shall be held and the procedure to be  followed at such meetings, including the quorum 
necessary for the transaction of business thereat, under sub -section ( 1) of section 10 and under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 11;  
(b) the fees and allowances to be paid to the members of a committee of the Central Board, not 
being members of the Board, under sub -section ( 3) of section 11;  
(c) the manner in which and the purposes for which persons may be associated with the Central 
Board und er sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(d) the fees and allowance to be paid under sub -section ( 3) of section 12 to persons associated 
with the Ce ntral Board under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(e) the  functions to be performed by the Central Board under clause ( j) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 16;  
  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 15 for “ State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  22 
 1[(f) the form in which and the time within which the budget of the Central Board may be 
prepared and forwarded to the Central Government under section 34;  
(ff) the form in which the annual report of die Central Board ma y be prepared under section 35;]  
(g) the form in which the accounts of the Central Board may be maintained under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 36.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafte r have effect only in such mo dified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
54. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) Subject to the  provisions of sub -section ( 3), 
the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of 
this Act in respect of matter not falling within the purview of section 53.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely — 
2[(a) the qualifications, knowledge and experience of scientific, engineering or management 
aspect s of pollution control required for appointment as member -secretary of a State Board 
constituted under the Act;]  
3[(aa)] the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members (other than the 
member -secretary) of the State Board constituted under this Act under sub -section ( 7) of section 7;  
(b) the intervals and the time and place at which meetings of the State Board or any committee 
thereof shall be held and the procedure to be followed at such meetings, including the quorum 
necessary for the transaction of business thereat, under sub -section ( 1) of section 10 and under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 11;  
(c) the fees and allowances to be paid to the members of a committee of the State Board, not 
being members of the Board under sub -section ( 3) of section 11;  
(d) the manner in which and the purpose for which persons may be associated with the State 
Board under sub-section ( 1) of section 12;  
(e) the fees and allowances to be paid under sub -section ( 3) of section 12 to persons associated 
with the State Board under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(f) the terms and conditions of service of the member -secretary of a State Board constituted under 
this Act under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(g) the powers and duties to be exercised and discharged by the member -secretary of a State 
Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(h) the conditions subject to which a State Board may appoint such officers and other employees 
as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under sub -section ( 3) of section 
14; 
(i) the conditions subject to whi ch a State Board may appoint a consultant under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 14;  
(j) the functions to be performed by the State Board under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of  
section 17;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 23, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 24 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Clause ( a) renumbered a s clause ( aa) thereof by s. 24 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  23 
 (k) the manner in which any area or areas may be declared as air polluti on control area or areas 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(l) the form of application for the consent of the State Bo ard, the fees payable therefore the period 
within which such application shall be made and the particulars it may contain, under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 21;  
(m) the procedure to be followed in respect of an inquiry under sub -section ( 3) of section 2 1; 
(n) the authorities or agencies to whom information under sub -section ( 1) of section 23 shall be 
furnished;  
(o) the  manner in which samples of air or emission may be taken under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 26;  
(p) the form of the notice referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 26;  
(q) the form of the report of the State Board analyst under sub -section ( 1) of section 2 7; 
(r) the form of the report of the Government analyst under sub -section ( 3) of section 27;  
(s) the functions of the State Air Laboratory, the procedure for the submission to the said 
Laboratory of samples of air or emission for analysis o r tests, the form of Laboratory’ s report thereon, 
the fees payable in respect of such report and other matters as may be necessary or expedient to 
enable that Laboratory to carry out its functions, under sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
(t) the qualifications required fo r Government analysts under sub -section ( 1) of section 29;  
(u) the qualification required for State Board analysts under sub -section ( 2) of section 29;  
(v) the form and the manner in which appeals may be preferred , the fees payable in respect of  
such appea ls and the procedure to be followed by the Appellate Authority in disposing of the appeals 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 31;  
1[(w) the form in which and the time within which the budget of the State Board may be prepared 
and forwarded to the State Government under section 34;  
(ww) the form in which the annual report of the State Board may be prepared under  section 35;]  
(x) the form in wh ich the accounts of the State Board may be maintained under the  
sub-section ( 1) of section 36;  
2[(xx) the manner in which notice of intention to make a complaint shall be given under  
section 43;]  
(y) the particulars which the register maintained under section 51 may contain;  
(z) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) After the first constitution of the State Board, no rule with respect to any of the matters referred to 
in sub -section  (2) [other than those referred to  3[[in clause ( aa)]] thereof], shall be made, varied, amended 
or repealed without consulting that Board.  
[The Schedule.] .—Omitted by the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution ) Amendment Act, 1987  
(47 of 1987 ), s. 25 (w.e.f. 1-4-1988 ). 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1987, s. 24, for clause ( w) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 24 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 24,  ibid., for “in clause ( a)” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
--------------------------The Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1981--------------------------
 
1 
 THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1981  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement .  
2. [Repealed. ] 
3. [Repealed. ] 
4. [Repealed. ] 
5. [Repealed. ] 
6. [Repealed. ] 
7. [Repealed. ] 
8. [Repealed. ] 
9. [Repealed. ] 
10. [Repealed. ] 
11. [Repealed. ] 
12. [Repealed. ] 
13. [Repealed. ] 
14. [Repealed. ] 
15. [Repealed. ] 
16. [Repealed. ] 
17. [Repealed. ] 
18. [Repealed. ] 
19. [Repealed. ] 
20. [Repealed. ] 
21. [Repealed. ] 
22. Transitional provisions.  
23. Saving . 
   
2 
 THE ALIGARH MUSLIM UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 62 OF 1981  
[31st December , 1981.] 
An Act  further to amend the Aligarh Muslim University (Amendment) Act, 1920.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Aligarh Muslim University 
(Amendment) Act, 1981.  
(2) It shall come in to force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette appoint . 
2*   *   *   *   * 
22. Transitional provisions. —(1) The Court and the Executive Council of the Aligarh Muslim  
University shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement of this Act, be constituted in accordance 
with the provisions of the principal Act a nd of the Statutes, as amended  by this Act, and until the Court or 
the Executive Council is so constituted, the  Court or the Executive Council functioning immediately 
before such commencement, shall continue to exercise all the powers and perform all the functions under 
the principal Act, as so amended.  
(2) The Chancellor and the Pro -Chancellor shall, as soon as ma y be, after the commencement of this 
Act, be elected in accordance with the p rovisions of the principal Act and of the Statutes, as amended by 
this Act, and the person holding any such office immediately before such  commencement, shall continue 
to hold tha t office until his successor enters upon his office.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -Chancellor and the Heads of Departments of the Aligarh 
Muslim University holding office immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, on and from 
such commencement, hold their respective officers by the same tenure and upon the same terms and 
conditions as they held it immediately before such commencement.  
23. Saving. —Anything done, any action taken or any degree or other academic distinction conferred 
by the Aligarh Muslim University before the commencement of this Act, shall, notwithstanding any 
change made by this Act in the constitution of the Court or the Executive Council, be valid as if such 
thing was done, action was taken, or degree or academic distinction was conferred under the provisions of 
the principal Act, as amended by this Act.  
                                                           
1. 10th February 1982,  vide notification No . S.O. 69(E), dated 9th February, 1982, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Sections 2 to  21 rep. by Act  19 of 1988 , s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
 
--------------------------The Anti-Apartheid (United Nations Convention) Act, 1981--------------------------
1 
 THE ANTI -APARTHEID  (UNITED NATION S CONVENTION) ACT, 1981  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Application of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of 
Apartheid . 
3. Punishment for international criminal responsibility.  
4. Offences by companies, organisations or institutions . 
5. Place of trial.  
6. Previous sanction of the Central Government for arrest or prosecution . 
7. Provisions as to Extradition Act . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE ANTI -APARTHEID  (UNITED NATION S CONVENTION) ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 48 OF 1981  
[18th December, 1981.]  
An Act to give effect to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the 
Crime of Apartheid . 
WHEREAS  an International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid 
was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on the Thirtieth day of November, 1973;  
AND WHEREAS India, having acceded to the said Convention, should make  provisions for giving 
effect to it;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called The Anti -Apartheid (United Nations 
Convention) Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Application of the International Con vention on the Suppression and Punishment of the 
Crime of Apartheid .—(1) Notwithstanding any thing to the contrary contained in any other law, such of 
the provisions of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of 
Apartheid as are setout in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India.  
(2) The Central Governm ent may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the said 
Convention set out therein.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament.  
3. Punishment for international criminal responsibility .—Every person to whom international 
crimina l responsibility applies under a rticle III of the said Convention, as s et out in the Schedule, shall be 
punished with death, or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the reference in clause ( a) of a rticle III of the said 
Convention to “article II” shall be construed as a reference t o the provisions of a rticle II of that 
Convention as set out in the Schedule.  
4. Offences by companies, organisations or institutions .—Where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company or an organisation or an institution, every person who, at the time the 
offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, organisation or 
institution, as the case may be, for  the conduct of its busine ss or affairs, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided  that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act if h e proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “company” means any body  corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals.  
5. Place of trial .—Any person committing an offence under section 3 may be tried for the offence in 
any place in which he may be found or in such other place as the Central Government may,  by general or 
special order, published in the Official Gazette, direct in this behalf.  
6. Previous sanction of the Central Government for arrest or prosecution .—No person shall be 
arrested or prosecuted in respect of any offence under section 3 except wit h the previous sanction of the 
Central Government or such officer or authority as may be authorised by that Government by order in 
writing in this behalf.  3 
 7. Provisions as to Extradition Act .—For the purposes of the Extradition Act , 1962  (34 of 1962) , 
the offence under section 3 shall not be considered to be an offence of a political character.  
  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 2 and 3)  
PROVISIONS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION ON THE SUPPRESSION AND PUNISHMENT OF THE 
CRIME OF Apartheid  WHICH  SHALL HAVE FORCE OF LAW 
*   *   *                                      *                                  *  
Article II  
For the purpose of the present Convention, the term “the crime of apartheid ”, which shall include 
similar policies and practices of racial segregation and discrimination as practis ed in s outhern Africa, 
shall apply to the following inhuman acts committed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining 
domination by one racial group  of persons over any other racial group of persons and systematically 
oppressing them:  
(a) Denial to a member or members of a racial group or groups of the right to life and liberty of 
person:  
(i) By murder of members of a racial group or groups;  
(ii) By t he infliction upon the memb ers of a racial group or groups  of serious bodily or mental 
harm, by the infringement of their freedom or dignity , or by subjecting them to torture or to cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;  
(iii) By arbitrary arr est and illegal imprisonment of the memb ers of a racial group or groups;  
(b) Deliberate imposition on a racial group or groups of living con ditions calculated to cause its 
or their physical destruction in whole or in part;  
*                                       *                                  *                                       *                                   *  
(e) Exploitation of the labour of the members of a racial group or groups, in particular by 
submitting them to forced labour;  
(f) Persecution of organis ations and persons, by depriving them of fundamental rights and 
freedoms, because they oppose apartheid . 
Article III  
International criminal responsibility shall apply, irrespective of the motive involved, to individuals, 
members of or ganis ations and institutions and representatives of the State, whether residing in the 
territory of the State in which the acts are perpetrated or in some other State, whenever they:  
(a) Commit, participate in, directly incite or conspire in the commi ssion  of the acts mentioned in 
article II of the present Convention;  
(b) Directly abet, encourage or co -operate in the commission of the crime of apartheid.  
*                                  *                                         *                                       *                                *  
 
--------------------------The British India Corporation Limited (Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1981--------------------------
1 THE BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION LIMITED (ACQUISITION OF SHARES)  ACT , 1981  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE SHARES OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer and vesting of shares of the Company in the Central Government . 
4. Management of the Company . 
5. Payment of amounts . 
6. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments . 
7. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner . 
8. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
9. Examination of claims . 
10. Admission or rejection of claims . 
11. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.  
12. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account . 
13. Power of inspection . 
14. Power of Commissioner to inquire into disp utes as to amount . 
15. Deposit of amount in court . 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Act to have overriding effect . 
17. Penalties . 
18. Offences by companies . 
19. Limitation of cognizance of offences . 
20. Power to make rules . 
21. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 THE BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION LIMITED  (ACQUISITION OF SHARES)  ACT , 1981  
ACT NO. 29 OF 1981  
[11th September , 1981 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition of certain shares of the British India Corporation Limited 
with a view to securing the proper management of the affairs of the Company and the 
continuity and development of the production of goods which are vital to the needs of the 
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHERE  AS Messrs . British India Corporation Limited, Kanpur, are engaged in the manufacture and 
production of pure and blended wooll en fabrics which are vital to the needs of the general public;  
AND WHEREAS  as a result of an investigation made under section 15 of the Industries ( Development 
and Regulation) Act,  1951 (65 of 1951) , certain directions were issued to the Company under section 16 
of that  Act which , inter alia , included the moderni sation of the plant and machinery of the undertaking s 
of the Company;  
AND WHEREAS  for the purpose of c arrying out the said directions , public financial institutions had 
advanced large sums of money to the Company;  
AND WHEREAS  the Central Government and certain public financial institutions have also invested 
considerable funds in t he share capital of the Company ; 
AND WHERE  AS the State Bank of India has advanced considerable sums to the Company and a part 
thereof has been guaranteed by the Central Government;  
AND WHEREAS  further investment  of large sums of money is necessary for the maintenance and 
development  of the production of the under taking s of the Company and for securing the proper 
management of the aff airs of the Company ; 
AND WHEREAS  acquisition by the Central Government of an effective control over the affairs of the 
Company is necessary to enable i t to make the investments afore said; 
BE it enabled by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Repub lic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the British India Corporation 
Limited ( Acquisition of S hares) Act, 1981.  
(2) It shall be deemed to  have come into force on the 11 th day of June, 1981.  
2. Defin itions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 11th day of June , 1981 ; 
(b) “bank ” means a banking company within the meanin g of the Banking Regulation                  
Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) ; 
(c) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 6;  
(d) “Company ” means Br itish India Corporation Limited ,being a company within t he meaning of 
the Companies Act , 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its regist ered office at Sutherland House, Kanpur, 
in the State of Uttar Pradesh;  
(e) “notification”  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “share ” means a share , whether ordinary or preference , in the capital of the Company , and 
includes a share pledged by any shareholder with any bank or other credit or, but does not include any 
share in the  capital of the Company held by — 
(i) the Central Government ; 
(ii) any State Government ; 3 (iii) the State Bank of India , established under section 3 of the State Bank of India Act,19 55 
(23 of 1955 ), and its subsidiary banks;  
(iv) the Life Insurance Corporation of India, established under section 3 of the Life Insurance 
Corporation Act , 1956  (31 of 1956) ; 
(v) the Unit Trust of India , established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963  
(52 of 1963) ; 
(vi) any corresponding new bank , within the meaning of the Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertaking s) Act , 1970  (5 of 1970) ; 
(vii) any corresponding new bank, within the meaning of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition an d Transfer of Undertakings) Act ,1980  (40 of 1980) ; 
(viii) any general insurance company nationali sed by the General Insurance Business 
(Nationali sation) Act , 1972  (57 of 1972) ; 
(g) “shareholder”  means,— 
(i) a person who , immediately before the appointed day,  was registered by the Company as 
the holder of any share and includes his legal representa tive; or 
(ii) a person  who, before the appointed day , had lodged with the Company a proper 
instrument of transfer of any share in the form prescribed under section 108 of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and executed in accordance with the provisions of that section; or  
(iii) a person who claims under a proper instrument of transfer of any share in the form 
prescribed under section 10 8 of the Companies Act,  1956 (1 of 1956) , and delivers such 
instrument to the Commissioner, duly executed , on or before such date as the Central 
Government may , by notification, specify in this behalf;  
(h) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any 
provisi on of this Act, by notification , specify and different dates may be specified for di fferent 
provisions of this Act;  
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act,1956  (1 
of 1956) , have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION OF THE SHARES OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer and vesting of shares of the Company in the Central Government .—(1) On the 
appointed day , all the shares of the Company shall , by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and  vest in , 
the Central Government . 
(2) The Central Government shall be deemed , on and from the appointed day , to have been registered 
in the Register of members of the Company as the holder of each share which stand s transferred to, and 
vested in , it by virtue of the provisions of sub -section( 1). 
(3) All the shares which have vested in the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), shall, by force 
of such vesting , be free d and discharged of all trusts , liabilities, obligations , mortgages, charges, liens and 
other encumbrances aff ecting them, and any a ttachment , injunction or a ny decree or order of the court , 
tribunal or other authority restricting the u se of such shares in any manner , shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) 
shall not be deemed to affect — 
(a) any right of the Company subsisting, immed iately before the appointed day , against any 
shareholder to recover from such shareholder any sum of money on the ground that the shareholder 
has not paid or credited to the Company the whole or any part of the value of the shares held by him, 
or on any other ground whatsoever; or  4 (b) any righ t of the shareholder subsisting , immediately before the appointed day , against the 
Company to receive any dividend or other payment due from the Company.  
4. Management of the Company .—For the purpose of enabling the Company to f unction as a 
Government company, the Central Government may, by notification, make such provisions (including 
changes in the Board of Directors , and amendments in the memoran dum and articles of association , of the 
Company)  as it may conside r necessary and the provisions  so made shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Companies Act , 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
5. Payment of amounts .—(1) For the transfer to , and vesting in , the Central Government , under 
section 3, of the shares of the Company , there shall be given by the Central Government to the 
shareholders of the Company , in cas h and in the manner specified in section 7, an amount of rupees 
twenty -two lakhs and sixty thousand.  
(2) The amount , referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall carry simp le interest at the rate of four percent . 
per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of 
such amount is made by the Central G overnment to the Commissioner.  
6. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall , for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to shareholders of the Company u nder section 5, by 
notification , appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercis able by him under this Act , and  different pers ons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers . 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been confe rred on that person directly by this Act, and not by way of authoris ation . 
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of  the Consolidated Fund of India . 
7. Payment  by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thir ty days from the specified date ,pay, in cash, to the Commissioner , for payment to t he 
shareholders of the Company ,— 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in sub-section ( 1) of section 5 ; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount determined under sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favo ur of the Commissioner , in 
the Public Account of India , and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in 
sub-section ( 2), shall en ure to the benefit of the shareholders of the Company.  
8. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—(1) Every shareholder, having a claim in relation to 
any share acquired by this Act, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thir ty days from 
the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring theclaim within the period of thirty days , he m ay entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
(2) Every shareholder of a preference share shall have a preferential claim with regard to the amount 
paid by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
9. Examination of cl aims .—On receipt of the claims made under section 8, the Commissioner shall 
separately arrange the claims in relation to preference shares and in relation to the ordinary shares and 
examine the claims in relation to each such share.  5 10. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims, the Commissioner shall fix a 
certain date on or before which every claimant shall file the proof of his claim o r be excluded from the 
benefit of the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of daily newspaper in the English language and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the regional 
language as the Commissioner may consider suitable , and every such notice shall call upon the claimant 
to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant , who fails to file the proof of his claim within the tim e specified by the 
Commissioner , shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall , after such investigation as may , in his opinion, be necessary , and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving th e claimant a reasonable 
opportun ity of being heard, in writing , admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions , including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall , for 
the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit , in re spect of  the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits ; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of  1860)  and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 345 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(7) A claimant, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner, may prefer an a ppeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated.  
11. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—(1) After admitting  a claim 
under this Act, the amount due in respect of each share acquired by virtue of this Act shall be paid by the 
Commissioner at the rate of rupees ten per preference share, and at the rate of fifty paise per ordinary 
share to the person or persons to whom such sums are due, and on such payment, the liability of the 
Central Government in respect of the share so acquired shall stand discharged.  
(2) The Commissioner shall also apportion amongst the share -holders, the amount paid to him by way 
of interest under sub -section ( 3) of section 7, and such apportionment shall be made on the basis of the 
amount due to each shareholder.  
12. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner before his office is finally would up  to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, the order, i f 
any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
13. Power of inspection .—For the purposes of ascertaining whether any person claiming payment 
under this Act is a shareholder, the Commi ssioner shall have the right to — 
(a) require any person , having the possession, custody or control, of any register or record of the 
Company, to produce such register or record before the Commissioner,  6 (b) require any person to make any statement or furnish any information which may be required 
by the Commissioner.  
14. Power of Commissioner to inquire into disputes as to amount .—Where there is any dispute as 
to the person or persons who are entitled to any amount payable under this Act (including any dispute as 
to who are the legal repre sentatives of any deceased claimant to the amount), the Commissioner may, 
after making such inquiry as he may deem fit, make the payment to such person as appears to him to be 
best entitled to receive the amount:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is unable  to determine as to who is the person entitled to the 
amount and considers that the matter could more appropriately be dealt with by the principal civil of 
original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office of the Com pany is 
situated, he may refer such dispute to the said court, whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that nothing contained herein shall affect the liability of any person, who may 
receive the whole or any part of the amount allowed under  this Act, to pay the same to the person lawfully 
entitled thereto.  
15. Deposit of amount in court .—Where any dispute has been referred under section 14 by the 
Commissioner to the civil court referred to therein, he shall deposit the amount in that court.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Act to have over riding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law, other than this Act, or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act.  
17. Penalties .—If any person, — 
(a) makes any claim for any payment under this Act, knowing or having reason to believe that 
such claim is false or without any basis; or  
(b) when re quired under this Act so to do, — 
(i) omits or fails to produce any register or record of the Company; or  
(ii) makes any statement of furnishes any information which is false in any material particular 
and which he knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true; or  
(c) makes any such statement as aforesaid in any book, account, record, register, return or other 
document,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.  
18. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committe d without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent or connivance o f, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against the punished ac cordingly.  
 7 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
19. Limitation of cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under this Act, ex cept with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of an officer authori sed by 
that Government in this behalf.  
20. Power to make rule s.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while i t is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agr ee in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have affect only in such modified form or be no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
21. Repeal and saving .—(1) The British India Corporation (Acquisition of Shares) Ordinance, 1981 
(5 of 1981 ), is hereb y repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Cine-workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981--------------------------
1 
 THE CINE -WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1981  
___________  
ARRANG EMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINE -WORKERS  
3. Prohibition of employment of cine -worker without agreement . 
4. Conciliation officers . 
5. Duties of conciliation officers . 
6. Settlement to be binding and to be enforced by the competent authority . 
7. Constitution of Tribunals . 
8. Disqualification for the pre siding officers of Tribunals.  
9. Filling of vacancies . 
10. Finality of orders constituting Tribunals, etc . 
11. Reference of disputes to Tribunals.  
12. Procedure and powers of conciliation officers and Tribunals . 
13. Duties of Tribunals . 
14. Publication of awards of Tribunals . 
15. Revision . 
16. Application of Act 19 of 1952 to cine -workers.  
17. Penalties.  
18. Offences by companies . 
19. Cognizance of offences . 
20. Magistrate ’s power to impose enhanced penalties . 
21. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Chapter . 
22. Protection of action taken und er this Chapter . 
23. Power to make rules . 
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS  
24. Application of Act 19 of 1952.  
25. Application of Act 39 of 1972.  
  2 
  
THE CINE -WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 50 OF 1981  
[24th December , 1981.]  
An Act to provide for the regulation of the conditions of employment of certain cine -workers 
and cinema theatre workers and for matter s connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cine -workers and 
Cinema Theatre Workers (Regul ation of Employment) Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
for different areas.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e conte xt otherwise requires, — 
(a) “cinema theatre ” means a place which is licensed under Part III of the Cinematograph Act, 
1952 (37 of 1952), or under any other law for the time being in force in a State for the exhi bition 
of a cinematograph film;  
(b) “cinemato graph film ” has the same meaning as in the Cinematograph Act, 1952                     
(37 of 1952);  
(c) “cine-worke r” means an individual — 
(i) who is employed, directly or through any contractor or other person, in or in 
connection with the production of  a feature film to work as an artiste (including actor, 
musician or dancer) or to do any work, skilled, unskilled, manual, supervisory, techni cal, 
artistic or otherwise; and  
(ii) whose remuneration with respect to such employment in or in connection with t he 
production of such feature film does not exceed, where such remuneration is by way of 
monthly wages, a sum of one thousand six hundred rupees per month, and where such 
remuneration is by way of a lump sum, a sum of fifteen thousand rupees;  
(d) “competen t authority ” means any authority authorised by the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette to perform all or any of the functions of the competent 
authority under th is Act;  
(e) “contractor ” means a person who furnishes or undertakes to f urnish cine -workers for being 
employed in or in connection with the production of a feature film, and incl udes a sub -contractor 
or agent;  
(f) “feature film ” means a full length cinematograph film produced wholly or partly in India 
with a format  and a story woven around a number of characters where the plot is revealed mainly 
through dialogues and not wholly through narration, animation or cartoon depiction, and does not 
include an adver tisement film;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 1984, vide notification No. G.S.R . 676(E), dated 21st September, 1984, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( i).  3 
 (g) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “producer ”, in relation to a feature film, means the person by whom the arrangements 
necessary for the making of such film (including the raising of finances and engaging             
cine-workers for the makin g of such film) are un dertaken;  
(i) “production ”, in relation to a feature film, includes any of the activities in  respect of the 
making thereof;  
(j) “Tribunal ” means a Cine -workers Tribun al constituted under section 7;  
(k) “wages ” means all emoluments which are payable to a wo rker in accordance with the 
terms of the contract of employment in cash, but does not include — 
(i) the cas h value of any food concession;  
(ii) any dearness allowance (that is to say, all cash payments, by whatever name called, 
paid to a worker on account o f a rise in the cost of living or on account of his being required 
to work in a place other than the place where he is normally residing), house rent allowance, 
overtime allowance, bonus, commission or any other similar allowance payable to the worker 
in respect of his employment or o f work done in such employment;  
(iii) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident 
fund or for the benefit of the worker under any law for the time being in force;  
(iv) any gratuity payable on the termination of his contract.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATIO N OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINE -WORKERS  
3. Prohibition of employment of  cine-worker without agreement. —(1) No person shall be 
employed as a cine -worker in or in connection with the productio n of any feature film unless, — 
(a) an agreement in writing is entered into with such person by the producer of such film; or, 
where such person is employed through a contractor or other person, by the producer of such film 
and such contractor or other person; and  
(b) such agreement is registered with the competent authorit y by the producer of such film.  
(2) Every agreement, referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, — 
(a) be in the prescribed form;  
(b) specify the name of and such other particulars as may be prescribed with respect to, the 
person to whose employment it relates (hereafter in this sub -section referred to as  the employee);  
(c) specify the nature of assignment of the employee, his hours of work, the wages and other 
benefits (including benefits by way of provident  fund, if any), to which he is entitled; the mode of 
payment of such wages and contributions to such provident fund and all other term s and 
conditions of employment;  
(d) include, where such employee is employed through a contractor or other person, a specific 
condition to the effect that in the event of the contractor or other person failing to discharge his 
obligations under the agreement to the employee with respect to  payment of wages or any other 
matter, the producer of the film concerned shall be liable to discharge such obligations and shall 
be entitled to be reimbursed with respect thereto by the contractor or other person.  
(3) A copy of the agreement referred to i n sub -section ( 1) with respect to the employment of any 
person as a cine -worker shall, if such person is entitled to the benefits of provident fund under section 
16, also be forwarded by the producer of the film to the Regional Provident Fund Commissione r 
concerned under the Employees’  Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952                  
(19 of 1952).  4 
 4. Conciliation officers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such number of persons as it thinks  fit to be conciliation officers charged with the duty of 
mediating and promoting the settlement of any dispute (hereinafter referred to as the dispute) between 
a cine -worker and the producer of the film in, or in connection with, which he has been employe d or 
the contractor or other person through whom he has been so employed, with respect to the terms and 
conditions or termination, of employment of such cine -worker.  
5. Duties of conciliation officers. —(1) Where any dispute exists or is apprehended, the 
conciliation officer may hold conciliation procee dings in the prescribed manner.  
(2) The conciliation officer shall, for the purpose of bringing about a settlement of the dispute, 
without delay, investigate the dispute and all matters affecting the merits a nd the right settlement 
thereof and may do all such things as he thinks fit for the purpose of inducing the parties to come to a 
fair and amic able settlement of the dispute.  
(3) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is arrived at in the course of 
the conciliation proceedings, the conciliation officer shall send a report thereof to the Central 
Government together with a memorandum of the settlement signed  by the parties to the dispute.  
(4) If no such settlement is arrived at, the  conciliation officer shall, as soon as practicable, after 
the close of the investigation, send to the Central Government a full report setting forth the steps taken 
by him for ascertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and for bringi ng about a 
settlement thereof, together with a full statement of such facts and circumstances and the reasons on 
account of which, in his opinion , a sett lement could not be arrived at.  
(5) If, on a consideration of the report referred to in s ub-section ( 4), the Central Government is 
satisfied that there is a case for reference to a Tribunal, it may make such reference under section 11 
and where that Government does not make such a reference, it shall record and communicate to the 
parties concerned its reaso ns therefor.  
(6) A report under this section shall be submitted within three months of the commencement of 
the conciliation proceedings or within such shorter period as may be f ixed by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that, subject to the approval of the c onciliation officer, the time for the submission of the 
report may be extended by such period as may be agreed upon in writing by all the parties to the 
dispute.  
6. Settlement to be binding and to be enforced by the competent authority .—Every 
settlement arrived at in the course of a concilation proceeding under this Chapter shall be binding on 
all the parties to the dispute and shall not be called in question in any court and it shall be  the duty of 
the competent authority to enforce the terms of the said settlement.  
7. Constitution of Tribunals. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute one or more Tribunals, to be called the Cine -workers Tribunals, with headquarters 
at such place as may be speci fied in the notification, for the adjudication of disputes relating to any 
matter specified in any agreement of the n ature referred to in section 3.  
(2) A Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appoi nted by the Central Government.  
(3) A person sha ll not be qualified for appointment as the presiding  officer of a Tribunal unless —  
(a) he is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) he has, for a period of not less than three years, been a District Judge or an  Additional 
District Judge; or  
(c) he has held the office of the presiding officer of an Industrial Tribunal constituted under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), for a per iod of not less than two years.  
(4) The Central Government may, if it so  thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to advice the 
Tribuna l in any proceedings before it.  5 
 8. Disqualification for the presiding officers of Tribunals. —No person shall be appointed to, or 
continue in, the office of the presiding officer of a Tribunal, i f—  
(a) he i s not an independent person; or  
(b) he has attained the age of sixty -five years.  
9. Filling of vacancies. —If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in 
the office of the presiding officer of a Tribunal, th e Central Government shall appoint another person 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy, and the proceeding may be continued 
before the Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.  
10. Finality of orders constituting  Tribunals, etc. —(1) No order of the Central Government 
appointing any person as the presiding officer of a Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner; 
and no act or proceeding before any Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner on the gr ound 
merely of any defect in the constitution of such Tribunal.  
(2) No settlement arrived at in the course of a conciliation proceeding shall be invalid by reason 
only of the fact that such settlement was arrived at after the expiry of the period referred to in                
sub-section ( 6) of section 5.  
11. Reference of disputes to Tribunals .—(1) Where, on a consideration of the report referred to 
in sub -section ( 4) of section 5, the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may, 
by order in writing, refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the 
dispute, to a Tribunal for adjudication.  
(2) Where in an order referred to in sub -section ( 1) or in a subsequent order, the Central 
Government has spec ified the points of dispute for adjudication, the Tribunal shall confine its 
adjudication to those points and matters incidental thereto.  
12. Procedure and powers of conciliation officers and Tribunals .—(1) Subject to any rules 
that may be made in this be half, a conciliation officer or a Tribunal shall follow such procedure as the 
officer or Tribuna l may think fit.  
(2) A conciliation officer or a Tribunal may, for the purpose of inquiry into any existing or 
apprehended dispute, after giving reasonable notice, enter any premises in the occupati on of any party 
to the dispute.  
(3) Every Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in respect of t he following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;  
(c) issuing commissions for th e examination of witnesses; and  
(d) in respect of such othe r matters as may b e prescribed;  
and every inquiry or investigation by a Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for the purpose s of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(4) A conciliation officer may call for and inspect any document which he has ground for 
considering to be relevant to the dispute or to be necessary for the purpose of verifying the 
implementation of any award or carrying out any other duty imposed on him under this Chapter, and 
for the aforesaid purposes, the conciliation officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of compelli ng the production of 
documents.  
(5) A Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or more persons having special knowledge of 
the matter under consideration as assessor or assessors to advise it in the proceeding before it.  6 
 (6) A Tribunal may grant to any party to any proceeding before it, such interim or other reliefs 
(whether subject to any conditions or not), including stay of any order, issue of any injunction or 
direction in regard to payment of wag es or other amounts payable under the agreement referred to in 
section 3, setting aside any unilateral termination of contract or the dismissal of a worker or 
reinstating a worker, as it deems just and proper in the circumstances of the case:  
Provided tha t the Tribunal shall not grant any such interim relief unless all the parties to the 
proceeding have been served with a notice on the application for such interim relief and have been 
given a reasona ble opportunity of being heard:  
Provided further that the  Tribunal may, having regard to the nature of the interim relief sought 
and the circumstances of the case, pass appropriate orders granting such interim relief as it deems just 
and proper in the circumstances of the case before the notice referred to in th e preceding proviso is 
served on  the parties to the proceeding:  
Provided also that where the Tribunal makes any order under the proviso immediately preceding, 
it shall record the reasons for making the order before complying with the requirements specified  in 
the first proviso.  
(7) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the awarding of damages in, and the costs 
of, and incidental to, any proceeding before a Tribunal shall be in the discretion of that Tribunal and 
the Tribunal shall have full power to determine by and to whom and to what extent and subject to 
what conditions, if any, such damages or costs are to be paid, and to give all necessary directions for 
the purposes aforesaid and such damages or costs may, on an application made to the Central 
Government by the person entitled, be directed to be recovered by that Government in the same 
manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
13. Duties of Tribunals. —Where  a dispute has been referred to a Tribunal for adjudication, it 
shall hold its proceedings expeditiously and shall submit its award to the Central Government 
ordinarily within a period of three months from the date on which such indust rial dispute is refer red to 
it: 
Provided that in computing the period of three months under this section, the period for which the 
proceedings before the Tribunal have been stayed by any injunct ion or order shall be excluded.  
14. Publ ication of awards of Tribunals. —(1) Every a ward of a Tribunal shall, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of its receipt by the Central Government, be published in such manner  as that 
Government thinks fit.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 15, the award shall be final and binding on  all the parties 
to the dispute and shall not be called in question in any Court in any manner whatsoever.  
(3) The award of a Tribunal shall be executed in the same manner as if it were a decree of a Civil 
Court.  
15. Revision. —(1) The High Court may, on t he application of any person aggrieved by the award 
of a Tribunal, call for and examine the record of the Tribunal, to satisfy itself as to the regularity of 
the proceeding before such Tribunal or the correctness, legality or propriety of any award passed 
therein and if, in any case, it appears to the High Court that any such award should be modified, 
annulled or reversed, it ma y pass such orders accordingly:  
Provided that where the presiding officer of the Tribunal is a Judge of a High Court, such 
applicat ion shall be heard and disposed of by not less tha n two Judges of the High Court:  
Provided further that where the award of the Tribunal provides for the payment by the producer of 
any film or, as the case may be, the contractor or other person of any amoun t either by way of 
compensation to the cine -worker or by way of damages, no such application by the producer, 
contractor or other person shall be entertained by the High Court unless the applicant deposits with 
the High Court or with such other authority a s may be prescribed  the amount ordered to be paid:  
Provided also that where, in any particular case, the High Court is of opinion that the deposit of 
any amount ordered to be paid would cause undue hardship to the applicant, the High Court may 7 
 dispense wit h such deposit subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose so as to safeguard 
the interests of the cine -worker concerned.  
(2) Every application to the High Court under sub -section ( 1) shall be preferred within ninety 
days from the date on which  the aw ard was passed by the Tribunal:  
Provided that the High Court may, in its discretion, allow further time not exceeding one month 
for the filing of any such application, if it is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the  application within the time  specified in this sub -section.  
(3) In this section, “High Court ” means the High Court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction, the headquarters of the Tribunal is situated.   
16. Application of Act 19 of 1952 to cine-workers. —The Employees ’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, as in force for the time being, shall apply to every cine -worker 
who has worked in not less than three feature films with one or more producers, as if such                    
cine-worker were an employee within the meaning of that Act.  
17. Penalties .—(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupee s:  
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a fine of  less than ten thousand rupees.  
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1) is again convicted of an 
offence under  the same provision, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty 
thousand rupees but which  may extend to one lakh rupees:  
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a f ine of le ss than twenty thousand rupees.  
18. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such pers on liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence  under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such  director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association  of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
19. Cognizance of offences. —No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act 
except on a complaint made  by, or with the permission in writing of, the Central Government or an 
officer empowered by it in this behalf and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try an off ence punishable under this  Act. 
20. Magistrate ’s power to impose enhanced penalties .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for any 
Metropolitan Magistrate or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence authorised 
by th is Act.  8 
 21. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Chapter .—The provisions of this 
Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law 
for the time be ing in force or in the terms of any agreement or contract of service.  
22. Protection of action taken under this Chapter .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie against any competent authority, conciliation officer, or any other emplo yee of 
the Central Government or the presiding officer of a Tribunal, for anything which is in good faith 
done, or intended to be done, in pursuance of this Act or any  rule or order made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government for any damage 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule or notification or order made or issued thereunder.  
1[22A. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or rules made thereunder (other than 
the powers conferred by this section and section 23) shall, in relation to such matters and subject  to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification , be exercisable also by the State 
Government or by such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government as may be specified 
in the notification.]  
23. Power to make rules .—(1) The  Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the fo llowing matt ers, namely: — 
(a) the form in which an agreement may be entered into by a producer with a cine -worker 
under section 3 and the other conditions of employment ; 
(b) the manner in which proceedings may be held by a conciliation officer under                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(c) the procedure to be followed by a conciliation office r or Tribunal under section 12;  
(d) the matters referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(e) the damages or costs that may be awarded by a Tribunal under sub -section ( 7) of              
section 12;  
(f) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before  each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive s essions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that an y such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS  
24. Application of Act 19 of 1952 .—The provisions of the Employees ’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, as in force for the time being, shall apply to every cinema theatre 
in which five or more workers are employed on any day, as if such cinema theatre were an 
establishment to which the aforesaid Act h ad been applied by a notification of the Central 
Government under the proviso to sub -section ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and as if each such worker were 
an employee within the meaning of that Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-4-1988).  9 
 25. Application of Act 39 of 1972 .—The provisions of the Paym ent of Gratuity Act, 1972, as in 
force for the time being, shall apply to or in relation to, every worker employed in a cinema theatre in 
which five or more workers are employed or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, as they apply to, or in relation to, employees within the meaning of that Act . 
--------------------------The Cine-workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981--------------------------
1 
 THE CINE -WORKERS WELFARE CESS  ACT, 1981  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Levy and collection of cess on feature films.  
4. Payment of duty of excise.  
5. Crediting proceeds of duty to Consolidated Fund of India . 
6. Power of Central Government to exempt . 
7. Penalty for non -payment of duty of excise . 
8. Recovery of amounts due under the Act . 
9. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
10. Power to make rules . 
 
   2 
  THE CINE -WORKERS WELFARE CESS  ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1981  
[11th September , 1981.]  
An Act to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on feature films for the financing of 
activities to promote the welfare of certain cine -workers and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cine -workers Welfare 
Cess Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “cinematograph film ” has the same meaning as in the Cinem atograph Act, 1952 ( 37 of 1952) ; 
(b) “feature film ” means a full length cinematograph film produced wholly or partly in India with 
a format  and a story woven  around a number of characters where the plot is revealed mainly through 
dialogues and not wholly through narration, an imation or cartoon depiction and does not include an 
advertisement film;  
(c)  “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “producer”, in rel ation to a feature film , means,— 
(i)   the producer of such film; or  
(ii) where  the application for a certificate in respect of such film under section 4 of the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952),  is made by any other person, such other person.  
3. Levy and collection of cess on feature films .—2[(1) There shall be levied and collect ed as a cess, 
for the purposes of the Cine -workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981  (33 of 1981) , a duty of excise at such rate, 
not being less than one thousand rupees and not exceeding twenty thousand rupees on every feature film, 
as the Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time.]  
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to any cess or duty leviable on 
cinematograph films under any other law for the time being in force.  
4. Payment of duty of excise .—(1) The duty of excise levied under section 3 on any feature film 
shall be payable to the Central Government by the producer of such film on or before the date on which 
he makes an application for a certificate in respect of suc h film under section 4 of the Cinem atograph Act, 
1952 (37 of 1952):  
                                                           
1. 1st January , 198 4, vide notification No. G.S.R. 888(E), dated 14th December , 198 3, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
    Part I, sec. 3( i). 
2. Subs . by Act 37 of 1993 , s. 2 , for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1993 ). 3 
 Provided that the producer of such film may apply to the Central Government for the refund of the 
duty paid by him in respe ct of such film on the ground, — 
(a)  that an order refusing to grant any certificate in respect of such film has been made under 
section 4, read with section 5A,  of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952); and  
(b) that he does not intend to appeal against, or seek revision of, such order, or, as the case may 
be, that  the said order has  been confirmed on appeal or revision under the said Act:  
Provided further that in case any certificate is granted under the said Act in respect of any film after 
the refund under the preceding proviso of the duty paid in respect thereof , the producer shall be liable to 
repay, within a period of seven days from the date of grant of such certificate, to the Central Government 
the duty so refunded.  
(2) Simple interest shall be payable at the rate  of twelve per cent . per annum, — 
(a)  by the Central Government on the amount of duty in relation to any film refunded by it under 
the first proviso to sub -section ( 1), from the date of the payment of such duty till the date of such 
refund;  
(b)  by the producer of a film on any amount of duty refunde d to him under the first proviso to 
sub-section ( 1) and repaid by him to the Central Government under the second proviso to that sub -
section, from the date of such refund to the date of such repayment.  
5. Crediting proceeds of duty to Consolidated Fund of India .—The proceeds o f the duty of excise 
levied under section 3 shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
6. Power of Central Government to exempt .—Notwithstanding anything con tained in this Act, if 
the Central Government, having regard to the  content of a feature film, its technical quality and other 
factors, is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified in the said notification, exempt such feature film 
from all or any of the provisions of this Act.  
7. Penalty for non -payment of duty of excise .—If any duty of excise payable by the producer of a 
feature film to the Central Government under section 4 [including any duty of excise which has  been 
refunded but which is required to be repaid to that Government under the second proviso to sub -section 
(1) of that section] is not paid to that Government before the date, or, as the case may be, within the 
period specified therein, it shall be deeme d to be in arrears and the authority prescribed in this behalf 
may, after such inquiry as it deems fit, impose on the producer, a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees for 
every month during which the duty of excise is in arrears:  
Provided that before imposin g any such penalty, such producer shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and, i f after such hearing, the said authority is satisfied that the default was for 
any good and sufficient reason, no penalty shall be imposed under this section.  
8. Recovery of amounts due under the Act .—Any amount due under this Act (including the 
penalty, if any, payable under section 7) from any producer of a feature film may be recovered by the 
Central Government in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
9. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any officer or other employee of the Central Government for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  4 
 10. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provi de for— 
(a) the assessment and collection of the duty of excise under section 3;  
(b) the authority which may impose any penalty under section 7;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section sha ll be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session  immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
--------------------------The Cine-workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981--------------------------
1 
 THE CINE -WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1981  
[17th September , 1981.]  
An Act to provide for the financing of activities to promote the welfare of certain                    
cine-workers.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Cine -workers Welfare 
Fund Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “cinematograph film ” has the same meaning as in the Cinematogr aph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952);  
(b) “cine-worker ” means an individual — 
(i) who has been employed, directly or through any contractor or in any other manner, in or in 
connection with the production of not less than five feature films to work as an artiste (including 
actor, musician or dancer) or to do any work, skilled, unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical, 
artistic or otherwise; and  
2[(ii) whose remuneration with respect to such employment in or in connection with the 
production of each of any five fe ature films,  not being less than the monthly remuneration or 
lump sum remuneration stipulated prior to the commencement of the Cine -workers Welfare Fund 
(Amendment) Act, 2001  (56 of 2001) , does not exceed such sum, whether monthly or by way of 
lump sum or instalments, as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette ;] 
(c) “feature film ” means a full length cinematograph film produced wholly or partly in India with 
a format  and a story woven around a number of characters where the plot is revealed mainly through 
dialogues and not wholly through narration, animation or cartoon depiction and does not include an 
advertisement film;  
(d) “Fund ” means the Cine -workers Welfare Fund  formed under section 3;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “producer ”, in relation to a feature film, means the person by whom arrangements necessary 
for the making of such film (including the raising of finance and engagi ng cine -workers for such   
filmmaking) are undertaken.  
                                                           
1. 1st November , 1984, vide notification No. G.S.R. 721(E), dated 1 2th October , 198 4, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
    Part I, sec. 3  (i). 
2. Subs. by Act 56 of 2001, s. 2, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 2-5-2002 ). 2 
 3. Cine -workers Welfare Fund. —There shall be formed a Fund, to be called the Cine -workers 
Welfare Fund, and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(a) such amounts as the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide from out of the proceeds of the duty of excise credited under section 5 of 
the Cine -workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981 (30 of 1981), after deducting therefrom the cost of 
collection as determined by the Central Government under this Act;  
(b) any grants made to the Fund by the Central Government;  
(c) any money received as donations for the purposes of this Act;  
(d) any income from investment of the amounts in the Fund.  
4. Application  of Fund. —(1) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the 
expenditure incurred in connection with measures and facilities which, in the opinion of that Government, 
are necessary or expedient to promote the welfare of cin e-workers; and, in particular, — 
(a) to defray the cost of such welfare measures or facilities for the benefit of cine -workers as may 
be decided by the Central Government;  
(b) to provide assistance in the form of grants or loans to indigent cine -workers;  
(c) to sanction any money in aid  of any scheme for t he welfare of the cine -workers 1[, including 
family welfare, family planning, education and services]  which is approved by the Central 
Government;  
(d) to meet the allowances, if any, of the members of the Advisory Committees and the Cen tral 
Advisory Committee constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively and the salaries and allowances, 
if any, of persons appointed under section 8;  
(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direc t to be defrayed from the 
Fund.  
(2) The C entral Government shall have power to decide whether any particular expenditure is or is 
not debitable to the Fund, and its decision shall be final.  
5. Advisory Committees .—(1) The Central Government may constitute as many Advisory 
Committees as it thinks fit to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the 
administration of this Act as may be referred to it by that Government, including matters relating to the 
application of the Fund.  
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of such num ber of persons as may be appointed to it by 
the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that each Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members representing the 
Government, the cine -workers and the producers.  
(3) The Chairman of each Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of the members of every 
Advisory Committee.  
6. Central Adviso ry Com mittee.—(1) The Central Government may constitute a Central Advisory 
Committee to co -ordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to advise 
the Central Government on any matter arising out of the administration of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10-8-1988). 3 
 (2) The Central Advis ory Committee shall consist of 1[such number of members as may be appointed] 
by the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include at least three members representing the 
Government, the cine -workers and the producers.  
(3) The Chairman of the Central Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names  of the members of the 
Central Advisory Committee.  
7. Power to co -opt, etc .—(1) An Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, at 
any time and for such period as it thinks fit, co -opt any person or persons to the Advisory Committee.  
(2) A person co -opted under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise all the powers and functions of a member 
under this Act but  shall not be entitled to vote.  
(3) An Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, if it considers it necessary or 
expedient so to  do, invite any person to attend its meeting and when such person attends any meeting, he 
shall not be entitled to vote thereat.  
8. Appointment of Welfare Commiss ioners, etc., and their powers. —(1) The Central Government 
may appoint as many Welfare Commiss ioners, Welfare Administrators, Inspectors and such other officers 
and staff as it thinks necessary for the purposes of this Act and the Cine - workers Welfare Cess                         
Act, 1981 (30 of 1981).  
(2) The Central Government may, by general o r special order, direct a Welfare Commissioner to 
appoint such staff as is considered necessary for the purposes of this Act and the Cine -workers We lfare 
Cess Act, 1981  (30 of 1981) . 
(3) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a pub lic servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) Any Welfare Commissioner may, — 
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he may think fit, enter, at any reasonable time, any place which 
he considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act and the Cine -workers 
Welfare Cess Act, 1981 (30 of 1981);  
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his duties; and  
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
9. Annual report of act ivities financed under the Act. —The Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be, after the end of each financial year, cause to be published in the Official Gazette, a report giving 
an account of the activities financed under this Act during t he financial year, together with a statement of 
accounts.  
10. Power to call for information .—The Central Government may require a producer to furnish, for 
the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in such form and within such period as 
may be prescribed.  
11. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1987 , s. 4, for “eleven members appointed”  (w.e.f. 10-8-1988). 4 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which the Fund may be applied for the measures and facilities specified in sub -
section ( 1) of section 4;  
(b) the conditions governing the grant of any loan under clause ( b) of s ub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(c) the composition of the Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory Committee constituted 
under sections 5 and 6 respectively, the manner in which the members thereof shall be chosen, the 
term of office of such members, the allowances, if any, payable to  them, and the manner in which the 
Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory Committee shall conduct their business;  
(d) the recruitment, conditions of service and the duties of all persons appointed under section 8;  
(e) the powers that may be exercised  by a Welfare Commissioner, a Welfare Administrator and 
an Inspector appointed under section 8;  
(f) the furnishing to the Central Government by a producer of such statistical and other 
information as may be required to be furnished under section 10;  
(g) the form in which and the period within which the statistical and other information are to be 
furnished under clause ( f); 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by rules under this Act.  
(3) In making any rule under clause ( f) or clause ( g) of sub - section ( 2), the Central Government may 
direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions a foresaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such mo dification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
--------------------------The Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1981--------------------------
 
1 THE DALMIA DADRI CEMENT LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1981  
_________  
  ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Govern ment of the undertakings of the  Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Central Government or Cement Corporation not to be liable for prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in Cement 
Corporation.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount.  
8. Payment of further amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management,  etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
10. Duty to deliver possession of the undertakings of the Company and documents relating           
thereto.  
11. Duty to furnish particulars.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Employment of cert ain employees to continue.  
13. Provident fund and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Cement Corporation.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
18. Priority of claims.  
19. Examination of claims.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company.  
23. Undisburse d or unclaimed amount to be deposi ted to the general revenue account.  
   
2 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
24. Act to have overriding effect.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Central Government or Cement      
Corporation.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
27. Delegation of Powers.  
28. Penalties.  
29. Offences by companies.  
30. Power to make rules.  
31. Power to remove difficulties.  
32. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE  
   
3 THE DALMIA DADRI CEMENT LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1981  
[15th September , 1981 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquis ition and transfer of the under taking s of the Dalmia Dadri 
Cement Limited with a view to securing the proper management of  such undertakings so as 
to sub serve the interest of the general public by ensuring the continued manufacture, 
production and distribution of cement which is essential to the needs of the economy of the 
country and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Messrs. Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited had been engaged in the manufa cture and 
production of portland cement, an article mentioned in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS an order has been made for the winding up of the Company and proceedings for its 
liquidat ion are pending in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana;  
AND WHEREAS the undertaking s of the Company have not been functioning since March, 1980;  
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire the undertaking s of the said Company to ensure that the 
interests of th e general public are served by the continuance, by the undertakings of   the said Company, of 
the manufacture, production and distribution of portland cement which is essential to the needs of the 
economy of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the T hirty -second Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Dalmia Dadri Cement  Limited 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1981.  
(2)  It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd day of June, 1981 . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a)  “appointed day ” means  the 23rd day of June, 1981;  
(b)  “Cement Corporation ” means the Cement Corporation of India, a company incorporated and 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(c)  “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of  Payments appointed under section 14;  
(d)  “Company ” means the Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited, being a company within the meaning 
of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at Charkhi Dadri (Haryana);  
(e)  “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f)  “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g)  “specified date ”, in relation to any provis ion of  this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of that provision, and different dates m ay 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                    
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the      
Company .—On the appointed day, the undertakings of   the Company, and the right, title and interest of   
the Company in relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of   this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, 
the Central Government.   
4 4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of   the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash 
on hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other rights an d interests in, or arising out of, such 
property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of   
the Company,  whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents 
of wh atever nature relating thereto.  
(2)  All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from  any trust, obligation, mortgag e, charge, lien and all 
other incumbran ces affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court 
restricting the use of such properties in any manner shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3)  Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge,  lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entit led to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in   part, out of the amount specified in section 7 and also out of the 
amount determined under section 8, but no such mortgage, charge, lien  or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property   which   has vested in the Central Government.  
(5)  Any licenc e or other instrument granted to the Company in relation to any undertaking which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3 , at any time before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before that day, shall continue to be in force on and after such day in accordance with its 
tenor in relation to, and for the purposes of, such undertaking and on and from the day of vesting o f such 
undertaking under section 6 in the Cement Corporation, that Corporation shall be deemed to be 
substituted in such licen ce or ot her instrument as if such licenc e or other instrument had been granted to 
the Cement Corporation and that Corporation shal l hold it for the remainder of the period for which that 
Company would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(6)  If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of   wherever nature in relation to 
any property   which has vested in the Centra l Government, under section 3, instituted or preferred by or 
against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate,  be discontinued or be, in any way,   
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced 
by or against the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed under 
section 6 to vest in the Cement Corporation, by or aga inst that Corporation.  
5. Central Government or Cement Corporation not to be liable for prior liabilities .—(1) Every 
liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the 
Company and shall be enforceabl e against it and not against the Central Government, or, where the 
undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest in the Cement Corporation, against that 
Corporation.  
(2)  For the removal of doubt s, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a)  save as  otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other provision of this Act, no 
liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable 
against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the C ompany are directed under 
section 6 to vest in the Cement Corporation, against that Corporation;  
(b)  no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed after the appointed day, in res pect of any matter, claim or 
dispute which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, where 
the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest in the Cement Corporation, 
against that Corporation;   
5 (c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention of a 
provision of any law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, 
or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed under sec tion 6 to vest in the Cement 
Corporation, against that Corporation.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in 
Cement Corporation .—(1) Notwithstanding   anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central 
Governme nt may, subject to such terms and conditions as it may think fit to impose, direct, by 
notification, that the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings, which have vested in the Central Go vernment under section 3, shall, instead 
of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in the Cement Corporation either on the date of the 
notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be 
specified in the notification.  
(2)  Where the right, title and interest of the Company, in relation to its undertakings, vest in the 
Cement Corporation under sub -section ( 1), the Cement Corporation shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to hav e become the owner in relation to such undertakings, and all the rights and 
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the Cemen t Corporation.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under           
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, there shall be paid by the central Government to the Company, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees eighty -four lakhs and eighty -seven thousand.  
8. Payment of further amount .—(1) The amount specified in section 7 shall carry simple interest at 
the rate of four per cent. per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the 
date on which payment of such amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(2) The amount determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be paid by the 
Central Government to the Company  in addition to the amount specifi ed in section 7.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from the 
amount referred to in section 7, and also from th e amount determined under sub -section (1) in accordance 
with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of   the undertakings of the Company, the 
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall, 
where a direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, vest in the 
Cement   Corporation, and thereupon the Cement Corporation shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion 
of all other persons, all such powers and do all such things as the Com pany was authorised to exercise 
and 1[do in relation to its undertakings, including the power to dispose off the assets of the undertakings 
of the Company vested upon it, by the notification of the Government of India, in the Ministry of Industry 
(Departme nt of Industrial Development) number S.O. 502(E), dated the 23rd June, 1981, under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 6, if such disposal of the assets is considered necessary by the Cement 
Corporation due to legal or financial considerations].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2007, s. 2, for “do in relation to its undertakings” (w.e.f. 29 -12-2006).   
6 10. Duty to deliver possession of the undertakings of the Company and documents relating            
thereto .—(1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority or 
anything contained in any law for the time being in forc e, the Official Liquidator of the Company or any 
other person, in whose possession or custody or under whose control the undertakings of the Company or 
any part thereof may be, shall forthwith deliver possession of the undertakings of   the Company   or any 
part thereof to the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are vested under 
section 6 in the Cement Corporation, to that Corporation.  
(2) On the vesting of the management of   the undertakings of the Company in the Cement 
Corporation, the Official Liquidator of   the Company or any other person who has, on the appointed day, 
in his possession or custody or under his control any books, documents or other papers relating to the 
undertakings of the Company immediately before such vesting or  appointment, shall be bound to deliver 
the said books, documents or other papers to the Cement Corporation or to such person as the Central 
Government or the Cement Corporation, as the case may be, may specify in this behalf.  
(3) The Central Government ma y take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for securing possession 
of the undertakings which have vested in it under section 3.  
(4) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Cemen t Corporation and that Corporation may also, if it is considered necessary so to 
do, apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the 
management of the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted or in relation to any other matter 
arising in the course of such management.  
11. Duty to furnish particulars .—(1) The Company shall, within such period as the Central 
Government may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Government or to the Cement Corporation a 
complete inventory of all the properties and assets of the Company as on the appointed day pertaining to 
the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or the Cement Corporation, as the case 
may be.  
(2) So much of the obligation of the Company, under sub-section ( 1) as relate s to the properties and 
assets of  the Company in the possession, custody or control of  the Official Liquidator of the Company 
shall be discharged by him.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Employment of certain employees to continue .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately 
before the appointed day, employed in any of the undertakings  of the Company shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government; and  
(b)  where the undertakings of   the Company are directed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, to 
vest in the Cement Corporation, an employee of that Corporation on and from the date of such 
vesting,  
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government o r the Cement Corporation, as the case 
may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been 
admissible to him if there had been no such   vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment under the Central Government or the Cement Corporation, as the case may be, is duly 
terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central 
Government or the Cement Corporation, as the case may be.  
(2)  Notwiths tanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other per son employed 
in any undertaking  of the Company to the Central Government or the Cement Corporation shall not 
entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the 
time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.   
7 (3)  Where, u nder the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, any person, whose services 
become transferred to the Central Government or the Cement Corporation by reason of   the provisions of 
this Act, is entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any payment s for any leave not availed of or any 
other payment, not being payment by way of gratuity or pension, such person may enforce his claim 
against the   Company, but not against the Central Government or the Cement Corporation.  
13. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established  a provided fund, 
superannuation  fund, welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of the 
undertakings of the Company, the monies relatable to the officers or other employees, whose services 
have become transferred, by or under this Act, to the Central G overnment or the Cement Corporation, 
shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government 
or the Cement Cor poration, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the 
Cement Corporation, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or that Corporation in 
such manner as may be prescrib ed. 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of  disbursing the amounts payable  to the Company under section 7 and section 8, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner o f Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under  this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effec t as if th ey have 
been conferred on that  person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India . 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall , within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissione r, for payment to the 
Company, — 
(a) an amount equal to th e amount specified in section 7,  and 
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company under section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner in 
the Public Account of India , and every amount paid under this Act to t he Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained   by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of the Company 
in relation to which payment has been made to him under this Act.  
(4) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in 
sub-section (2) shall en ure to the benefit of the Company.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Cement Corporation .—(1) The Central 
Government or the Cement Corporation , as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive up to the 
specified date to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to the Com pany, in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or the Cement Corporation and realised after 
the appointed day , notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day.   
8 (2)  The Central Governm ent or the Cement Corporation, as the ease may be, may make a claim to 
the Commissioner with regard to every payment ma de by it after the appointed day for discharging any 
liability of the Company in relation to any period prior to the appointed day; and e very such claim shall 
have priority in accordance with the   priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which 
such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the Cement Corporation.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in t his Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the 
liabilities of the Company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every pers on having a claim against the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty  days from the specified date: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim w ithin the said period of thirty days,   he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
18. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with the following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full,  but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full,   they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly; and  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a s urplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
19. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2)  If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower  category , he shall not be 
required to examine the  claims in respect of such lower category . 
20. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix  a certain date on or before which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim . 
(2) Not less than fourteen days’ notice  of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation  in the major part of the country 
and one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commissioner may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the p eriod specified in the advertisement.  
(3)  Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall , after such inves tigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order in  writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5)  The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out 
of the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making an investigation under th is Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under th e Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a)  the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining  him on oath;   
9 (b)  the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c)  the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d)  the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6)  Any investigation befor e the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall 
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the  Code of Criminal   
Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974 ).  
(7)  A claimant, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner, may prefer an appeal 
against  the decision to the principal  civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
the appeal shall lie to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and such appeal shall be heard and d isposed 
of by not less than two Judges of that High Court.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due, and, on such payment , the liability of the Company in respect of 
any claim relating to the undertakings of the Company shall stand discharged.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company .—(1) If, out of the monies paid to  him in relation to 
the undertakings of the Company,  there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or ot her property, has vested in the Central 
Government or the Cement Corporation under this Act, but such machinery,  equipment or other property 
does not belong to the Company,  it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the Cement Corporation 
to continue  to possess such machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions 
under which it was possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day.  
23. Undisburse d or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the general  revenue account of the Central 
Government;  but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been  made , and the 
order, in any , for payment of the claim, being treated as an order for the refund of  revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained  in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Centra l Government or Cement      
Corporation .—Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its undertakings, which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3, for any service, sale or supply and in force 
immediately before the appointed d ay, shall , on and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from 
the appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, in 
writing, by the Central Government or the Cement Corporation, where such u ndertakings have been 
vested in that Corporation under this Act, and in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or the 
Cement Corporation may make such alteration or modificatio n therein as it  may think fit:   
10 Provide d that the Central Government or the Cement Corporation shall not omit to ratify contract and 
shall not make any alteration  or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interes ts of the Central Government or the Cement Corporation, and  
(b) except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making an y 
alteration or modification therein.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government  or any of ficer or other employee of that  Government or the 
Cement Corporation  or other person authorised by that Government or Corporation  for anything which is 
in good faith done or intended  to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government   or any officer or other 
employee of t hat Government or the Cement Corporation   or other person authorised by that Government 
or Corporation for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or 
intended   to be done.  
27. Delegation of Powers. —(1) The Central G overnment may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section, section 30 
and section 31 , may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the no tification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
28. Penalties .—Any person who ,— 
(a) having in  his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any undertakings of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Gover nment or the Cement 
Corporation;  or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property fo rming part of, the undertakings of 
the Company; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the Cement Corporation or 
to any person or body of persons specified by that Government or the Cement Corporation, as the 
case may be , any document or inventory relating to the undertakings of the Company, which may be  
in his  possession, custody or control;  or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Cement Corporation or to any person or body 
of persons specified by that Government or the Cement Corporation, any assets, books of account, 
registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control  relating to the undertakings of the 
Company ;, or 
(e)  wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the undertakings of the 
Company; or  
(f) prefers  any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
or gro ssly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
29. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who , at the time the offence was committed , was in charge of , and was 
responsible to, the company, for the conduct of  the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable  to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due  diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.   
11 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of  the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation shall be given to the 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other fund under section 13 shall be 
dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed.  
(3)  Every rule made by the Cen tral Government   under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty   days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effe ct only in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be; so, however , that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
31. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remo ve the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two y ears from the appointed 
day. 
32. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Dalmia Dadri Cement Limited (Acquisitio n and Transfer of 
Undertakings)  Ordinance, 1 981 (6 of 1981) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the  said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.    
12 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section s 18, 19  (1), 20 (1) and 22  (1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY  
Category I — 
(a) Wages,  salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the Company.  
(b) Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the employees for provident fund, Employees ’ 
State Insurance contribution, premium relating to Life Insurance Corporation of India or for any 
other purposes.  
(c) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company to the provident fund and under 
Employees ’ State Insurance Act, 1948  (34 of  1948)  and also under any other law for the time 
being in force providing for such contributions.  
Category II — 
Princip al amount of loans advanced by — 
(i) Central Government;  
(ii) State Government;  
(iii) Banks and financial institutions;  
(iv) Any other sources.  
Category III — 
(a) Any credits availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
(b)  Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government or semi -Government institutions 
against supply of goods o r services.  
(c)  Arrears of interest on loans and advances.  
Category IV — 
(a)  Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or o ther dues to Central Government,  State Government and local 
authorities.  
(b) Any other dues.  
 
--------------------------The Export-Import Bank of India Act, 1981--------------------------
1 
 THE EXPORT -IMPORT BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1981  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE  EXPORT -IMPORT  BANK OF INDIA AND INCORPORATION THEREOF  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Export -Import Bank of India.  
4. Authorised capital . 
CHAPTER III  
MANGAEMENT OF THE EXIM BANK 
5. Management.  
6. Constitution of Board.  
7. Committees.  
8. Fees and allowances of directors and members of Committees . 
9. Disqualifications . 
CHAPTER IV  
BUSINESS OF THE EXIM BANK 
10. Business of Exim Bank . 
CHAPTER V  
RESOURCES OF THE EXIM BANK 
11. Loans by Central Government . 
12. Borrowings and acceptance of deposits by Exim Bank . 
13. Loans in foreign currency.  
14. Grants, donations, etc., to Exim Bank.  
CHAPTER VI  
EXPORT  DEVELOPMENT  FUND 
15. Export Development Fund . 
16. Credits to Export Development Fund . 
17. Utilisation of Export Development Fund.  
18. Debits to Export Development Fund.  
19. Accounts and audit of Export Development Fund . 
20. Liquidation of Export Development Fund.  
CHAPTER VI I 
GENERAL FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
21. General Fund . 2 
 SECTIONS  
22. Preparation of accounts and balance -sheet.  
23. Disposal of Profits accruing to General Fund . 
24. Audit . 
25. Saving.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TRANSFER OF PART OF BUSINESS OF  DEVELOPMENT  BANK 
26. Transfer of part of business of Development Bank . 
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Staff of Exim Bank.  
28. Delegation of powers . 
29. Returns . 
30. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy . 
31. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc.  
32. Arrangement with Exim Bank on appointment of directors to prevail . 
33. Indemnity of directors  
34. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
35. Act 18 of 1891 to apply in relation to Exim Bank.  
36. Section 34A and section 36AD only of Act 10 of 1949 to apply to Exim Bank . 
37. [Omitted .] 
38. Liquidation of Exim Bank . 
39. Power to make regulations.  
40. [REPEALED .] 
41. Power to remove difficulty . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  [REPEALED ]. 
 
 
  3 
 THE EXPORT -IMPORT BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1981  
[11th September , 1981 .] 
An Act to establish a corporation to be known as the Export -Import Bank of India for providing 
financial assistance to exporters and importers, and for functioning as the principal financial 
institution for co -ordinating the working of institutions engaged in financing export and 
import of goods and services with a view to promot ing the country ’s international trade and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Republic of India as fo llows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Export -Import Bank of 
India Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Board of Directo rs of the Exim Bank referred to in section  6; 
(b) “Development Bank ” means the Industrial Development Bank of India established under the 
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964  (18 of 1964) ; 
(c) “Exim Bank ” means the Export -Import Bank of India established under section 3;  
(d) “export ” and “import ” mean, respectively, export from or import into India or any other 
country of goods or services, or both;  
(e) “goods ” includes all materials, commodities and articles in a solid, liquid or gaseous state and 
all forms of energy;  
(f) “notification ” means a n otification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(h) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(i) “scheduled bank ” means a bank, for the time being, included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(j) “service s” includes, — 
(I) providing personnel (including skilled or unskilled workmen and persons for rendering 
technical or other services) for the purposes of any work or project (by whatever name called) or 
any activity;  
(II) transferring of technology, including transferring, or securing the transfer of rights,          
know how, expertises or other skill with respect to any patent , invention, model, design, secret 
formula or process or similar property;  
                                                           
1. 1st January 1982, vide notification No. S.O. 919(E), dated 29 th December, 1981  (except section 26) , see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st March 1982, vide notification No. S.O. 91(E), dated 23rd February, 1982  (in respect of section 26), see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii)  4 
 (III) furnishing any information, blueprints, plans, or advice with respect to any matter; and  
(IV) making available any other resources.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE  EXPORT -IMPORT  BANK OF INDIA AND INCORPORATION THEREOF  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Export -Import Bank of India .—(1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be established for the purposes 
of this Act  a corporation to be known as the Export -Import Bank of India.  
(2) The Exim Bank shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose  of 
property and to contract, and may, by that name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Exim Bank shall be at Bombay or at such other place as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify.  
(4) The Exim Bank may establish offices, branches or agencies at such places in or outside India as it 
may consider necessary.  
4. Authorised capital .—1[(1) The authorised capital of the Exim Bank shall be ten thousand crores of 
rupees:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, increase th e said capital up to an amount 
that it may deem necessary from time to time.]  
(2) The issued capital of the Exim Bank shall be wholly subscribed by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF THE EXIM BANK 
5. Management .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and 
business of the Exim Bank shall vest in the Board, which may exercise all powers and do all acts and 
things which may be exercised or done by the Exim Bank.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in the regulations made under this Act — 
(a) the chairman, if he is a whole -time director or if he is holding offices both as the chairman and 
the managing director, or  
(b) the managing director, if the chairman is not a whole -time director, or, if the chairman be ing a 
whole -time director, is absent,  
shall also have powers of general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business 
of the Exim Bank and may also exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or 
done by the  Exim Bank.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in discharging its functions shall act on business 
principles with due regard to public interest.  
(4) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Exim Bank shall be guided by such d irections 
in matters of policy involving public interest as the Central Government may give to it in writing.  
6. Constitution of Board .—(1) The Board of Directors of the Exim Bank shall consist of the 
following , namely: — 
(a) a chairman and a managing director appointed by the Central Government:  
Provided that the same person may be appointed to function both as chairman and as managing 
director;  
2[(aa) two whole -time directors appointed by the Central Government;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 11 of 2012 , s. 2, for s ub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1-2-2012 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  5 
 (b) one direc tor nominated by the Reserve Bank;  
(c) one director nominated by the Development Bank;  
(d) one director nominated by the Export Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited, being a 
Government Company within the meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act, 195 6 (1 of 1956) ; 
(e) not more than twelve directors nominated by the Central Government of whom — 
(i) five directors shall be officials of the Central Government;  
(ii) not more than three directors shall be from the scheduled banks;  
(iii) not  more than four directors shall be persons who have special knowledge of, or 
professional experience in, export or import or financing thereof.  
(2) The chairman and the managing director  1[or the whole -time director] shall hold office for such 
term, not ex ceeding  2[five years], as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and any person so 
appointed shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have the 
right to terminat e the term of office of the chairman or the managing director,  1[or the whole -time 
director] as the case may be, at any time before the expiry of the term specified under sub -section ( 2), by 
giving him notice of not less than three months in writing or thr ee months ’ salary and allowances in lieu 
thereof, and the chairman or the managing director,  1[or the whole -time director] as the case may be, shall 
also have the right to relinquish his office at any  time before the expiry of the term specified under                       
sub-section ( 2) by giving to the Central Government notice of not less than three months in writing or 
three months ’ salary and allowances in lieu thereof.  
(4) The chairman and the managing director  1[or the whole -time director] shall receive such salary 
and allowances as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may, at any time, remove the chairman or the managing director,                    
1[or the whole -time director] as the case may be, from office:  
Provided that no person shall be removed from his office under this sub -section unless he has been 
given an opportunity of showing cause against his removal.  
3[(6)  Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 7), any director nominated under clause (b) 
or clause ( c) or clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) and not being an official of Government or not 
being a whole -time director or official of the Reserve Bank or the Development Bank or the said Export 
Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited or a scheduled bank, shall hold office for such term, not 
exceeding three years, as the Central Government or, as the case may be, the authority nominating him, 
may specify in this behalf  4***, and shall be eligible for re -nomination:  
Provided that no suc h director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years. ] 
(7) Any 5***director nominated under this section shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
authority nominating him.  
(8) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.  
(9) The chairman or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the managing 
director  1[or the whole -time director] o r, in the event of both the chairman and the managing director  1[or 
the whole -time director] being unable to attend a meeting, any other director nominated by the chairman 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 2012, s. 3 (w.e.f . 1-2-2012)                                                                                                                                        
2. Subs. by Act 81 of 1985, s. 16, for “three years” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 39, fo r sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 3 0-12-1988).  
4. The word s “and thereafter until his successor enters upon his office” omitted by Act 45 of 2006, s. 18 (w.e.f. 16-10-2006).  
5. The word “other” o mitted by Act 66 of 1988,  s. 39  (w.e.f 30 -12-1988).    6 
 in this behalf and in the absence of such nomination any director elected by the dir ectors present from 
among themselves, shall preside at the meeting.  
(10) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of 
votes of the directors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the chairman, or in his 
absence, the managing director,  1[or the whole -time director] or in the absence of both the chairman and 
the managing director,  1[or the whole -time director] the person presiding, shall have and exercise a 
second or casting vote.  
(11) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 10), every director of the Board shall have one vote.  
7. Committees .—(1) The Board may constitute such Committees whether consisting wholly of 
directors or wholly of other persons or partly of directors and partly of other persons for such purpose or 
purposes as it may think fit.  
(2) Any Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules or procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meeting as may be 
prescribed.  
8. Fees and allowances of directors and members of Committees .—The directors and the members 
of a Committee shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetings of 
the Board or of any Committee constitut ed in pursuance of this Act and for attending to any other work of 
the Exim Bank:  
Provided that no fees shall be payable to the chairman, if he is appointed as a whole -time chairman, 
or to the managing director  1[or the whole -time director] or to any other  director or member who is an 
official of the Government, the Reserve Bank or the Development Bank.  
9. Disqualifications .—No person shall be a director of the Board co nstituted under this Act, who — 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent, or  
(b) is of unsound mind and has been so declared by a competent court, or  
(c) is, or has been, convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude, or  
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused h is position as a director, as to 
render his continuance on the Board detrimental to the interests of the general public, or  
(e) has been, for any reason, removed from the Board.  
CHAPTER IV  
BUSINESS OF THE EXIM BANK 
10. Business of Exim Bank .—(1) The Exim Bank may grant in or outside India loans and advances 
by itself or in participation with any bank or financial institution whether in or outside India for the 
purposes of export or import and shall also function as the principal financial institution for c o-ordinating 
the working of institutions engaged in financing of the export and import in such manner as it may deem 
appropriate.  
(2) The Exim Bank may also carry on and transact all or any of the followi ng kinds of busi ness, 
namely: — 
(a) granting loans an d advances to a scheduled bank or any other bank or financial institution 
notified in the Official Gazette by the Central Government in this behalf by way of refinance of loans 
and advances granted by it for purpose of export or import;  
(b) underwriting  the issue of stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of any company engaged in 
export or import;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 2012, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-2-2012).  7 
 (c) issuing bid bonds or guarantees in or outside India by itself or in participation with any 
government, bank or financial institution in or outside India;  
(d) accepting, collecting, discounting, re -discounting, purchasing, selling or negotiating in or 
outside India, bills of exchange or promissory notes arising out of tr ansactions relating to export or  
import and granting of loans and advances in or outside Indi a against such bills or promissory notes;  
(e) granting, opening, issuing, confirming or endorsing lette rs of credit and negotiating or  
collecting bills and o ther documents drawn thereunder;  
(f) undertaking any transaction involving a combination of governm ent to government and 
commercial credit for purposes of export or import;  
(g) granting lines of credit to the government of any foreign State or any financial institution or 
person outside India for purposes of export or import;  
(h) granting  loans and advances outside India for any Indian joint venture;  
(i) granting loans and advances to a ny person in India in connection  with his equity contribution 
in any joint venture in any country outside India;  
(j) financing export or import of machinery  and equipment on lease basis;  
(k) subscribing to, or investing in, or purchasing of , stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of any 
development bank or Export -Import Bank of any country outside India;  
(l) buying  or selling of, or entering into such other dealings in, foreign exchange, as may be 
necessary for the discharge of its functions;  
(m) opening of any account in any bank in or outside India or the making of any agency 
arrangement with, or acting as an agen t or correspondent of, any bank or other institution in or outside 
India;  
(n) transferring, for consideration, any instrument relating to loans and advances granted by it;  
(o) issuing participation certificates;  
(p) subscribing to, or investing in, or purc hasing of stocks, shares, bonds or debentures to the 
extent necessary for the enforcement of a lien, pledge or other contractual right;  
(q) undertaking and financing of research, surveys, techno -economic or any other study in 
connection with the promotion and development of international trade;  
(r) providing technical, administrative and financial assistance of any kind for export or import;  
(s) planning, promoting, developing and financing export -oriented concerns;  
(t) forming or conducting subsidiaries fo r carrying out its functions;  
(u) acting as agent of the Central Government, any State Government, the Reserve Bank, the 
Development Bank or any other person as the Central Government may authorise;  
(v) collecting, compiling and disseminating market and cr edit information in respect of 
international trade;  
(w) doing any other kind of business which the Central Government may authorise;  
(x) generally  doing such other acts and things as may be incidental to, or consequential upon, the 
exercise of its powers or the discharge of its duties under this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force, including sale or transfer of any of its assets.  
(3) Th e Exim Bank may receive in consideration of any of the services mentioned in                       
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) such commission, brok erage, interest, remuneration or  fees as may be agreed 
upon.  
(4) The Exim Bank shall not grant any loan or adva nce or other financial accommodation on the 
security of its own bonds or debentures.  8 
 CHAPTER V  
RESOURCES OF THE EXIM BANK 
11. Loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf , advance to the Exim Bank — 
(a) a loan of twenty crores of rupees at a rate of interest  of five and a quarter per cent.  per annum 
repayabl e in fifteen equal annual insta lments, commencing on the expiry of a period of fifteen years 
from the date of receipt of the loan; and  
(b) such further sums of money by way of loan on such terms and conditions as may be agreed 
upon:  
Provided that the Central Government may , on a request being made to it by the Exim Bank , 
increase the number of instal ments or alter the amo unt of any instal ment or vary the date on which 
any i nstal ment is payable under clause ( a). 
12. Borrowings and acceptance of deposits by Exim Bank .—(1) The Exim Bank may, for the 
purposes of carrying out  its functions under this Act, — 
(a) issue  and sell bonds and debentures with or without the guarantee of the Central Government;  
(b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank — 
(i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding ninety days from the 
date on which the money is so borro wed against the security of stocks, funds and securities (other 
than immovable property ) in which a trustee is authoris ed to invest trust money by any law for 
the time being in force in India;  
(ii) against bills of exchange or promissory notes arising out of bona fide commercial or trade 
transactions and bearing two or more good signatures and maturing within five years from the 
date of the borrowing;  
(iii) out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund established under 
section 46C of th e Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) for any of the purposes specified 
in that section;  
(c) borrow money fr om such other authority, organis ation or institution in India as may generally 
or specially be approved by the Central Government;  
(d) accept deposits repayable after the expiry of a period which shall not be less than twelve 
months from the date of the making of the deposit on such terms as may generally or specially be 
approved by the Reserve Bank.  
(2) The Central Government may, on a r equest being made to it by the Exim Bank, guarantee the 
bonds and debentures issued by that Bank as to the repayment of principal and the payment of interest at 
such rate as may be fixed by that Government.  
13. Loans in foreign currency .—Notwithstanding an ything contained in the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1973  (46 of 1973)  or in any other law for the time being in force relating to foreign 
exchange, the Exim Bank may, for the purpose of granting loans and advances under this Act, borrow, 
with the previous consent of the Central Government, foreign currency from any foreign State or from 
any bank or financial institution in any foreign country or otherwise.  
14. Grants, donations, etc., to Exim Bank .—The Exim Bank may receive gifts, grants, donations or 
benefactions from Government or any other source in or outside India.  
CHAPTER VI  
EXPORT  DEVELOPMENT  FUND 
15. Export Development Fund .—With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint, the Exim Bank shall establish a special fund to be called the Export Development 
Fund.  9 
 16. Credits to Export  Development Fund .—To the Export Dev elopment Fund shall be credited — 
(a) all amounts received for the purposes of that Fund by way of loans, gifts, grants, donations or 
benefactions from Government or any other source in or outside India;  
(b) repayments or  recoveries in respect of loans, advances or other facilities granted from the 
Fund;  
(c) income or profits from investments made from the Fund; and  
(d) income accruing or arising to the Fund by way of interest or otherwise, on account of the 
application of  the Fund in accordance with the provisions of section 17.  
17. Utilisation of Export Development Fund .—(1) Where the Exim Bank considers it necessary or 
desirable so to do, it may, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), disburse or spend from the 
Export Development Fund any amount on account or in consequence of the grant of any loan or advance, 
or on account or in consequence of entering into any arrangement under sub -section ( 1) or clause ( b) or 
clause ( c) or clause (d) or clause ( q) or clause ( r) or clause ( s) or cl ause ( w) or clause ( x) of                          
sub-section  (2) of section 10:  
Provided that before granting any such loan or advance or entering into any such arrangement, the 
Exim Bank shall obtain the prior approval of the Central Government.  
(2) Before seeking the approval of the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), the Exim Bank 
shall satisfy itself that banking or other financial institutions or other agencies are not likely to grant such 
loan or advance, or to enter into any such arrangement in the ordinary course of business.  
(3) The Central Government shall, before giving its approval, satisfy itself that such loan, advance or 
arrangement is necessary as a matter of priority in the interes ts of the international trade of the country.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing contained in this section shall be 
deemed to preclude the Exim Bank from granting any loan or advance or from entering in to any 
arrangement unde r sub -section (1) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) or clause ( q) or clause ( r) or 
clause  (s) or clause ( w) or clause ( x) of sub -section ( 2) of section 10 without the approval of the Central 
Government, if no amount in respect thereof is to be disb ursed or spent from the Export Development 
Fund.  
18. Debits to Export Development Fund .—(1) To the Export Deve lopment Fund shall be debited — 
(a) such amounts as may from time to time be disbursed or spent under sub -section ( 1) of            
section 17;  
(b) such amounts as may be required for discharging the liabilities in respect of loans received for 
the purposes of that Fund;  
(c) any loss arising on account of investment made out of that Fund; and  
(d) such expenditure arising out of, or in connection wit h, the administration and application of 
the Fund as may be determined by the Board.  
(2) No amount shall be debited to the Export Development Fund except as provided for in                     
sub-section ( 1). 
19. Accounts and audit of Export Development F und.—(1) The balance -sheet and accounts of the 
Export Development Fund shall be prepared in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Export Development Fund to be closed and 
balanced as on the 31st day of December each year . 
(3) The Export Development Fund shall be audited by one or more auditors appointed by the Central 
Government under section 24 who shall make a separate report thereon.  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 6) of section 24 shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to the audit of the Export Development Fund.  10 
 (5) The Exim Bank shall furnish to the Central Government, within four months from the date on 
which the accounts of the Export Development Fund are closed a nd balanced, a copy of the balance -sheet 
and accounts together with a copy of the auditors ’ report and a report on the operation of the Fund during 
the relevant year and the Central Government shall, as soon as may be after they are received by it, cause 
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.  
20. Liquidation of Export Development F und.—The Export Development Fund shall not be closed 
or wound up save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as that Government may 
direct.  
CHAPTER VI I 
GENERAL FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
21. General Fund .—All receipts of the Exim Bank other than those which are to be credited to the 
Export Development Fund under this Act shall be credited to a Fund to be called the General Fund and all 
payments by the Exim Bank, other than those which are to be debited to the Export Development Fund, 
shall be  made out of the General Fund.  
22. Preparation of accounts and balance -sheet .—(1) The balance -sheet and accounts of the Exim 
Bank shall be prepared in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Exim B ank to be closed and balanced as on 
the 31st day of December  each year.  
23. Disposal of Profits accruing to General Fund .—(1) The Exim Bank may establish a Reserve 
Fund to which may be transferred such sums as that Bank may deem fit out of the annual profits accruing 
to the General Fund.  
(2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation of assets and for all other matters 
for which provision is necessary or expedient or which is usually provided for by bankers and for the 
Reserve Fund  referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Exim Bank shall transfer the balance of the net profits to 
the Central Government.  
24. Audit .—(1) The accounts of the Exim Bank shall be audited by auditors duly qualified to act as 
auditors under sub -section ( 1) of section 266 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , who shall be 
appointed by the Central Government for such term and on such remuneration as the Central Government 
may fix.  
(2) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance -sheet of the  Exim Bank and it 
shall be their duty to examine it together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and they shall 
have a list delivered to them of all books kept by the Exim Bank and shall at all reasonable times have 
access to the books accounts , vouchers and other documents of the Exim Bank.  
(3) The auditors may, in relation to such accounts, examine any director or any officer or other 
employee of the Exim Bank and shall be entitled to require from the Board or officer or other employee 
of the Exim Bank such information and explanation as they may think necessary for the performance of 
their duties.  
(4) The auditors shall make a report to the Exim Bank upon the annual balance -sheet and accounts 
examined by them and in every such report they shal l state whether in their opinion the balance -sheet is a 
full and fair balance -sheet containing all necessary particulars and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a 
true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Exim Bank and in case they had called for an y explanation 
or information from the Board or any officer or other employee of the Exim Bank whether it has been 
given and whether it is satisfactory.  
(5) The Exim Bank shall furnish to the Central Government within four months from the date on 
which its accounts are closed and balanced, a copy of its balance -sheet and accounts together with a copy 
of the auditors ’ report  and a report  of the working of the Exim Bank during the relevant year, and the 
Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after they a re received by it, cause the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  11 
 (6) Without prejudice to anything contained in the preceding sub -sections, the Central Government 
may, at any time, appoint the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India to examin e and report upon the 
accounts of the Exim Bank and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such examination and 
report shall be payable by the Exim Bank to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
25. Saving .—Save as otherwise provided in sub-section ( 4) of section 19, nothing contained in this 
Chapter shall apply to the Export Development Fund.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TRANSFER OF PART OF BUSINESS OF DEVELOPMENT  BANK 
26. Transfer of part of business of Development Bank .—(1) On such date as that Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint, all business, property, assets and liabilities, rights, interests, 
privileges and obligations of whatever nature of the Development Bank in so far as they relate to the 
export financing functions of that Ba nk shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Exim Bank.  
(2) For the transfer to, and vesting  in, the Exim Bank under sub -section (1), the Exim Bank shall pay 
to the Development Bank such amount in such mann er and in such number of instal ments  as may be 
determined by the Central Government.  
(3) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers -of-attorney, grants of legal representation and 
other instruments of whatever nature of the Development Bank which relate to the export financing 
functions  of that Bank and which are subsisting or having effect immediately before the date referred to in                   
sub-section ( 1) and to which the said Bank is a party or which ar e in favour of that Bank shall, — 
(a) if they relate exclusively to the exp ort financing function s of that Bank, be of full force and 
effect against or in favour  of the Exim Bank, as the case may be, and may be enforced and acted upon 
as fully and effectively as if instead of the Development Bank the Exim Bank had been a party thereto 
or as if they had been issued in favour of the Exim Bank; and  
(b) if they relate  not only t o the export financing function  of the Development Bank but also to 
any of the other functions of that Bank, be of full force and effect against or in favour of both the 
Development Bank and the Exim Bank and may be enforced or acted upon as ful ly and effectively as 
if in addition to the Development Bank the Exim Bank had also been a party thereto or as if they had 
been issued in favour of the Development Bank and also the Exim Bank.  
(4) If, on the date referred to in sub -section ( 1), any suit, a ppeal or other legal proceeding of whatever 
nature relating to the export financing functions of the Development Bank is pending, the same shall not 
abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the Exim Bank 
of the business of the Development Bank or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, a ppeal o r other 
proceeding  may, — 
(a) where it relates exclusively to the export financing functions of the Development Bank, be 
continued, prosecuted and enforced by  or against the Exim Bank; and  
(b) where it relates not only to the export financing functions of the Development Bank but also to 
any of the other functions of that Bank , be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the 
Development Bank and the Exi m Bank or, if the Central Government by special order in writing so 
directs, by or against such one of the said two Banks, as may be specified in such order.  
(5) If any question arises as to whether any contract , deed, bond, agreement, powers -of-attorney, 
grant of legal representation or other instrument referred to in sub -section ( 3) or any suit, appeal or other 
legal proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 4) relates or relates exclusively to the export financing 
functions of the Development Bank, it shall  be referred to the Central Government for decision and the 
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
(6) The provisions of thi s section shall have effect not withstanding anything contained in the 
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964) or any other law or any instrument having 
force by virtue of the said Act or other law.  
 12 
 CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Staff of Exim Bank. —(1) The Exim Bank may appoint such number of officers and other 
employees as it considers necessary or desirable for the efficient performance of its functions and 
determine the terms and conditions of their appointment and service.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions o f sub -section ( 1), it shall be la wful for the Exim Bank to 
utilis e, and for the Development Bank to make available the services of, such staff of the Development 
Bank having experience relating to export financing functions on such terms and conditions as may be 
agreed upon between the Exim Bank and the Development Bank.  
(3) The duties and conduct, terms and conditions of service and the establishment and maintenance of 
a Provident Fund or any other Fund for the benefit of the officers and other employees o f the Exim Bank 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
28. Delegation of powers .—The Board may, be general or special or der, delegate to any director or  
any officer or other employee of the Exim Bank, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may  
be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary.  
29. Returns .—The Exim Bank shall furnish , from time to time, to the Central Government such 
returns as the Central Government may require.  
30. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy .—(1) The Exim Bank shall not, except as otherwise 
required by this Act or any other law, divulge any information relating to , or to the affairs , of, its 
constituents except in circumstances in which it is, in accordance with the law or practice and usage 
customary among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the Exim Bank to divulge such information.  
(2) The Exim Bank may, for the purpose of efficient discharge of its functions under this Act, collect 
from, or furnish to, the Centr al Government, the Development Bank or any scheduled bank or such other 
financial institution, as may be notified in the Official Gazette by the Central Government in this behalf, 
credit information or other information as it may consider useful for the pu rpose, in such manner and at 
such times, as it may think fit.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, the expression “credit information ” shall have the 
same meaning as in clause ( c) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) , subject 
to the modification that “banking company ” referred to therein shall mean the Development Bank, any 
scheduled bank or other financial institution as aforesaid.  
(3) Every director, member of a committee, auditor or officer or other emp loyee of the Exim Bank or 
of the Developmen t Bank whose services are utilis ed by the Exim Bank under the provisions of this Act, 
shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the 
First Schedule.  
1[(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005. ] 
31. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc .—(1) No act or proceeding of the Board or 
of any committee of the Exim Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board or the committee, as the case may be.  
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director shall  be deemed to be invalid merely 
on the ground that he was disqualified to be a director or that there was any other defect in his 
appointment.  
32. Arrangement with Exim Bank on appointment of directors to prevail .—(1) Where any 
arrangement entered into by the Exim Bank with a company provides for the appointment by the Exim 
Bank of one or more directors of such company, such provisions and any appointment of directors made 
in pursuance thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the con trary contained in the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2005, s. 34  and the Schedule  (w.e.f.  14-12-2006) . 13 
 Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or in any other law for the time being in force or in the memorandum, 
articles of association or any other instrument relating to the company , and any provision reg arding share 
qualification, age -limit, number of directorships, removal from office of directors and such like conditions 
contained in any such law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the Exim 
Bank in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid.  
(2) Any di rector appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Exim Bank and may be removed or substituted by any 
person by order in writing of the Exim Bank;  
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director  or for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in relation 
thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of directors li able to such retirement.  
33. Indemnity of directors .—(1) Every director shall be indemnified by the Exim Bank against all 
losses and expenses incurred by him, in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties, except s uch as are 
caused by his own wi lful act or default.  
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or for any officer or other employees of 
the Exim Bank or for any loss or expenses resulting to the Exim Bank from the insufficiency or 
deficiency of the value of, or title to,  any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Exim 
Bank or the insolvency or wrongful act of any debtor or any person under obligation to the Exim Bank or 
anything done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relatio n thereto.  
34. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding  shall lie against the 
Exim Bank or any director or any officer or other employee of the Exim B ank or any other person 
authoris ed by the Exim Bank to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss or damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any other law or provision having the force of law . 
35. Act 18 of 1891 to apply in relation to Exim Bank .—The Bankers’  Books Evidence Act, 1891 
shall apply in relation to the Exim Bank as if it were a Bank as defined in section 2 of that Act.  
36. Section 34A and section 36AD only of Act 10 of 1949 to appl y to Exim Bank .—Nothing 
contained in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, except section 34A and section 36AD thereof, shall apply 
to the Exim Bank.  
37. [Act 43 of 1961  and Act 7 of 1964  not to apply to Exim Bank .] Omitted by Finance Act , 1998               
(21 of 1998) s. 117 ( w.e.f . 1-4-1999).  
38. Liquidation of Exim Bank .—No provision of any law relating to the winding up of companies 
or corporations shall apply to the Exim Bank and the Exim Bank shall not be placed in liquidation save  by 
an order of the Central Government and in such manner as it may direct.  
39. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide for all matters for which 
provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, s uch regulations may 
provide for — 
(a) the times and places of th e meetings of the Board or of any committee constituted under this 
Act and the procedure to be followed at such meetings including the quorum necessary for the 
transaction of business;  
(b) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the directors and the m embers of a committee;  
  14 
 (c) the form and manner in which the balance -sheets and the account of the Export Development 
Fund and the Exim Bank shall be prepared;  
(d) the duties and conduct , and the terms and conditions of service of the officers and other 
employees of the Exim Bank;  
(e) the establishment a nd maintenance of provident fund  or any other fund for the benefit of the 
officers and other employees of the Exim Bank; and  
(f) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every regulation made by the Board under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that an y such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that regulation.  
40. [Amendment of certain enactments .]—Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1988 (19 of 1988) ,              
s. 2, and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  
41. Power to remove difficulty .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, do anything, not inconsistent with such provisions, for the 
purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of three years from the date on which 
this Act receives the assent of the President.  
  15 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 30( 3)] 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I………….., do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability 
execute and perform the duties required of me as director, member of …………. committee, auditor, 
officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the Export -Import Bank of India and  which properly 
relate to the officer or position held by me in or in relation to the said Exim Bank.  
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affai rs of the Export -Import Bank of India or to the affairs 
of any person having any dealing with the said Exim Bank, nor will I allow any such person to inspect or 
have access to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession of the said Exim Bank a nd 
relating to the business of the said Exim Bank or the business of any person having any dealing with the 
said Exim Bank.  
(Signature ) 
Signed before me.  
 
 
 
 
[THE SECOND SCHEDULE ]. Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1988  (19 of 1988) , s. and the 
First  Schedule (w.e.f. 31-3-1988 ). 
--------------------------The High Court at Bombay (Extension of Jurisdiction to Goa, Daman and Diu) Act, 1981--------------------------
1 THE HIGH COURT AT BOMBAY (EXTENSION OF JURISDICTION  TO GOA, DAMAN 
AND DIU) ACT, 1981  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Extension of jurisdiction of Bombay High Court to Goa, Daman and Diu . 
4. Jurisdiction of Bombay High Court.  
5. Chapter VI of Part VI of the Constitution to apply to the Bombay High Court exercising 
jurisdiction over the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu.  
6. Special provisions relating to advocates . 
7. Transfer of pending proceedings  from the Court of the Judicial Commissioner to the Bombay 
High Court . 
8. Right to appear or act in proceedings transferred to the Bombay High Court . 
9. Establishment of a permanent bench of Bombay High Court at Panaji . 
10. Allocation of expenditure of the Bombay High Court . 
11. Rule of construction . 
12. [Repealed. ] 
13. Power to remove difficulties.  
14. Power to adapt laws . 
 
  2 THE HIGH COURT AT BOMBAY (EXTENSION OF JURISDICTION  TO GOA, DAMAN 
AND DIU) ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 26 OF 1981  
[9th September , 1981 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of the jurisdiction of the High Court at Bombay to the Union 
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, for the establishment of a permanent bench of that High 
Court at Panaji and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the High Court at Bombay 
(Extension of Jurisdiction to Goa, Daman and Diu) Act, 1981.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “Court  of the Judicial Commissioner”  means the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Goa, 
Daman and Diu.  
3. Extension of jurisdiction of Bombay High Court to Goa, Daman and Diu .—(1) On and from 
the appointed day, the jurisdiction of the High Court at Bombay sha ll extend to the Union territory of 
Goa, Daman and Diu.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall cease to function 
and is hereby abolished:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prejudice or affect the conti nued operation of any 
notice served, injunction issued, direction given or proceedings taken before the appointed day by the 
Court of the Judicial Commissioner, abolished by this sub -section, under the powers then conferred upon 
that Court.  
4. Jurisdiction of Bombay High Court .—On and from the appointed day, the High Court at 
Bombay shall have, in respect of the territories included in the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, all 
such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the law in fo rce immediately before the appointed day, 
are exercisable in respect of the said territories by the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
5. Chapter VI of Part VI of the Constitution to apply to the Bombay High Court exercising 
jurisdiction over the Union te rritory of Goa, Daman and Diu .—The provisions of Chapter VI of Part 
VI of the Constitution shall apply to the High Court at Bombay in relation to the exercise of its 
jurisdiction to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, subject to the following except ions and 
modifications,  namely:— 
(a) the references in the said Chapter to “State ” except where it occurs in the expression 
“Governor of the State ” shall be construed as references to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and 
Diu; 
(b) in clause (1) of article 233 and in article 234, the references to the Governor of the State, and 
in article 237, the reference to the Governor, shall be construed as references to the Administrator of 
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu;  
(c) the provisions of article 233A shall not apply;  
                                                           
1. 30th October , 1982, vide notification No. G.S.R. 592(E), dated 8th October , 1982, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
    Part II, sec. 3( i). 
 3 (d) in article 234, the reference to the State Public Service Commission shall be construed as a 
reference to the Union Public Service Commission.  
6. Special provisions relating to advocates .—Subject to any rule made or direction given by the 
High Court at Bombay in this behalf, any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an 
advocate entitled to practi se in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall be entitled to practi se as an 
advocate in the High Court at Bombay.  
7. Transf er of pending proceedings from the Court of the Judicial Commissioner to the Bombay 
High Court .—(1) All proceedings pending in the Court of the Judicial Commis sioner immediately before 
the appointed day shall stand transferred to the High Court at Bombay.  
(2) Every proceeding transferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be disposed of by the High Court at 
Bombay as if such proceeding were entertained by that High Court.  
(3) Any order made before the appointed day by the Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall,  for all 
purposes, have effect not only as an order of that Court but also as an order of the High Court at Bombay.  
8. Right to appear or act in proceedings transferred to the Bombay High Court .—Any person 
who, immediately before the appointed day, is an a dvocate entitled to practi se in the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner and was authorised to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred from that Court 
under section 7, shall have the right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court at  Bombay 
in relation to those proceedings.  
9. Establishment of a permanent bench of Bombay High Court at Panaji .—On and from the 
appointed day, there shall be established a permanent bench of the High Court at Bombay at Panaji and 
such Judges of the High Co urt at Bombay, being not less than two in number, as the Chief Justice of that 
High Court may, from time to time, nominate, shall sit at Panaji in order to exercise the jurisdiction and 
power for the time being vested in that High Court in respect of cases  arising in the Union territory of 
Goa, Daman and Diu : 
Provided that the Chief Justice of that High Court may, in his discretion order that any case or class of 
cases arising in such territory shall be heard at Bombay.  
10. Allocation of expenditure of the Bombay High Court .—The expenditure in respect of the High 
Court at Bombay, including the expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the Judges, 
officers and servants of the High Court shall, as from the appointed day, be allocated between the  State of 
Maharashtra and the Union in such proportion as the President may, by order, determine.  
11. Rule of construction .—References in any law in force in the Union territory of Goa, Daman and 
Diu to the Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall, on and from the appointed day, be construed in 
relation to that territory as references to the High Court at Bombay.  
12. [Amendment of Goa, Daman and Diu Act 16 of 1965 ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending 
Act, 1988  (19 of 1988 ) s.2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  31-3-1988 ). 
13. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, make such provision, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act , as appears to it to be necessary or expedient fo r the removal 
of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall ther eafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effec t, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  4 14. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in rela tion to the 
Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, the Central Government may, before the expiration of two years 
from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of 
repeal or amendment, as may be necessa ry or expedient to give effect to the provisions of this Act and 
thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until 
altered, repealed or amended by a competent legislature or other competent authority.  
--------------------------The National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981--------------------------
1 THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL  
DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1981 
____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
____________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS 
1.Short title, extent and commencement .
2.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND  
RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND CAPITAL THEREOF
3.Establishment and incorporation of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development. 
4.Capital. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL  BANK
5.Management. 
6.Board of Directors. 
7.Term of office of Chairman and other directors, retirement and payment of fees. 
8.Term of office of Managing Director and whole-time directors, conditions of service, etc. 
9. Disqualifications. 
10.Vacation and resignation of office by directors .
11.Casual vacancy in the office of Managing Director. 
12.Meetings of Board. 
13.Committees of National Bank. 
14.Advisory Council. 
15.Member of Board or Committee thereof not to participate in meetings in certain cases. 
CHAPTER IV 
TRANSFER OF BUSINESS TO THE NATIONAL  BANK
16.Transfer of assets and liabilities of Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation. 
17.Dissolution of the Corporation and repeal of Act 10 of 1963. 
18.Transfer of business from Reserve Bank. 
CHAPTER V 
BORROWINGS BY THE  NATIONAL BANK
19.Borrowings by the National Bank. 
20.Borrowings in foreign currency. 2 CHAPTER VI 
CREDIT FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL  BANK
SECTIONS
21.Production and marketing credit 
22.Conversion loan for production credit.
23.Rescheduling of loans to artisans, small-scale industries, etc. 
24.Investment credit—medium term. 
25.Other investment credit. 
26.Purchase and sale of shares. 
27.Loans to State Governments for share capital contribution. 
27A. Loans to State Government, undertakings, etc.
28.Security for credit. 
29.Amounts and securities to be held in trust. 
30.Direct loans. 
30A. Bills rediscounting.
31.Commission. 
32.Issue of guarantees. 
33.Power to impose conditions for accommodation. 
34.Power to call for repayment before agreed period.
35.National Bank to have access to records. 
36.Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned. 
37.National Bank not to grant loans or advances against its own bonds or debentures. 
37A. Prohibited business. 
CHAPTER VII 
OTHER FUNCTIONS OF THE  NATIONAL  BANK
38.Other functions of National Bank. 
38A. Promotion of subsidiaries.
38B. Securitisation of debt.
38C. Exemption from compulsory registration.
39.Incidental powers. 
40.Deposits and investments.
41.Credit information. 
CHAPTER VIII 
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
42.National Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund. 
43.National Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund. 
44.Research and Development Fund. 
45.Reserve Fund and other Funds. 
46.Preparation of balance-sheet, etc., of National Bank. 
47.Disposal of surplus. 
48.Audit. 
49.Returns. 3 CHAPTER IX 
STAFF 
SECTIONS
50.Staff of National Bank. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
51.Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy. 
52.Defects in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc. 
52A. Agreement with National Bank on appointment of directors to prevail.
53.Protection of action taken under the Act. 
54.Indemnity of directors. 
55.[Omitted ]. 
56.Penalties. 
57.Offences by companies. 
58.Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891, to apply in relation to National Bank. 
59.Liquidation of National Bank. 
60.Power of Board to make regulations. 
61.[Repealed ]. 
62.Power to remove difficulty. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE [ Repealed ].4 THE NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1981 
ACT NO. 61 OF 1981
[30th December , 1981.]  
1[An Act to establish a development bank to be known as the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development for providing and regulating credit and other facilities for the promotion and 
development of agriculture, 2[micro-enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises, cottage 
and village industries, handlooms] handicrafts and other rural crafts and other allied economic 
activities in rural areas with a view to promoting integrated rural development and securing prosperity 
of rural areas and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.]
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development Act, 1981. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date3as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and 
any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of that provision. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “agriculture” includes horticulture, animal husbandry, forestry, dairy and poultry farming, 
pisciculture, and other allied activities, whether or not undertaken jointly with agriculture and the 
expression “agricultural operations” shall be construed accordingly. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “pisciculture” includes the development of 
fisheries, both inland and marine, catching of fish and all activities connected therewith or incidental 
thereto; 
(b) “Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation” means the Corporation established 
under section 3 of the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation Act, 1963 (10 of 1963), 
and renamed under section 3A of that Act as the Agricultural Refinance and Development 
Corporation; 
(c) “Board” means the Board of Directors of the National Bank; 
(d) “central co-operative bank” means the principal co-operative society in a district in a State, 
the primary object of which is the financing of other co-operative societies in that district: 
Provided that in addition to such principal society in a district, or where there is no such principal 
society in a district, the State Government may declare any one or more co-operative societies 
carrying on the business of financing other co-operative societies in that district to be also or to be a 
central co-operative bank or central co-operative banks within the meaning of this definition; 
(e) “Chairman” means the Chairman 4*** appointed under section 6; 
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 2, for  “small-scale industries, cottage and village industries” (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
3. 1st May, 1982, vide notification No. S.O. 278(E), dated 21st April, 1982 (except sections 3, 16 and 18), see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
12th July, 1982, vide notification No. S.O. 484(E), dated 6th July, 1982 (in respect sections 3, 16 and 18), see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
4. The words “of the Board” omitted by Act 55 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 5 (f) “co-operative society” means a society registered, or deemed to be registered, under the  
Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912) or any other law relating to co-operative societies for 
the time being in force in any State; 
(g) “crops” includes products of agricultural operations; 
(h) “director” means a director appointed under section 6; 
1* * * * * 
 (j) “Managing Director” means the Managing Director appointed under section 6; 
(k) “marketing of crops” includes the processing of crops prior to marketing by any agricultural 
producers or any organisation of such producers; 
2[(ka) “micro enterprise”, “small enterprise” and “medium enterprise”, shall have the same 
meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006)]; 
(l) “National Bank” means the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development established 
under section 3; 
(m) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(n) “primary rural credit society” means a co-operative society, by whatever name called,— 
(1) which has as its object or business the provision of financial accommodation to its 
members for agriculture or agricultural operations or for the marketing of crops, or for rural 
development; and 
(2) the bye-laws of which do not permit admission of any other co-operative society as 
member: 
Provided that this sub-clause shall not apply to the admission, as a member, of a co-operative 
society, which is a State co-operative bank or a central co-operative bank by reason of such bank 
subscribing to the share capital of the co-operative society out of funds provided by the State 
Government for the purpose; 
(o) “prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act; 
(p) “regional rural bank” means a regional rural bank established under section 3 of the Regional 
Rural Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976); 
(q) “rural development” means development of rural areas through any activities conducive to 
such development. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause,— 
(a) activities conducive to development of rural areas include activities relating to production 
of goods or provision of services in rural areas and activities for the promotion of cottage and 
village industries, 3[micro-enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises, handicrafts, 
handlooms] and other rural crafts; 
(b) “rural area” means the area comprised in any village and includes the area comprised in 
any town, the population of which does not exceed ten thousand or such other figure as the 
Reserve Bank may specify from time to time; 
(r) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); 
1.  Clause ( i) omitted by Act 7 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
2.  Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “industry in the tiny and decentralised sector and small-scale industry and handicrafts”                      
(w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 6 (s) “scheduled bank” means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
1* * * * * 
 (u) “State co-operative bank” means the principal co- operative society in a State, the primary 
object of which is the financing of other co-operative societies in the State: 
Provided that in addition to such principal society in a State, or where there is no such principal 
society in a State, the State Government may declare any one or more co-operative societies carrying 
on business in that State to be also or to be a State co-operative bank or State co-operative banks 
within the meaning of this definition; 
(v) “State land development bank” means the co-operative society which is the principal land 
development bank (by whatever name called) in a State and which has as its primary object the 
providing of long-term finance for agricultural development: 
Provided that, in addition to such principal land development bank in a State, or where there is no 
such bank in a State, the State Government may declare any co-operative society carrying on business 
in that State and authorised by the bye-laws of such co-operative society to provide long-term finance 
for agricultural development to be also or to be a State land development bank within the meaning of 
this definition; 
(w) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act; 
(x) words and expressions used herein and not defined either in this Act or in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), but defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL  BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL
DEVELOPMENT AND CAPITAL THEREOF 
3. Establishment and incorporation of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a bank to be known as the 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development. 
(2) The Bank shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
and to contract, and may by that name sue and be sued. 
(3) The head office of the National Bank shall be at 2[Mumbai] or at such other place as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify. 
(4) The National Bank may establish offices, branches or agencies at any place in India, and with the 
previous approval of the Central Government and in consultation with the Reserve Bank, at any place 
outside India.  
4. Capital .—(1) The capital of the National Bank shall be one hundred crores of rupees: 
3[Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, increase the said capital up to thirty 
thousand crore rupees:  
Provided further that the Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank and by 
notification, further increase the said capital to such amount as it may deem necessary from time to time].
1. Clause ( t) omitted by Act 7 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “Bombay” (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
3. The proviso subs by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 7 1[(2) The capital of the National Bank which has been subscribed to by the Reserve Bank valued at 
twenty crore rupees as on the date immediately preceding the commencement of the National Bank for 
Agriculture and Rural Development (Amendment) Act, 2018 shall, on such commencement, stand 
transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government:  
Provided that the National Bank may issue capital to such institutions and persons in such manner as 
may be notified by the Central Government:  
Provided further that the shareholding of the Central Government shall not at any time be less than 
fifty-one per cent. of the total subscribed capital.  
(3) The Central Government shall give to the Reserve Bank an amount equal to the face value of the 
subscribed capital, valued at twenty crores of rupees, referred to in sub-section ( 2), in cash, for transfer to, 
and vesting in the Central Government of the capital of the National Bank which has been so subscribed 
to by the said Bank.]
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE  NATIONAL  BANK
5. Management .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and 
business of the National Bank shall vest in a Board of Directors, which shall exercise all powers and do 
all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the National Bank. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in discharging its functions, shall act on business 
principles with due regard to public interest. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1) and save as otherwise provided in the regulations 
made under this Act, the Managing Director shall also have powers of general superintendence, direction 
and management of the affairs and business of the National Bank and may also exercise all powers and do 
all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the National Bank: 
2[Provided that during the period of any casual vacancy of the nature referred to in section 11 in the 
office of the Managing Director, the Chairman may also exercise the powers and discharge the functions 
of the Managing Director until the person appointed by the Central Government under section 11 to act as 
Managing Director enters upon his office.] 
(4) Any whole-time director appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 6 shall assist the Managing 
Director in the discharge of his functions under sub-section ( 3) and perform such duties as the Board may 
entrust or delegate to him. 
(5) In the discharge of his powers and functions under sub-section ( 3), the Managing Director shall 
follow such directions as the Chairman may give. 
(6) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the National Bank shall be guided by such 
directions in matters of policy involving public interest as the Central Government, in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank, or the Reserve Bank, may give in writing. 
6. Board of Directors .—3[(1)The Board of Directors of the National Bank shall consist of the 
following, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman; 
(b) three directors from amongst experts in rural economics, rural development, village and 
cottage industries, 4[micro-enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises ] or persons having 
experience in the working of co-operative banks, regional rural banks or commercial banks or any 
other matter the special knowledge or professional experience in which is considered by the Central 
Government as useful to the National Bank; 
1. Subs by Act 7 of 2018, s. 5, for sub-section ( 2)  (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
2. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 43 (w.e.f. 30-12-1988). 
3. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 5, for sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 6, for “small-scale industries”  (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 8 (c) three directors from out of the directors of the Reserve Bank; 
(d) three directors from amongst the officials of the Central Government; 
(e) four directors from amongst the officials of the State Governments; 
(f) such number of directors elected in the prescribed manner, by shareholders other than the 
Reserve Bank, the Central Government and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central 
Government whose names are entered on the register of shareholders of the National Bank ninety 
days before the date of the meeting in which such election takes place on the following basis, 
namely: — 
(i) where the total amount of equity……………………………….
share capital issued to such shareholders is ten per cent. or less of the 
total issued equity capitaltwo directors;
(ii) where the total amount of equity................................................
share capital issued to such shareholders is more than ten per cent. 
but less than twenty-five per cent. of the total issued equity capital three directors; 
and 
(iii) where the total equity share capital…………………………...
issued to such shareholders is twenty-five per cent. or more of the 
total issued equity capital: four directors: 
Provided that until the assumption of charge by the elected directors under this clause, the 
Central Government may at any time nominate such number of directors not exceeding four from 
amongst persons having special knowledge of, and professional experience in, agricultural 
science, technology, economics, banking, co-operatives, law, rural finance, investment, 
accountancy, marketing or any other matter, the special knowledge of, and professional 
experience in, which would, in the opinion of the Central Government, be useful to the National 
Bank for carrying out its functions; and 
(g) a Managing Director. 
(2) The Chairman and other directors, excluding the directors referred to in clause ( f), shall be 
appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank: 
Provided that no such consultation shall be necessary in the case of directors appointed under clause 
(d) of sub-section ( 1).  
(3) Where the Central Government is satisfied, in consultation with the Reserve Bank,1*** that it is 
necessary so to do, it may appoint one or more whole-time directors with such designations as may be 
deemed appropriate by that Government and any whole-time director so appointed shall also be a member 
of the Board: 
2*  * * * * 
7. Term of office of Chairman and other directors, retirement and payment of fees .—(1) The 
Chairman shall hold office for such term not exceeding five years and shall receive such salary and 
allowances as the Central Government may, at the time of appointment, specify 3[and shall be eligible for 
reappointment]: 
4*  * * * * 
1. The words “and the Board” omitted by Act 81 of 1985, s. 17(w.e.f. 1-5-1986). 
2. The proviso omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-5-1986). 
3. Ins. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
4. The proviso omitted by Act 81 of 1985, s.18 (w.e.f. 1-5-1986). 9 1[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall have the 
right to terminate the term of office of the Chairman at any time before the expiry of the term specified 
under that sub-section by giving him a notice of not less than three months in writing or three months’ 
salary and allowances in lieu of such notice.]
2[(1B) In the case of a vacancy in the office of the Chairman, the Managing Director shall perform the 
functions and duties of the Chairman during such vacancy.]
3[(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 5), a director appointed under clause ( b) or 
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 6, shall hold office for such term, not exceeding three years, as the 
Central Government may specify in this behalf 4***, and shall be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years.] 
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, remove the Chairman 5*** 
at any time before the expiry of his term of office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the proposed removal. 
6[(4) The Chairman and any other director, who is not an officer of the Central Government or a State 
State Government or an officer of the Reserve Bank or any body or corporation established by or under 
any Central Act or any State Act and owned or controlled by such Government, shall be paid such fees 
and allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetings of the Board or of any of its committees 
and for attending to any other work of the National Bank.]
7[(5) The directors appointed under clauses ( b) to ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 6 shall hold office 
during the pleasure of the Central Government.] 
8. Term of office of Managing Director and whole-time directors, conditions of service, etc .—(1) 
The Managing Director and any whole-time director appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 6  
shall,— 
(a) hold office for such term not exceeding five years as the Central Government may, at the time 
of appointment, specify 8[and shall be eligible for reappointment]; 
(b) receive such salary and allowances and be governed by such terms and conditions of service 
as the Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank, determine: 
Provided that the Managing Director and any such whole-time director appointed to the first 
Board shall receive such salary and allowances and be governed by such terms and conditions of 
service as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, determine. 
(2) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, remove the Managing 
Director or any whole-time director appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 6 at any time before the 
expiry of his term of office, after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
proposed removal. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), the Central Government 
shall have the right to terminate the term of office of the Managing Director or of any whole-time director 
appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 6 at any time before the expiry of the term fixed under  
sub-section ( 1) by giving him notice of not less than three months in writing or three months’ salary and 
allowances in lieu of such notice: 
1. Ins. by Act 81 of 1985, s. 18  (1-5-1986). 
2. Ins. by Act 55 of  2000, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
3. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 45, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 30-12-1988). 
4. The words “and thereafter until his successor enters upon his office” omitted by Act 55 of 2000, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
5. The words, brackets and figure “or any other director referred to in sub-section ( 2)” omitted by Act 66 of 1988, s. 45  
(w.e.f. 30-12-1988). 
6.  Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 6, for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
7. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 45 (w.e.f. 30-12-1988). 
8. Ins. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 10 Provided that the Central Government shall, before terminating the term of office of the Managing 
Director or any whole-time director appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 6, consult the Reserve 
Bank. 
9. Disqualifications .—(1) No person shall be a director who— 
(a) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or 
(b) is or has been convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts or has 
compounded with his creditors.  
(2) The appointment as director of any person who is a Member of Parliament or the Legislature of 
any State shall, unless within two months of the date of his appointment he ceases to be such member, be 
void on the expiry of the said period of two months and if any director is elected or nominated as a 
Member of Parliament or of any State Legislature he shall cease to be a director as from the date of such 
election or nomination, as the case may be.
10. Vacation and resignation of office by directors .—(1) If a director— 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 9; or 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for more than three consecutive meetings thereof,  
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
(2) Any director may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the Central Government, 
and on his resignation being accepted by the Central Government or if his resignation is not sooner 
accepted, on the expiry of three months from the receipt thereof by the Central Government, he shall be 
deemed to have vacated his office. 
11. Casual vacancy in the office of Managing Director .—If the Managing Director is by infirmity 
or otherwise rendered incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise, in 
circumstances not involving the vacation of his appointment, the Central Government may, after 
consultation with the Reserve Bank and the Board, appoint another person to act in his place as Managing 
Director during his absence. 
12. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Chairman of the Board, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting, 1[the 
Managing Director and in the absence of both, the Chairman and the Managing Director] any other 
director nominated by the Chairman in this behalf, and in the absence of such nomination, any other 
director elected by the directors present at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting of the Board. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of 
votes of the directors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or, in his 
absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
13. Committees of National Bank .—(1) The Board may constitute an Executive Committee 
consisting of such number of directors as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Executive Committee shall discharge such functions as may be prescribed or may be 
delegated to it by the Board. 
(3) The Board may constitute such other committees, whether consisting wholly of directors or 
wholly of other persons or partly of directors and partly of other persons as it thinks fit and for such 
purposes as it may decide and every committee so constituted shall discharge such functions as may be 
delegated to it by the Board. 
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 2000,  s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 11 (4) The Executive Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed. 
(5) The times and places at which any committee constituted under sub-section ( 3) shall meet, the 
rules of procedure which such committee shall observe in regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings, and the fees and allowances which may be paid to the members of such committee for attending 
the meetings of the committee and for attending to any other work of the National Bank shall be such as 
may be specified by that Bank. 
14. Advisory Council .—(1) 1[The Board may] constitute an Advisory Council consisting of such 
number of directors and such other persons who, in the opinion of the Board, have special knowledge of 
agriculture, agricultural credit, co-operation and rural economics, 2[micro-enterprises, small enterprises 
and medium enterprises, ] village and cottage industries and handicrafts and other rural crafts or have 
special knowledge and appreciation of the country's overall developmental policies and in particular 
overall monetary and credit policies, which is considered by the Board as useful to the National Bank. 
(2) The Advisory Council shall advise the National Bank in such matters as may be referred to the 
Advisory Council by the National Bank and may discharge such other functions as may be entrusted or 
delegated to the Advisory Council by the National Bank. 
(3) A member of the Advisory Council shall hold office for such term not exceeding five years as the 
National Bank may fix, and receive such fees and allowances as may be prescribed for attending the 
meetings of the Advisory Council and for attending to any other work of the National Bank. 
(4) The Advisory Council shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed. 
15. Member of Board or Committee thereof not to participate in meetings in certain cases .—A 
director of the Board or a member of a Committee, who has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in 
any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Board or a Committee thereof, shall, as soon 
as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at 
such meeting, and the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board, or the Committee, as the 
case may be, and the director or member shall not take any part in any deliberation or decision of the 
Board or the Committee with respect to that matter. 
CHAPTER IV 
TRANSFER OF BUSINESS TO THE NATIONAL  BANK
16. Transfer of assets and liabilities of Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation .—
(1) On such date as the Central Government, in consultation with the Reserve Bank may, by notification, 
appoint, the entire undertaking of the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation (hereafter in 
this Chapter referred to as the “Corporation”) including all business, property, assets and liabilities, rights, 
interests, privileges and obligations of whatever nature, shall stand transferred to and vest in the National 
Bank. 
(2) As compensation for the transfer of the undertaking of the Corporation to the National Bank under 
sub-section ( 1), the National Bank shall within six months from the date appointed under that sub-section 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the appointed date) pay to the shareholders of the Corporation a 
sum equal to the total paid-up capital of the Corporation as on the date immediately preceding the 
appointed date. 
(3) The amount of compensation payable under sub-section ( 2) to the shareholders of the Corporation 
shall be apportioned among the shareholders in proportion to their contributions to the paid-up capital of 
the Corporation as on the date immediately preceding the appointed date. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, “shareholders of the Corporation” means 
shareholders of the Corporation whose names appear on the register of shareholders maintained under 
1. Subs. by 55 of 2000, s. 9, for “The Board shall” (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 7, for “small-scale industries” (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 12 section 8 of the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation Act, 1963 (10 of 1963), on the date 
immediately preceding the appointed date. 
(4) The National Bank shall also pay to the shareholders of the Corporation referred to in  
sub-section ( 2) an amount calculated at the rate at which the shares of the Corporation were guaranteed as 
to the payment of minimum divided under section 6 of the Agricultural Refinance and Development 
Corporation Act, 1963 (10 of 1963), for the period, if any, that has expired in the accounting year of the 
Corporation before the appointed date and this amount the National Bank shall distribute to the 
shareholders of the Corporation referred to in sub-section ( 2) in proportion to the shares held by such 
shareholders on the date immediately preceding the appointed date and at the rate at which such shares 
were guaranteed as to the payment of minimum dividend. 
(5) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and 
other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having effect immediately before the appointed date 
and to which the Corporation is a party, or which are in favour of the Corporation, shall be of as full force 
and effect against or in favour of the National Bank, as the case may be, and may be enforced or acted 
upon as fully and effectually as if instead of the Corporation the National Bank had been a party thereto, 
or as if they had been in favour of the National Bank. 
(6) If, immediately before the appointed date, any suit, appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever 
nature, is pending, by or against the Corporation, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any 
way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the National Bank of the undertaking of the 
Corporation, or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be 
continued, prosecuted and enforced, by or against the National Bank.
17. Dissolution of the Corporation and repeal of Act 10 of 1963 .—On the date appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 16,— 
(a) the Corporation shall stand dissolved; and 
(b) the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation Act, 1963, shall stand repealed. 
18. Transfer of business from Reserve Bank .—(1) On such date as the Central Government may, in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, by notification, appoint, the assets and liabilities with the Reserve 
Bank relating to— 
(a) the National Agricultural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund established and maintained 
under section 46A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); and 
(b) the National Agricultural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund established and maintained under section 
46B of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), 
shall stand transferred to the National Bank and form part of the National Rural Credit (Long Term 
Operations) Fund referred to in section 42 and the National Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund referred to 
in section 43, respectively. 
(2) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, by notification, appoint, the loans and advances which the Reserve Bank has granted to State  
co-operative banks and regional rural banks under section 17 [except sub-clause ( a) of clause ( 4)] of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), and which the Reserve Bank may specify by a general or 
special order, shall, as far as may be, become and be deemed to be loans and advances granted by the 
National Bank under section 21, and the National Bank shall repay to the Reserve Bank, the amount of 
such loans and advances on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may specify, in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank. 
(3) All rights, liabilities, interests, privileges and obligations of whatever nature (including the rights 
and obligations arising by way of purchase, sale and rediscount of any bills of exchange and promissory 
notes) of the Reserve Bank in relation to any asset or liability referred to in sub-section ( 1) or any loan or 
advance referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall stand transferred to and vest in the National Bank on the date 
on which such asset or liability stands transferred to the National Bank under sub-section ( 1) or, as the 13 case may be, such loan or advance becomes under sub-section ( 2) a loan or advance granted by the 
National Bank. 
(4) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and 
other instruments of whatever nature relating to any asset or liability referred to in sub-section ( 1) and 
subsisting or having effect immediately before the date appointed under that sub-section or relating to any 
loan or advance referred to in sub-section ( 2) and subsisting or having effect immediately before the date 
appointed under that sub-section shall be of as full force and effect against, or in favour of, the National 
Bank, as the case may be, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if instead of the 
Reserve Bank, the National Bank had been a party thereto, or as if they had been in favour of the National 
Bank. 
(5) If, immediately before the date appointed under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), as the case may 
be, any suit, appeal or other legal proceedings of whatever nature relating to any asset or liability referred 
to in sub-section ( 1) or any loan or advance referred to in sub-section ( 2) is pending, by or against the 
Reserve Bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued, or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason 
of the transfer to the National Bank of such asset or liability under sub-section ( 1), or as the case may be, 
such loan or advance becoming under sub-section ( 2) a loan or advance granted by the National Bank, or 
of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceedings may be continued, prosecuted 
and enforced, by or against the National Bank. 
CHAPTER V 
BORROWINGS BY THE NATIONAL  BANK
19. Borrowings by the National Bank .—The National Bank may, for the purpose of carrying out its 
functions under this Act,— 
1[(a) issue and sell bonds, debentures and other financial instruments with or without guarantee of 
the Central Government on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Board;] 
2[(b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank repayable on demand or otherwise on such terms and 
conditions including the terms relating to security and purposes as may be specified by the Reserve 
Bank; 
(c) borrow money from the Central Government and from any other authority or organisation or 
institution approved by the Board, on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon; 
(d) accept from the Central Government, a State Government, a local authority, a State land 
development bank, a State co-operative bank or a scheduled bank or any person or body, whether 
incorporated or not, deposits repayable on such terms as the National Bank may, with the approval of 
the Reserve Bank, fix; and 
(e) receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Central Government or any State 
Government or any other source.] 
3[20. Borrowings in foreign currency .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), or in any other law for the time being in force, relating to 
foreign exchange, the National Bank may borrow, with the previous approval of the Central Government 
and in consultation with the Reserve Bank, foreign currency from any bank or financial institution in 
India or elsewhere, for granting loans and advances or for utilising such currency for any other purpose 
specified under the provisions of this Act.]
CHAPTER VI 
CREDIT FUNCTIONS OF THE  NATIONAL  BANK
21. Production and marketing credit .—(1) The National Bank may provide by way of refinance, 
loans and advances, repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding eighteen 
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 10, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 26-9-2000). 
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for clauses ( b) to ( e) (w.e.f. 26-9-2000). 
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for section 20 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 14 months, 1[to State co-operative banks, central co-operative banks], regional rural banks, or to any 
financial institution or to any class of financial institutions, which are approved by the Reserve Bank in 
this behalf, for financing— 
(i) agricultural operations or the marketing of crops, or 
(ii) the marketing and distribution of inputs necessary for agriculture or rural development, or 
(iii) any other activity for the promotion of or in the field of agriculture or rural development, or 
(iv) bona fide  commercial or trade transactions, or 
(v) the production or marketing activities of artisans or of 2[village and cottage industries, micro-
enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises or of those engaged in the field of handicrafts, 
handlooms] and other rural crafts. 
(2) The National Bank may make loans and advances under sub-section ( 1) against the security of— 
(i) stocks, funds and securities other than immovable property, in which a trustee is authorised to 
invest trust money by any law for the time being in force; 
(ii) promissory notes supported by documents of title to goods, such documents having been 
transferred, assigned or pledged to the borrowing institution as security for a loan or advance made 
for any of the purposes specified in sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that the National Bank may, whenever it considers it necessary so to do, accept, in lieu 
of the actual assignment of any such security in favour of the National Bank, a declaration in writing 
from the borrowing institution,— 
(a) stating that it holds such documents of title to goods as may be set out in the declaration; 
and 
(b) containing such other particulars as may be required by the National Bank. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the National Bank may in its discretion 
grant a loan or advance— 
(a) 3[to any State co-operative bank or central co-operative bank] if the loan or advance is fully 
guaranteed for repayment of principal and interest by Government; 
(b) to any State co-operative bank which is a scheduled bank, if the loan or advance is secured 
either by a bill of exchange or promissory note executed by the central co-operative bank and 
assigned in favour of the State co-operative bank. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), the National Bank may also make 
loans and advances repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding eighteen months 
against promissory notes of a State co-operative bank or a regional rural bank or an institution approved 
under sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that the borrowing institution furnishes a declaration in writing, setting out the purpose for 
which it has made loans and advances and such other particulars as may be required by the National 
Bank. 
4[22. Conversion loan for production credit .—Where the National Bank is satisfied that owing to 
drought, famine or other natural calamities, military operations or enemy action, any State co-operative 
bank, central co-operative bank, regional rural bank or any such financial institution or any financial 
institution falling under any such class of financial institutions, as may be approved by the Reserve Bank 
in this behalf, requires assistance under this section, it may provide to such bank or institution such 
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 2003, s. 2, for “to State co-operative banks” (w.e.f. 19-9-2003). 
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 8, for “small-scale industries, industries in the tiny and decentralised sector, village and cottage 
industries or of those engaged in the field of handicrafts” (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
3. Subs. by Act 48 of 2003, s. 2, for “to any State co-operative bank” (w.e.f. 19-9-2003). 
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for section 22 (w.e.f. 19-9-2003). 15 financial assistance as it may deem fit by way of making loans and advances repayable on the expiry of 
fixed periods not exceeding seven years and on such terms and conditions as may be specified in this 
behalf by the National Bank: 
Provided that loans and advances may be made under this section only for the purpose of enabling the 
borrowing bank or institution, — 
(a) to pay any dues to the National Bank for credit extended for financing agricultural operations 
or the marketing of crops under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) of section 21, or 
(b) (i) to make loans or advances to central co-operative banks or primary rural credit societies in 
cases where the borrowing bank is a State co-operative bank, and 
(ii) to make loans and advances to primary rural credit societies in cases where the borrowing 
bank is a central co-operative bank, 
and such loans or advances in both the cases being repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being less 
than eighteen months and not exceeding seven years, by way of reimbursement of loans and advances 
made by such co-operative banks or societies for agriculture or agricultural operations or for 
reimbursement of such loans or advances which have been converted into loans or advances repayable on 
expiry of fixed periods not being less than eighteen months and not exceeding seven years from the date 
of conversion: 
Provided further that no loan or advance shall be made under this section to a State co-operative bank 
or a central co-operative bank unless such loan or advance is fully guaranteed as to the repayment of the 
principal and payment of interest, by the State Government.] 
23. Rescheduling of loans to artisans, small-scale industries, etc .—Where the National Bank is 
satisfied that owing to unforeseen circumstances the rescheduling of any loans and advances made to 
artisans, 1[village and cottage industries, micro enterprises, small enterprises and medium enterprises and 
those engaged in the field of handicrafts, handlooms and other rural crafts ], by any State co-operative 
bank, regional rural bank or any such financial institution or any financial institution falling under such 
class of financial institutions as may be approved by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, has become 
necessary, it may provide to such bank or institution such financial assistance as it may deem fit by way 
of loans and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being less than eighteen months and 
not exceeding seven years against such securities as may be specified in this behalf by the National Bank: 
Provided that no loan or advance shall be made under this section to a State co-operative bank unless 
such loan or advance is fully guaranteed as to the repayment of the principal and payment of interest, by 
the State Government but such guarantee may be waived by the National Bank if other security to the 
satisfaction of the National Bank is furnished, or if, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, the 
National Bank is satisfied that the guarantee or other security is not necessary. 
24. Investment credit—medium term .—The National Bank shall provide such financial assistance 
as it may consider necessary by way of making to State co-operative banks, regional rural banks, loans 
and advances repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not being less than eighteen months and not 
exceeding seven years against such securities as may be specified, in this behalf, by the National Bank 
and such loans or advances may be made for agriculture, rural development or such other purposes as the 
National Bank may, from time to time, determine: 
Provided that no loan or advance shall be made under this section to a State co-operative bank unless 
such loan or advance is fully guaranteed as to the repayment of the principal and payment of interest, by 
the State Government but such guarantee may be waived by the National Bank, if other security to the 
satisfaction of the National Bank is furnished, or if, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, the 
National Bank is satisfied that the guarantee or other security is not necessary. 
25. Other investment credit .—(1) The National Bank may provide such financial assistance as it 
may consider necessary for promoting agriculture and rural development by— 
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 9, for “small-scale industries, industries in the tiny and decentralised sector, village and cottage 
industries and those engaged in the field of handicrafts and other rural crafts,” (w.e.f 15-3-2018). 16 (a) making loans and advances, by way of refinance, on such terms and conditions as the National 
Bank may think fit to impose, to a State land development bank or a State co-operative bank or a 
scheduled bank or any other financial institution approved by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, and 
also rescheduling the payment of such loans and advances: 
Provided that the maximum period for which any such loan or advance may be granted, whether 
originally or by rescheduling the payment thereof, shall not exceed twenty-five years; 
(b) purchasing or selling, or subscribing to the bonds or debentures issued by any bank or 
institution referred to in clause ( a) and repayable within a period not exceeding twenty-five years 
from the dates on which they are issued; 
(c) making loans and advances on such terms and conditions as the National Bank may think fit 
to impose, to a State co-operative bank or a scheduled bank for the purpose of enabling such bank to 
make loans or advances to artisans, 1[village and cottage industries, micro-enterprises, small 
enterprises and medium enterprises and those engaged in the field of handicrafts, handlooms] and 
other rural crafts and also rescheduling the payment of such loans and advances: 
Provided that the maximum period for which any such loan or advance may be granted, whether 
originally or by rescheduling the payment thereof, shall not exceed twenty-five years; 
(d) making, where it is considered necessary so to do in connection with any financial assistance 
under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) to a State land development bank or a State co-operative 
bank or a scheduled bank, loans and advances repayable on demand or on the expiry of a fixed period 
not exceeding eighteen months, by way of refinance 2[or otherwise] to such bank and also 
rescheduling the payment of such loans and advances for such period as the National Bank may deem 
fit. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of 
section 21 and section 24. 
3[26. Purchase and sale of shares .—The National Bank may subscribe to, or purchase or sell stocks, 
shares, bonds or debentures of, or invest in the securities of, any institution or class of institutions 
concerned with agriculture and rural development which the Board may approve subject to such terms 
and conditions as it may deem fit.] 
27. Loans to State Governments for share capital contribution .—The National Bank may make 
loans and advances to State Governments, repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding twenty 
years from the date of making such loans and advances, from the National Rural Credit (Long Term 
Operations) Fund established under section 42 for enabling them to subscribe directly or indirectly to the 
share capital of a co-operative credit society. 
4[27A. Loans to State Government, undertakings, etc .—The National Bank may make loans and 
advances to any State Government or a corporation owned or controlled by the State Government or to 
any other person or class of persons, as may be approved by the Board, repayable on the expiry of a fixed 
period not exceeding twenty-five years from the date of making of such loans and advances and subject to 
such terms and conditions, as may be approved by the Board, for the purpose of development of 
infrastructure facilities for promotion of agriculture and rural development.]
28. Security for credit .—(1) No accommodation shall be granted by the National Bank under  
clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25 or section 30 or section 32 to any institution other 
than a scheduled bank unless it is fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Government as to the 
repayment of principal and payment of interest: 
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 10, for “small-scale industries, industries in the tiny and decentralised sector, village and cottage 
industries and those engaged in the field of handicrafts” (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
2. Ins. by Act  55 of 2000, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for section 26 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 17 Provided that no such guarantee shall be required in cases in which security to the satisfaction of the 
Board is furnished by the borrowing institution. 
(2) No accommodation shall be granted by the National Bank under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 25 or section 32 to any scheduled bank unless security to the satisfaction of the 
Board is furnished by such scheduled bank. 
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), no guarantee or 
security referred to therein shall be required in cases in which the Board, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, decides that no such security or guarantee is necessary in respect of a scheduled bank, a State co-
operative bank or any person or class of persons, specifically approved by the Board or in respect of any 
scheme or class of schemes, having regard to the nature and scope of the scheme or schemes for which 
accommodation is proposed to be granted by the National Bank.] 
29. Amounts and securities to be held in trust .—(1) Any sums received by a borrowing institution 
in repayment or realisation of loans and advances refinanced either wholly or partly by the National Bank 
shall, to the extent of the accommodation granted by the National Bank and remaining outstanding, be 
deemed to have been received by the borrowing institution in trust for the National Bank, and shall 
accordingly be paid by such institution to the National Bank, as per the repayment schedule fixed by the 
National Bank. 
(2) Where an accommodation has been granted to a borrowing institution, all securities held, or which 
may be held, by such borrowing institution, on account of any transaction in respect of which such 
accommodation has been granted by the National Bank, shall be held by such institution in trust for the 
National Bank. 
2[(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force, where 
a liquidator is appointed for winding up a borrowing institution, it shall be the duty of the liquidator to 
forthwith pass on to the National Bank the sums recovered by the borrowing institution or the liquidator, 
as the case may be, in repayment or realisation of the loans and advances refinanced either wholly or 
partly by the National Bank to the extent the refinance is outstanding and the National Bank shall be 
entitled to enforce the securities held by the borrowing institution in trust for the National Bank as if 
every reference to the borrowing institution in any contract, security or other document obtained by 
borrowing institution is a reference to the National Bank and accordingly, the National Bank shall be 
entitled to recover the balance sums due under such loans and advances from the constituents of 
borrowing institution and any discharge given by the National Bank to such constituent shall be a valid 
discharge and the liquidator shall, on demand made by the National Bank, deliver to it all such contracts, 
securities and other documents, for due enforcement thereof by the National Bank. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the word “liquidator” shall include liquidator or a 
provisional liquidator or any person or authority entrusted with the duty of liquidating the borrowing 
institution.] 
3[30. Direct loans .— The National Bank may, in exceptional circumstances to be recorded in writing 
by the Board, by itself or in association with other financial institutions or scheduled banks, make loans 
and advances, otherwise than by way of refinance to any person or class of persons or body corporate, on 
such terms and conditions, including security and repayable within such period not exceeding twenty-five 
years, as the National Bank may deem fit. 
30A. Bills rediscounting .—The National Bank may rediscount bills of exchange and promissory 
notes made, drawn, accepted or endorsed by any company or body corporate concerned with agriculture 
and rural development presented by a scheduled bank, a State co-operative bank, State land development 
bank, regional rural bank or any other institution or class of institutions approved by the Board.] 
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 15, for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
2.  Ins. by s. 16,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
3. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for section 30 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001).18 31. Commission .—The National Bank may receive, for the rendering of any of the services 
mentioned in this Chapter or Chapter VII, such commission or other consideration as may be agreed 
upon. 
1[32. Issue of guarantees .— The National Bank may guarantee, subject to such directions as may be 
issued by the Board, from time to time, deferred payments in connection with the purchase of capital 
goods or for any other purpose for giving effect to the provisions of this Act, due from any person or class 
of persons, whether incorporated or not.] 
33. Power to impose conditions for accommodation .—In entering into any transaction 2[under this 
Act with a borrower], the National Bank may impose such conditions as it may think necessary or 
expedient for protecting the interests of the National Bank. 
3[34. Power to call for repayment before agreed period .—Notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any agreement or arrangement, the National Bank may, by notice in writing, require 
any borrower or assisted person to whom it has granted any loan or other financial assistance including 
grants, to discharge forthwith in full, the loan or other financial assistance, including grants, as the case 
may be, — 
(a) if it appears to the National Bank that false or misleading information in any material 
particulars was given in the application for the loan or other financial assistance; or 
(b) if the borrower or the person has failed to comply with any of the terms of the contract or 
arrangement with the National Bank in the matter of loan or other financial assistance, including 
grants; or 
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the borrower is unable to pay its debts or that 
proceedings for liquidation may be commenced in respect thereof; or 
(d) if for any reason it is necessary so to do, to protect the interests of the National Bank.] 
35. National Bank to have access to records .—4[(1) The National Bank shall have free access to all 
such records of a borrower seeking to avail of any credit or other facilities from the National Bank under 
this Act and also to all such records of any person seeking to avail of any credit or other facilities from 
such borrower, perusal whereof may appear to the National Bank to be necessary in connection with the 
providing of finance or other assistance to such borrower or the refinancing of any loan or advance made 
to such person by the borrower.]
(2) The National Bank may require any institution or person referred to in sub-section ( 1) to furnish to 
it copies of any of the records referred to in that sub-section and the institution or the person, as the case 
may be, shall be bound to comply with such requisition. 
36. Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned .—Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the validity of any loan or advance granted by the 
National Bank in pursuance of the provisions of this Act shall not be called in question merely on the 
ground of non-compliance with the requirements of such other law as aforesaid or of any resolution, 
contract, memorandum, articles of association or other instrument: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall render valid any loan or advance obtained by any company 
or co-operative society where such company or co-operative society is not empowered by its 
memorandum to obtain loans or advances. 
37. National Bank not to grant loans or advances against its own bonds or debentures .—The 
National Bank shall not grant any loan or advance on the security of its own bonds or debentures. 
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 18, for section 32 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “under this Chapter with a borrowing institution” (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for section 34 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
4. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 19 1[37A. Prohibited business .—(1) The National Bank shall not make any loans or advances under 
section 30 or make any grants under this Act to any person or body of persons of which any of the 
directors of the National Bank is a proprietor, partner, director, manager, agent, employee or guarantor or 
in which one or more directors of the National Bank together hold substantial interest: 
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any borrower if any director of the National Bank — 
(a) is nominated as director of the Board of such borrower by the Government or a Government 
company as defined 2[in clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)] or by a 
corporation established by any other law; 
(b) is elected on the Board of such borrower by virtue of shares held in the borrower organisation 
by the Government, or a Government company as defined 2[in clause ( 45) of section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) ] or by a corporation established by any other law, 
by reason only of such nomination or election, as the case may be.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, “substantial interest”, in relation to a borrower, 
means the beneficial interest held by one or more of the directors of the National Bank or by any relative 
of such director as defined 3[in clause ( 77) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)] whether 
singly or taken together, in the shares of the borrower, the aggregate amount paid-up on which either 
exceeds five lakhs of rupees or five per cent. of the paid-up share capital of the borrower, whichever is 
lesser. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1)— 
(a) shall not apply to any borrower, if the National Bank is satisfied that it is necessary in the 
public interest to enter into business with that borrower and entering into any kind of business with 
such borrower shall be in accordance with and subject to such conditions and limitations, as may be 
approved by the Board; 
(b) shall not apply to any transaction relating to the business entered into prior to the 
commencement of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (Amendment)  
Act, 2000 (55 of 2000), and all such business and any transaction in relation thereto may be 
implemented or continued as if that Act had not come into force; 
(c) shall apply only so long as the conditions precedent to such disability as set out in the said 
sub-section continue.]
CHAPTER VII 
OTHER FUNCTIONS OF THE  NATIONAL  BANK
38. Other functions of National Bank .—The National Bank— 
(i) shall co-ordinate its operations and the operations of various institutions engaged in the field 
of rural credit and maintain expert staff to study all problems relating to agriculture and rural 
development and be available for consultation to the Central Government, the Reserve Bank, the 
State Governments and the other institutions engaged in the field of rural development; 
(ii) may act as the agent for the Central Government or a State Government or the Reserve Bank 
in the transaction of any business in respect of loans and advances granted or to be granted, or bonds 
or debentures purchased or subscribed for, or to be purchased or subscribed for; 
(iii) may provide facilities for training, for dissemination of information and the promotion of 
research including the undertaking of studies, researches, techno-economic and other surveys in the 
field of rural banking, agriculture and rural development and it may for the said purposes 4[make 
loans or advances or grants] including grants by way of provision for fellowships and chairs to any 
institution. 
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 11, for “in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)” (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for “in clause ( 41) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)” (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 
4. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 23, for “make grants” (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 20 1[(iv) may provide technical, legal, financial, marketing and administrative assistance to any 
person engaged in agriculture and rural development activities; 
(v) may provide consultancy services in the field of agriculture and rural development and other 
related matters in or outside India, on such terms and against such remuneration, as may be agreed 
upon; 
(vi) may perform the functions entrusted to or required of the National Bank by any other law for 
the time being in force; and 
(vii) do any other kind of business or undertake any other kind of activity which the Central 
Government or the Reserve Bank may authorise.] 
2[38A. Promotion of subsidiaries .—The National Bank may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, 
promote, form or manage or associate itself in promotion, formation or management of companies, 
subsidiaries, affiliates, societies, trusts or such other association of persons, as it may deem fit, for the 
purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act. 
38B. Securitisation of debt .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the National Bank 
may— 
(a) create one or more trusts and transfer loans and advances granted by it, with or without the 
securities, to such trusts, for consideration; 
 (b) set aside loans or advances held by the National Bank and issue and sell securities based upon 
such loans or advances so set aside in the form of debt obligations, trust certificates of beneficial 
interest or other instruments, by whatever name called, and act as a trustee for the holders of such 
securities. 
38C.Exemption from compulsory registration .—Notwithstanding anything contained in                
sub-section ( 1) of section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908)— 
(a) any instrument in the form of debt obligations or trust certificate of beneficial interest or any 
other instrument, by whatsoever name called, issued by the National Bank or the trust created by it to 
securitise the loans granted by it and not creating, declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing any 
right, title or interest to or in immovable property; or 
(b) any transfer of such instruments referred to in clause ( a), shall not require compulsory 
registration.] 
39. Incidental powers .—The National Bank may also do all such things as may be necessary or 
incidental to or consequential upon the exercise of its powers, discharge of its functions and the 
performance of its duties, under this Act, or under any other law for the time being in force. 
3[40. Deposits and investments .—(1) The National Bank may invest its funds in promissory notes, 
stocks or securities of the Central Government or keep the moneys deposited with the Reserve Bank or 
with any agency of the Reserve Bank or with a State co-operative bank or a scheduled bank. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or section 30A, the National Bank may, for 
beneficial investment of its surplus funds, rediscount bills of exchange or promissory notes arising out of 
bona fide  trade and commercial transactions and also lend repayable at call or short notice to a scheduled 
bank or any financial institution approved by the Reserve Bank, or invest in certificates of deposit and 
other instruments or schemes as may be approved by the Board.] 
41. Credit information .—The National Bank may, for the purpose of the efficient discharge of its 
functions under this Act, collect from or furnish to the Central Government, the Reserve Bank or any 
banking company or such other financial institution as may be notified by the Central Government in this 
behalf, credit information or other information. 
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
2. Ins. by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
3. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for section 40 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 21 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expressions “banking company” and “credit 
information” shall have the same meanings as in section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  
(2 of 1934). 
CHAPTER VIII  
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
42. National Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund .—(1) The National Bank shall establish 
and maintain a Fund to be known as the National Rural Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund. 
(2) The Fund shall (in addition to assets and liabilities transferred under section 18) include,— 
(a) such sums of money as the Central Government and the State Governments may contribute 
from time to time; 
(b) such sums of money as the Reserve Bank may contribute every year; and 
(c) such further sums of money as the Board may contribute every year. 
(3) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied by the National Bank only to provide financial 
assistance by way of loans and advances under section 23, section 24, sub-section ( 1) of section 25 or 
section 27 or for the purposes of section 26. 
43. National Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund .—(1) The National Bank shall establish and 
maintain a Fund to be known as the National Rural Credit (Stabilisation) Fund. 
(2) The Fund shall (in addition to assets and liabilities transferred under section 18) include,— 
(a) such sums of money as the Central Government and the State Governments may contribute 
from time to time; 
(b) such sums of money as the Reserve Bank may contribute every year; and 
(c) such further sums of money as the Board may contribute every year. 
(3) The amounts in the said Fund shall be applied by the National Bank only to provide loans and 
advances under section 22. 
44. Research and Development Fund .—(1) The National Bank shall establish and maintain a Fund 
to be known as the Research and Development Fund, to which shall be credited— 
(a) such sums of money as are transferable to this Fund in accordance with section 47; 
(b) such sums of money as the Board may contribute every year to this Fund from out of its 
annual profits; and 
(c) such gifts, grants, donations or benefactions which the National Bank may receive and which 
the Board may earmark for this purpose. 
(2) The Research and Development Fund shall be expended on matters of importance to agriculture, 
agricultural operations and rural development, including the provision of training and research facilities 
and the 1[making of loans or advances or grants] under clause ( iii) of section 38. 
45. Reserve Fund and other Funds .—The National Bank shall establish a Reserve Fund 2[and other 
Funds] as the Board may consider necessary by transferring such sums as it may deem fit, out of its 
annual profits and out of receipts from gifts, grants, donations or benefactions, which it may receive. 
46. Preparation of balance-sheet, etc., of National Bank .—(1) The balance-sheet and accounts of 
the National Bank shall be prepared and maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 26, for “making of grants” (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid.,  for “and such other Funds” (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 22 (2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the National Bank to be balanced and closed as 
on the thirtieth day of June 1[or such other date in each year as the Central Government may, by  
notification in the Official Gazette, specify]. 
2[Provided that with a view to facilitating the transition from one period of accounting to another 
period of accounting under this sub-section, the Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary or expedient for the balancing and 
closing of, or for other matters relating to, the books or accounts in respect of the concerned years.] 
47. Disposal of surplus .—After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation of assets 
and all other matters for which provision is necessary or expedient or which is usually provided for by 
bankers, and for the Funds referred to in sections 42, 43 and 45, the National Bank shall transfer— 
(i) for a period of fifteen years, following the accounting year during which the National Bank is 
established, the amount remaining (hereafter in this section referred to as surplus) to the Research and 
Development Fund under section 44; and 
3[(ii) after the expiry of the said period of fifteen years, the Board shall, after making provision 
for the Fund referred to in clause ( i), disburse or spend the balance of the surplus in such manner as 
may be approved by the Board.]
48. Audit .—(1) The accounts of the National Bank shall be audited by auditors duly qualified to act 
as auditors under sub-section ( 1) of 4[section 141 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)] who shall be 
appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank, for such term and on such 
remuneration as the Central Government may fix. 
(2) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance-sheet of the National Bank and it 
shall be their duty to examine it together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and they shall 
have a list delivered to them of all books kept by the National Bank and shall at all reasonable times have 
access to the books, accounts, vouchers and other documents of the National Bank. 
(3) The auditors may, in relation to the accounts of the National Bank, examine any director of the 
Board or any officer or other employee of the National Bank and shall be entitled to require from the 
Board or officers or employees of the National Bank such information and explanation as they may think 
necessary for the performance of their duties. 
(4) The auditors shall make a report to the National Bank upon the annual balance-sheet and accounts 
examined by them and in every such report, they shall state whether in their opinion the balance-sheet is a 
full and fair balance-sheet containing all necessary particulars and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a 
true and fair view of the state of affairs of the National Bank and in case they had called for any 
explanation or information from the Board or any officer or other employee of the National Bank, 
whether it has been given and whether it is satisfactory. 
(5) The National Bank shall furnish to the Central Government and the Reserve Bank within four 
months from the date on which the annual accounts of the National Bank are closed and balanced, a copy 
of its balance-sheet as on the close of that year together with a copy of the profit and loss account for the 
year and a copy of the auditors’ report and a report of the working of the National Bank during the 
relevant year, and the Central Government shall, as soon as may be after they are received by it, cause the 
same to be laid before each House of Parliament and cause the copies of the said balance-sheet, profit and 
loss account and auditors' report to be published in the Official Gazette. 
(6) Without prejudice to anything contained in the preceding sub-sections, the Central Government 
may, at any time, appoint the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to examine and report upon the 
accounts of the National Bank and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such examination 
and report shall be payable by the National Bank to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 46, for “, each year” (w.e.f. 30-12-1988). 
2. The proviso  inserted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 30-12-1988).
3. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 28, for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 12, for “section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)”(w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 23 49. Returns .—The National Bank shall furnish, from time to time, to the Central Government and to 
the Reserve Bank, such returns as the Central Government or the Reserve Bank may require. 
CHAPTER IX  
STAFF
50. Staff of National Bank .—(1) The National Bank may appoint such number of officers and other 
employees as it considers necessary or desirable for the efficient performance of its functions and 
determine the terms and conditions of their appointment and service. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the National Bank to 
utilise, and for the Reserve Bank to make available, the services of such staff of the Reserve Bank on such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the National Bank and the Reserve Bank. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 6), at any time before the expiry of six months from the 
appointed day, the Reserve Bank may, in public interest, transfer to the National Bank, such members of 
the staff of Reserve Bank whom the Reserve Bank considers as engaged, or as suitable to be engaged, in 
attending to the work of a nature which is same or similar to that which the National Bank may require for 
its efficient functioning, and upon such transfer they shall be deemed to be appointed by the National 
Bank under sub-section ( 1) with effect from the date of such transfer: 
Provided that every person so transferred may, before the expiry of a period of six months from the 
appointed day, or before the expiry of a period of thirty days from such transfer, whichever period expires 
later, elect to go back to the Reserve Bank by exercising an option in writing to that effect, the option 
once exercised being final, and on the exercise of such option, the Reserve Bank shall, before the 
expiration of a period of eighteen months from the appointed day, take back such member of the staff and 
he shall be deemed to have been on deputation to the National Bank during the period he was a member 
of the staff of the National Bank. 
(4) (a) Any member of the staff of the Reserve Bank who is not appointed under sub-section ( 3), may, 
if he so desires, make an application to the Reserve Bank within six months from the appointed day, to be 
considered for appointment as a member of the staff of the National Bank. 
(b) The Reserve Bank may, in consultation with the National Bank, consider such application having 
regard to the suitability of the person so applying, the availability of vacancies in the National Bank, the 
exigencies of service in the Reserve Bank and the National Bank and such other factors as may be 
considered relevant in this regard, and, if the Reserve Bank is satisfied having regard to these factors, that 
such applicant is suitable for being so appointed recommend his appointment to the National Bank. 
(c) The National Bank may thereupon, within eighteen months from the appointed day, appoint such a 
person applying under this sub-section, as a member of the staff of the National Bank, and on such 
appointment, such a person shall be deemed to have been appointed in the National Bank under  
sub-section ( 3): 
Provided that the proviso to sub-section ( 3) and the proviso to sub-section ( 5) shall not apply in 
respect of such a person. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act or in any other law or in any contract, 
for the time being in force, at any time before the expiry of six months from the appointed day, the 
Reserve Bank may, if it considers it necessary in consultation with the National Bank so to do in the 
interest of the National Bank, transfer on promotion any member of the staff of the National Bank to the 
Reserve Bank, and on such transfer to the Reserve Bank, each such member of the staff shall be deemed 
to be a member of the staff of the Reserve Bank and shall be entitled to the same salary, emoluments and 
other conditions of service to which he was entitled immediately before the date of such transfer, 
including benefits, if any, arising directly out of such promotion: 
Provided that every member of the staff who is transferred as aforesaid may, before the expiry of a 
period of six months from the appointed day or within thirty days from such transfer, whichever period 
expires later, elect to go back to the National Bank by exercising an option in writing to that effect, the 
option once exercised being final, and on the exercise of such option, the National Bank shall, before the 24 expiration of a period of eighteen months from the appointed day, take back such member of the staff and 
he shall be deemed to have been on deputation to the Reserve Bank during the period he was a member of 
the staff of the Reserve Bank. 
(6) Every person,— 
(a) who, immediately before the date appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 16, is a member 
of the staff of the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation; or 
(b) who is a member of the staff of the Reserve Bank but whose services are being utilised 
immediately before that date by the said Corporation, 
shall be deemed to be appointed by the National Bank under sub-section ( 1) on the said date: 
Provided that every member of the staff of the Reserve Bank, who is so deemed to be appointed, and 
who was not recruited specifically for utilisation in the Agricultural Refinance and Development 
Corporation, may, before the expiry of a period of six months from the appointed day or within a period 
of thirty days from the date appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 16, whichever period expires later, 
elect to go back to the Reserve Bank by exercising an option in writing to that effect, the option once 
exercised being final, and on the exercise of such option, the Reserve Bank shall, before the expiration of 
a period of eighteen months from the appointed day, take back such member of the staff and he shall be 
deemed to have been on deputation to the National Bank during the period he was a member of the staff 
of the National Bank. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or in any agreement, for the time being in 
force, no member of the staff shall be entitled to claim any compensation for, or in relation to any matter 
concerning, his transfer, appointment or as the case may be, return, under sub-sections ( 3) to ( 6) and no 
claim in respect thereof shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
(8) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 10) and sub-section ( 11), every member of the staff of 
the Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation or of the Reserve Bank who is deemed to be 
appointed as a member of the staff of the National Bank under this section, shall be deemed to have been 
appointed by the National Bank on the same salary, emoluments and other terms and conditions of service 
to which he was entitled immediately before his appointment in the National Bank. 
(9) The provisions relating to superannuation benefits, namely, the regulations relating to provident 
fund and the rules relating to payment of gratuity and compassionate gratuity and any other provision 
relating to superannuation as are applicable to the staff of the Reserve Bank on the appointed day shall, so 
far as may be, apply to the staff of the National Bank, unless and until the National Bank alters or amends 
the same: 
Provided that after the appointed day, any such alteration or amendment may be effected by the 
National Bank as regards provident fund regulations in accordance with section 60, and as regards the 
other rules in the manner they would have been altered or amended but for this sub-section: 
Provided further that after the expiry of six months from the appointed day, the balances held in the 
Reserve Bank of India Employees’ Provident Fund to the credit of any member of the staff of the Reserve 
Bank whose services are transferred under this section to the National Bank and who does not opt to go 
back to the Reserve Bank, shall be transferred to, and held in, the Provident Fund of the National Bank on 
same or similar terms subject to which those balances were held earlier in the Reserve Bank of India 
Employees’ Provident Fund. 
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, settlement, or agreement, every person 
employed by the National Bank or whose services have been transferred to the National Bank under this 
Act, shall be liable to serve anywhere in India. 
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or any 
other law for the time being in force, or in any award, judgment, decree, decision or order of any 
Industrial Tribunal, Court or other authority, or any settlement or agreement, made or entered into before 
the date of transfer to the National Bank of the services of any person under this section, the National 
Bank shall be free to alter, amend or repeal in such manner and to such extent it may consider necessary, 25 any of the terms and conditions of service applicable to such persons whose services are so transferred to 
the National Bank and who are appointed in the National Bank under this section except that the National 
Bank shall not alter to their prejudice the terms relating to payment of salary and other emoluments, 
retirement benefits and eligibility for leave. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “appointed day” means the date of establishment of 
the National Bank under section 3. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS
51. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy .—(1) The National Bank shall not, except as otherwise 
required by this Act or any other law, divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, its 
constituents except in circumstances in which it is, in accordance with the law or practice and usage 
customary among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the National Bank to divulge such information. 
(2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor, officer or other employee of the National Bank or 
of the Reserve Bank, whose services are utilised by the National Bank under the provisions of this Act, 
shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the 
First Schedule to this Act. 
1[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (30 of 2005).]
52. Defects in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc .—(1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of 
any committee of the National Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board or the committee, as the case may be. 
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director of the Board or as a member of a 
committee of the National Bank shall become invalid merely on the ground that he was disqualified to be 
a director or that there was any other defect in his appointment. 
2[52A. Agreement with National Bank on appointment of directors to prevail .—(1) Where any 
agreement entered into by the National Bank with a company or a body corporate while granting loans 
and advances, provides for the appointment by the National Bank of one or more directors of such 
company or body corporate, such provisions and any appointment of directors made in pursuance thereof 
shall be valid and effective, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 3[the Companies Act, 
2013 (18 of 2013)] or in any other law for the time being in force, or in the memorandum, articles of 
association or any other instrument relating to the company or body corporate, and any provision 
regarding share qualification, age-limit, number of directorships, removal from office of directors and 
such like conditions contained in any such law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director 
appointed by the National Bank in pursuance of the agreement as aforesaid. 
(2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the National Bank and may be removed or substituted by 
any person by order in writing of the National Bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in relation 
thereto; 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of directors liable to such retirement.]
53. Protection of action taken under the Act .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the National Bank or any director or any officer or other employee of the National Bank or any other 
person authorised by the National Bank to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss or damage 
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2005, s. 34 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 14-12-2006).
2. Ins. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2018, s. 13, for “the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)” (w.e.f. 15-3-2018). 26 caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or of any other law or provision having the force of law. 
54. Indemnity of directors .—(1) Every director shall be indemnified by the National Bank against 
all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties, except such as are 
caused by his own wilful act or default. 
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or for any officer or other employee of 
the National Bank or for any loss or expenses resulting to the National Bank from the insufficiency or 
deficiency of the value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the National 
Bank or the insolvency or wrongful act of any debtor or any person under obligation to the National Bank 
or anything done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office in relation thereto. 
55. [Exemption from income-tax, etc .]—Omitted by the Finance Act, 2001  (14 of 2001 ), s. 140 (w.e.f. 
1-4-2002 ). 
56. Penalties .—(1) Whoever in any return, balance-sheet, or other document or in any information 
required or furnished by or under or for the purposes of any provision of this Act, wilfully makes a 
statement which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully omits to make a 
material statement, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other document, or to furnish any statement or 
information which, under the provisions of this Act, it is his duty to produce or furnish, he shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand rupees in respect of each offence and in the 
case of a continuing failure, with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every 
day during which the failure continues after conviction for the first such failure. 
57. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person 
who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the 
conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
58. Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891, to apply in relation to National Bank .—The Bankers’ 
Books Evidence Act, 1891 (18 of 1891), shall apply in relation to the National Bank as if it were a bank 
as defined in section 2 of that Act. 
59. Liquidation of National Bank .—No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies 
shall apply to the National Bank and the National Bank shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of 
the Central Government and in such manner as it may direct. 
60. Power of Board to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and in consultation with the Reserve Bank, by notification, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 27 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the fees or allowances that may be paid to the directors or members of the Advisory Council; 
(b) the times and places of the meetings of the Board or the Executive Committee or the Advisory 
Council and the procedure to be followed at such meetings including the quorum necessary for the 
transaction of business; 
(c) the number of directors constituting the Executive Committee and the functions that such 
Committee shall discharge; 
(d) the manner and terms of issue and redemption of bonds and debentures by the National Bank; 
1[(e) the manner of election of directors under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 6;] 
2* * * * * 
(g) The form and manner in which the balance-sheets and the accounts of the National Bank shall 
be prepared or maintained; 
2* * * * * 
(i) the duties and conduct, salaries, allowances and conditions of service of officers and other 
employees; 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of provident or other benefit funds for employees of the 
National Bank; and 
(k) such other matters for which the Board may consider it expedient or necessary to provide for 
by way of regulations. 
(3) Any regulation which may be made by the Board under this Act may be made by the Reserve 
Bank, in consultation with the Central Government, before the expiry of three months from the date of 
establishment of the National Bank, and any regulation so made may be altered and rescinded by the 
Board in the exercise of its powers under this Act. 
(4) The power to make regulations conferred by this section shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect to the regulations or any of them from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of this Act, but no retrospective effect shall be given to any regulation so as to 
prejudicially affect the interest of any person to whom such regulation may be applicable. 
(5) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be 
made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that regulation. 
[61. Amendment of certain enactments ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1988
(19 of 1988),  s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31-3-1988) .
62. Power to remove difficulty .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 2000, s. 30, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 1-2-2001). 
2. Clauses ( f) and ( h) omitted by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-2001).28 THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 51( 2)] 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY
I do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability execute and 
perform the duties required of me as director, auditor officer or other employee (as the case may be) of 
the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and which properly relate to the office or 
position held by me in the said National Bank. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said National Bank nor will I 
allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or in the 
possession of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and relating to the business of 
the said National Bank or the business of any persons having any dealing with the said National Bank. 
Signed before me (Signature ) 
[THE SECOND SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1988 (19  of 1988) , s. 2 and the 
First Schedule  (w.e.f. 31-3-1988) .
