--------------------------The African Development Fund Act, 1982--------------------------
1  THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND ACT, 1982  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____ ___ 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Payments to Fund.  
4. Reserve Bank to be depository for Fund.  
5. Conferment of status and certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on Fund and conferment 
of certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on its officers and employees . 
6. Power to make rules . 
7. Notifications issued under section 5 and rules made under section 6 to be laid before Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2  THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 1 OF 1982  
[4th March , 1982 .] 
An Act to implement the African Development Fund Agreement and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of  India as follows: — 
1. Short title , extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the African Development 
Fund Act, 1982 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Agreement ” means the African Development Fund Agreement;  
(b) “Fund” means the African Development Fund established under the Agreement . 
3. Payments to Fund .—(1)There shall be paid out of the Consolidate d Fund of India, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, all such sums as may, from time to time, be 
required for the purpose of paying, — 
(a) the subscription payable by the Central Government to the Fund under Articles 6,7,8 and 9  of 
the Agreement;  
(b) any sums payable by the Central Government to the Fund under Article 13 of the Agreement; 
and 
(c) any charges payable by the Central Government to the Fund under Article 16 of the 
Agreement . 
(2) The Central Government may, if it thin ks fit so to do, create and issue to the Fund, in such form as 
it thinks fit, any such non -interest bearing  and non -negotiable note or other obligations as are provided for 
by Article 9 of the Agreement . 
4. Reserve Bank to be depository for Fund.—The Reserve Bank of India shall be  the depository of 
the Indian currency holdings of the Fund . 
5. Conferment of status and certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on Fund and 
conferment of certain immunities , exemptions and privileges on its officers and                
employees .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, the provisions of 
the Agreement set out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India:  
Provided that nothing in Article 49 of the A greement shall be construed as — 
(a) entitling the Fund to import into India goods free of any duty of customs without any 
restriction or their subsequent sale therein; or  
(b) conferring  on the Fund any exemption from duties or taxes which form part of the price of 
goods sold; or  
(c) conferring on the Fund any exemption from duties or taxes which are in fact no more than 
charges for services rendered . 
                                                           
1. 25thAugust , 198 6, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1035 (E), dated 2 5th August , 198 6, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
    Part II, sec. 3( i). 3 (2) The Central Government may, by no tification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in 
conformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out 
therein . 
6. Power to make rules .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act . 
7. Notifications issued under section 5 and rules made under section 6 to be laid before 
Parliament .—Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 5 and every rule made under 
section 6 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree  in making any modification in the notification or,  as the 
case may be, in the rule or both Houses agree that the notification or  rule should not be  issued or made, 
the notification or rule shall thereafter have effect  only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously  done under that notification or rule .  4 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
PROVISIONS OF THE AGREEMENT WHICH SHALL HAVE FORCE OF LAW  
CHAPTER VIII  
STATUS , IMMUNITIES , EXEMPTIONSAND PRIVILEGES  
ARTICLE 41  
PURPOSE OF CHAPTER  
To enable the Fund effectively to fulfil  its purpose and carry out the functions entrusted to it, the 
status, immunities, exemptions and privileges set forth in this Chapter shall be accorded to the Fund in the 
territory of each State participant, and each State participant shall inform the Fund  of the specific action 
which it has taken  for such purpose . 
ARTICLE 42  
STATUS  
The Fund shall possess full judicial personality an d, in particular, full capacity : 
(i) to contract;  
(ii) to acquire, and dispose of, immovable and movable property; and  
(iii) to institute legal proceedings . 
ARTICLE 43  
LEGAL  PROCESS  
1. The Fund shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal process, except in cases arising out of or 
in connection with the exercise of its power to receive loans in accordance with Article 8, in whi ch case 
actions may be brought against the Fund in a court of competent jurisdiction in the territory of a country 
in which the Fund has its office, or has appointed an agent for the purpose of accepting service or notice 
of process, or has otherwise agree d to be s ued. 
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, no action shall be brought against the Fund by any 
participant, or by any agency or instrumentality of a participant, or by any entity or person directly or 
indirectly acting for or deriving claims from a participant or from any agency or instrumentality of a 
participant . Participants shall have recourse to such special procedures for the settlement of disputes 
between the Fund and its participants as may be prescribed in this Agreement, in th e bye -laws and 
regulations of the Fund, or in contracts entered into with the Fund . 
3. The Fund shall also make provision for appropriate modes of settlement of disputes in cases which 
do not come within the provisions of paragraph 2 and of Articles 52 and  53 and which are subject to the 
immunity of the Fund by virtue of paragraph 1 of this Article . 
4. Where by virtue of any of the provisions of this Agreement the Fund does not enjoy immunity 
from legal process, the Fund, and its property and assets whereve r located and by whomsoever held, shall 
nevertheless be immune from all forms of seizure, attachment or execution before the delivery of final 
judgment against the Fund . 
ARTICLE 44  
IMMUNITY OF ASSETS  
Property and assets of the Fund, wherever located and by  whomsoever held, shall be immune from 
search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation or any other form of taking or foreclosure by executive or 
legislative action .  5 ARTICLE 45  
IMMUNITY OF ARCHIVES  
The archives of the Fund, and, in general, all documents  belonging to it or held by it , shall be 
inviolable, wherever  located . 
ARTICL E 46 
FREEDOM OF ASSETS FROM RESTRICTION  
To the extent necessary to carry out the purpose and function of the Fund, and subject to the 
provisions of this Agreement, all property and other assets of the Fund shall be free from restriction by 
financial controls, regulations, or moratoria of any kind . 
ARTICLE 47  
PRIVILEGE FOR COMMUNICATIONS  
Official communications of the Fund shall be accorded by each State participant the same treat ment 
as it accords to the official communications of other international financial institutions of which it is a 
member . 
ARTICLE 48  
IMMUNITIES AND PRIVILEGES OF OFFICIALS AND PERSONNEL  
All governors and direct ors, and their alternates, the President and personnel, including experts 
performing missions for the Fund:  
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts performed by them in their official 
capacity;  
(ii) when they are not local nationals, shall be accorded no less favourable immunities  from 
immigration restrictions, alien registration requirements and national service obligations, and no less 
favourable facilities as regards exchange regulations, than are accorded by the State participant 
concerned to the representatives, official s and employees of comparable rank of any other 
international financial institution of which it is a member; and  
(iii) shall be granted no less favourable treatment in respect of travelling facilities than is 
accorded by the State participant concerned to repres entatives, official s and employees of comparable 
rank of any other international financial institution of which it is a member . 
ARTICLE 49  
EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION  
1. The Fund, its assets, property, income, operations and transactions, shall be exempt from all direct 
taxation, and from all customs duties, or taxes having equivalent effect, on goods imported or exported 
for its official use . The Fund shall also be exempt from any obligation for the payment, withholding or 
collection of any tax or duty . 
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1, the Fund shall not claim exemption from taxes 
which are no more than charges for services rendered . 
3. Articles imported under an exemption provided for by paragraph 1 shall not be sold in the territory 
of the St ate participant which granted the exemption except under conditions agreed with that participant . 
4. No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emoluments paid by the Fund to the President 
and personnel including experts performing missions fo r it.  6 ARTICLE 50  
WAIVER BY THE FUND 
1. The immunities, exemptions and privileges provided in this Chapter are granted in the interests of 
the Fund . The Board of Directors may waive, to such extent and upon such conditions as it may 
determine, the immunities, exemptions and privileges provided in this Chapter in cases where its action 
would in its opinion further the interests of the Fund . 
2. Regardless of the provisions of paragraph 1, the President shall have the right and the duty to waive 
the im munity of any of the personnel, including experts performing missions for the Fund, in cases where, 
in his opinion, the immunity would impede the course of justice and can be waived without prejudice to 
the interests of the Fund . 
 
 
--------------------------The Andhra Scientific Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE ANDHRA SCIENTIFIC COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND  
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1982  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company . 
4. General effect of vesting . 
5. Company to be liable  for certain prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to  direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in a 
Government company . 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount . 
8. Payment of further amounts . 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company . 
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession . 
12. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF T HE COMPANY  
13. Continuance of employees . 
14. Provident fund and other funds . 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner . 
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government company . 
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
19. Priority of claims . 
20. Examination of claims.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims . 
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect . 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Central Government or Government company  
27. Penalties.  
28. Offences by companies . 
29. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
30. Delegation of powers . 
31. Power to make rules . 
32. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
  THE ANDHRA SCIENTIFIC COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND  
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 71 OF 1982  
[13th November, 1982 .] 
An Act to provide  for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Andhra Scientific 
Company Limited, with a view to securing the proper management of  such undertakings so 
as to subserve  the interests of the general public by ensuring the continuity of productio n of 
scientific instruments which are vital to the needs of the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Andhra Scientific Company Limited had been engaged in the manufacture and 
production of articles mentioned in the  First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , namely, scientific instruments;  
AND WHEREAS the management of the undertakings of the Andhra Scientific Company Limited was 
taken over by the Ce ntral Government under se ction 1 8AA of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Andhra Scientific Company Limited 
to ensure that the interests of the general public are served by the continuance, by the undertakings of the 
Company, of the production of the aforesaid articles which are vital to the needs of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called t he Andhra Scientific Company 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1982.  
(2) The provisions of sections 27 and 28 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of July, 1981.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of July, 1981;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 15;  
(c) “Company ” means the Andhra Scientific Company Limited, a company within the meaning of 
the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at Machilipatnam in the State o f 
Andhra Pradesh;  
(d) “Custodian ” means the Custodian appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 9 to take over, or 
carry on, the management of the Company;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of that provision and different dates may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(h) “the Government company ” means the Government company in which the undertakings of 
the Company are directed to vest under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(i) words  and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act, 1956           
(1 of 1956) , shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
 4 
 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company .—
On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company 
in relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, s tand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash 
on hand, cheques, demand drafts, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other rights and interests 
in, or arising out of, such prope rty as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, 
possession, power or control of the Company, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, 
registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other in  cumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court, tribunal 
or other authority restricting the use of such properties in any manner or appointing any receiver in 
respect of the whole or any part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every m ortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an  intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that th e mortgagee of any propert y referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other i nterest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount specified in section 7 and also out of the 
amounts  determined under section 8, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in this Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Company in relation to any undertaki ng which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before that day shall continue to be in force on and after such day in accordance with its 
tenor in relation to and for the purposes  of such under taking, and, on and from the dat e of vesting of such 
undertaking under section 6 in a Government company, such Government company shall be deemed to be 
substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had  been granted to 
such Government company and that Government company shall hold it for the remainder of the period for 
which the Company would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whate ver nature in relation to any 
property which has vested in the Central Government , under section 3, instituted or preferred by or 
against the Company, is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, 
prejudicially affected by reason  of the transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced 
by or against the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under 
section 6, to vest in a Government company, by or against the Government company.  
 5. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of the Company and shall be 
enforceable against it, and not against the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the 
Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in a Government company, against  that Government 
company.  
  5 
 (2) For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other provision of this Act, no 
liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable 
against the  Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under 
section 6, to vest in a Government company, against that Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
under takings of the Company, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or, where 
the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to  vest in a Government company, 
against that Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central Governmen t, or, 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in a Government 
company, against that Government company.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in a 
Government c ompany .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central 
Government may, subject to such terms and conditions as it may think fit to impose, direct, by 
notification, that the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the C ompany in 
relation to its undertakings, which have vested in that Government under section 3, shall, instead of 
continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in a Government company either on the date of the 
notification or on such earlier or later da te (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be 
specified in the notification . 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company, in relation to its undertakings, vest in a 
Government company under sub -section ( 1), the Government compan y shall, on and from the date of 
such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such undertakings, and all  the rights and 
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting, b e deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under section 
3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash and in the manner 
specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees two hundred and twenty -four lakhs and ten thousa nd. 
8. Payment of further amounts .—(1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its  
undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company in cash, an amount 
calculated at the rate of rupees ten thousand per annum for th e period commencing on the date on which 
the management of the undertakings of the Company was taken over in pursuance of the order made by 
the Centr al Government under section 18A A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  
(65 of 1951) , and  ending on the appointed day.  
(2) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions of sections 3, 4 and 5, there shall 
also be given by the Central Government to the Company in cash, an amount calculated at the rate of 
rupees ten thousand per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date 
on which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
(3) The amount specified in section 7, and the amount determined in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -sections ( 1) and (2) shall carry simple intere st at the rate of four per cent.  per annum for the period 
commencing on the appoin ted day and ending on the dat e on which payment of such amounts made by 
the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(4) The amounts determined  in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 7.  6 
 (5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall be discharged from the 
amount referred to in section 7, and also from the amounts determined under sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), 
in accordance with t he rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—(1)The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the 
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Go vernment under section 3, 
shall,— 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1)of section 
6, vest in the Government company specified in such direction; or  
(b) where no such direction has been  made by the Central Government,  vest in one or more 
Custodians appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2), 
and thereupon the Gove rnment company so specified or the Cust odian or Custodians so appointed , as the 
case may be, shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion of all other persons, all such powers and do all 
such things as the Company  is authoris ed to exercise and do in relation to its undertakings.  
(2)The Central Government may appoint one or more individuals or a Government company as the 
Custodian or Custodians of the undertakings of the Company in relation to which no direction has been 
made by it under sub -section ( 1) of section 6.  
(3)The Custodian or Custodians so appointed shall receive, from the funds of the undertakings of the 
Company, such remuneration as the Central Government may fix and shall hold office during the pleasure 
of the Centra l Government.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc .—(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in a Government 
company or on the appointment of a Custodian or  Custodians, all persons in charge of the management of 
the undertakings of the Company immediately before such vesting or appointment, shall be bound to 
deliver to the Government company or the Custodian or Custodians, as the case may be, all assets, book s 
of account, registers or other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of the Company.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Government company or the Custodian or Custodians, and such Government company 
or the Custodian or Custodians may also, if it is considered necessary so to do, apply to the Central 
Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the undertakings of 
the Company shall be conducted or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such 
management.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession .—(1) Any person who has, on 
the appointed day, in his possession or under hi s control, any assets, books, documents or other papers 
relating to any undertaking owned by the Company, which have vested in the Central Government or in a 
Government company under this Act, and which belong to the Company, or would have so belonged, if 
the undertakings owned by the Company had not vested in the Central Government or such Government 
company, shall be liable to account for the said assets, books, documents and other papers to the Central 
Government or the Government company and shall deliv er them up to the Central Government or such 
Government company or to such person or persons as the Central Government or the Government 
company may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government company  aforesaid may take or cause to  be taken all 
necessary steps for securing possession of the undertakings of the Company which have vested in the 
Central Government or the Government company under this Act.  
(3) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory o f all its properties and assets,  as on the appointed day, 7 
 pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, and, for this 
purpose, the Central Governmen t or the Government company aforesaid shall afford to the Company all 
reasonable facilities.  
12. Accounts and audit .—The Custodian or Custodians of the undertakings of the Company shall 
maintain an account of the undertakings of the Company in such form an d manner and under such 
conditions as may be prescribed and the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , shall apply 
to the audit of the accounts so maintained as they apply to the audit of the accounts of a company.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
13. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed in any undertakin g of the Company shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government, and  
(b) where the undertaking s of the C ompany are directed, under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, to 
vest in a Government company, an employee of the Government company on and from the date of 
such vesting,  
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government, or the Gover nment company, as the case 
may b e, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity a nd other matters as , would have been 
admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment under the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, is duly 
terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by th e Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or ot her person employed 
in any undertaking of the Company, to the Central Government or the Government company, shall not 
entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force and no such claim s hall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
14. Provident fund and other funds .—(1)Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of its undertakings, 
the moneys relatable to the officers or other employees whose services have become transferred by or 
under this Act to the Central Government or the Government company, shall, out of the moneys standing, 
on the appointed day, to the credit of  such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund,  stand 
transferred to, and vest  in, the Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be.  
(2)The moneys which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or t he 
Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or Government 
company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company under sections 7 and 8, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they h ave 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  8 
 (4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government shall, 
within thir ty days from the specified date , pay in cash to the Commissione r, for payment to the 
Company, — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 7; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amounts payable to the Company under section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner in 
the Public Account of India and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall  be deposited 
by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated by the 
Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of the Company 
in relation to which paymen ts have been made to him under this Act.  
(4) Interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in sub -
section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the Company.  
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or Government company .—(1) The Central 
Government or the Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive, up to the 
specified date , to the exclusion of  all other persons, any money due to the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or the Government company, and realised 
after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to  the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be, may make a claim to 
the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by that Government or Government company after 
the appointed day, for discharging any liabi lity of the Company in relation to any period prior to the 
appointed day, and every such claim shall have priority, in accordance with the priorities attaching under 
this Act, to the matter in relation to which such liability has been discharged by the Cen tral Government 
or the Government company.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged o n or before the specified date shall be the 
liabilities of the Company.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
with regard to any of the matters specified in the Schedule pertaining to any undertaking owned by it shall 
prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thir ty days from the specified date : 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a  further 
period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
19. Priority of claims .—The claims made under section 18 shall have priorities in accordance with 
the following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal propo rtions and be paid 
accordingly; and 
(c) the q uestion of discharging any  liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  9 
 20. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order.  
(2) If, on examination of the cl aims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  
21. Admission or re jection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities specified in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the country 
and in one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commission er may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the perio d specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim a nd after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of  his functions, including the place or places at which he may hold his sitting and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the India n Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195, and Chapter XXVI, of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against such d ecision to the principal civil c ourt of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of Hig h Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court exercising jurisdiction over the place in which the registered office 
of the Company is situated and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges  of 
that High Court.  
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner .—After  admitting a claim under this Act, the 
amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons to whom 
such amount is due, and on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of such claim shall 
stand dischar ged. 
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company .—(1) If, out of the moneys paid to him, in relation 
to the undertakings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such  balance to the Company.  10 
 (2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property has vested in the Central 
Government or a Government company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property 
does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the Government 
company to continue to possess such machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and 
conditions under which they were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wo und up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order, if any, for the payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having 
effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act,  or in any decree or order of any court, tri bunal or other 
authority.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by Central Government or Government 
company .—Every contract  entered into by the Company in relation to any of its undertakings, which has 
vested in the Central Government under  section 3, for any service, sale or supply, and in force 
immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period of thirty days from the 
date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, cease to h ave effect unless such contract is , 
before the expiry of that period, ratified in writing, by the Central Government or the Government 
company in which such undertaking has been vested under this Act and in ratifying such contract, the 
Central Government or the Government compan y may make such alterations or modificati ons therein as it 
may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or the Government company shall not omit to ratify a contract 
and shall not make any alteration  or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government or the Government company; and  
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of  being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
27. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his  possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the Government 
company; or  
(b) wrongfully  obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the Government company 
or any person or body of persons specified by that Governmen t or Government company, any 
document relating to such undertakings, which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
  11 
 (d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Government company or any person or body 
of persons specified by that Govern ment or Government company, any assets, books of account, 
registers or other documents in his possessio n, custody or control, relating to the undertakings of the 
Company; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the undertakings o f the 
Company or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be 
false or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thou sand rupees, or with both.  
28. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of , and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall  render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
office r of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie again st the Central Government or any officer  or other employee of that Government  or the 
Custodian or the Government company or other person authorised by that Government, Custodian or 
Government company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other 
employee of that Government or the Custodian or the Government company or other person authorised  by 
that Government, Custodian or Government company for any damage caused or likely to be caused by 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
30. Delegation of powers .—(1)The Central Government may, by notification, direc t that all or any of 
the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section and sections 
31 and 32, may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2)Whenever any delegation of  power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the form and manner in which, and the conditions under which, the Custodian or Custodians 
shall maintain the accounts as required by section 12;  12 
 (c) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or other fund referred  to in s ection 14 
shall be dealt wi th; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total pe riod of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification i n the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to th e validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remov e the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act recei ves the assent of the President.  
 
THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 18, 20( 1), 21(1) and 23( 1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY  
Post-take-over management period  
Category I  
Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company.  
Category II  
Loans advanced by the Central Government.  
Category III  
Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
Category IV  
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Government or a State Government.  
Pre-take-over management period  
Category V  
Arrear s in relation to contributions to be made by the Company to the provident fund, salaries, 
wages and other amounts due to the employees of the Company.  
Category VI  
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues, including Employees ’ State Insurance 
contrib utions, to the Central Government, a Local Authority or a State Electricity Board.  
Category  VII 
(i) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
(ii) Any other dues.  
 
--------------------------The Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE ANTI -HIJACKING ACT, 1982  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
HIJACKING AND CONNECTED OFFENCES  
3. Hijacking.  
4. Punishment for hijacking . 
5. Punishment for acts of violence connected with hijacking . 
5A. Conferment of powers of investigations, etc.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
6A. Designated Courts . 
6B. Offences of tribale by Designated Court . 
6C. Application of Code to proceedings before a Designated Court . 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
7. Provisions as to extradition.  
7A. Provision as to bail.  
8. Contracting parties to Convention.  
9. Power to treat certain aircraft to be registered in Convention countries.  
10. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution.  
10A. Presumptions as  to offences under sections 4 and 5 . 
11. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
 
  2 
 THE ANTI -HIJACKING ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 65 OF 1982  
[6th November , 1982.]  
An Act to give effect to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft and 
for matters connected therewith.  
WHEREAS  a Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft was, on the 16th day of 
December, 1970, signed at The Hague;  
AND WHEREAS it is expedient that India should accede to the said Convention and make provisions 
for giving effect thereto and for matters connected therewith;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Anti -
Hijacking Act, 1982 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to any 
offence thereunder committed outside India by any person . 
(3) It shall come into force on such  date1 as the  Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aircraft”  means any aircraft, whether or not registered in India, other than a military aircraft 
or an aircraft used in customs or police service;  
(b) “aircraft registered in India ” means an aircraft which is for the time being registered in India;  
(c) “Convention country” means a country in which the Hague Convention is for the time being 
in force;  
(d) “Hague Convention ” means the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of 
Aircraft signed at The Hague on the 16th day of December, 1970;  
(e) “military aircraft” means an aircraft of the naval, military, airforce or any other armed forces 
of any country and includes every aircraft commanded for the time being by a person in any such 
force detailed for the purpose . 
CHAPTER II  
HIJACKING AND CONNECTED OFFENCES  
3. Hijacking .—(1) Whoever on board an aircraft in flight, unlawful ly, by force or threat of force or 
by any other form of intimidation, seizes or exercises control of that aircraft, commits the offence of 
hijacking of such aircraft . 
(2) Whoever attempts to commit any of the acts referred to in sub -section ( 1) in relation to any 
aircraft, or abets the commission of any such act, shall also be deemed to have committed the offence of 
hijacking of such aircraft . 
(3) For the purposes of this section, an aircraft shall be deemed to be in flight at any time from the 
moment when all its external doors are closed following embarkation until the moment when any such 
door is opened for disembarkation , and in the case of a forced landing, the flight shall be deemed to 
continue until the competent authorities of the country in which such forced landing takes place take over 
the responsibility for the aircraft and for persons and property on board . 
4. Punishment for hijacking .—Whoever commits the offence of hija cking shall be punished with 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine . 
5. Punishment for acts of violence connected with hijacking .—Whoever, being a person 
committing the offence of hijacking of an aircraft, commits, in connection with such offence , any act of 
                                                           
1. 15th November, 1983, vide notification No. S.O. 1798(E), dated 12th November, 1982, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 violence against any passenger or member of the crew of such aircraft, shall be punished with the same 
punishment with which he would have been punishable under any law for the time being in force in India 
if such act had been committed in India . 
1[5A. Conferment of powers of investigation s, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , for the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, confer on any officer of the Central government, powers of arrest, 
investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police officer under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974) . 
(2) All officers of police and all officers of Government are hereby required and empowered to assist 
the officer of the Central Government referred to in sub -section ( 1), in the execution  of the provisions of 
this Act.] 
6. Jurisdiction .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), where an offence under section 4 or 
section 5 is committed outside India, the person committing such offence may be dealt with in respect 
thereof as if such offence had been committed at any place within India at which he  may be found . 
(2) No court shall take cogni zance of an offence punishable under section 4 or section 5 which is 
committed outside India unless — 
(a) such offence is committed on board an aircraft registered in India;  
(b) such offence is committed on board an aircraft which is for the time being leased without 
crew to a lessee who has his principal place of business or where he has no such place of business, his 
permanent residence in India; or  
(c) the  alleged offender is a citizen of India or is on board the aircraft in relation to which such 
offence is committed when it lands in India or is found in India . 
2[6A. Designated Courts .—(1) For the purpose of providing for speedy trial, the State Government  
shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify a Court of Session to be a Designated Court for such area or areas as may be specified in the 
notification . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , a 
Designated Court shall, as far as practicable, hold the trial on a day -to-day basis . 
6B. Offences of tribal e by Designated Court .—(1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ,— 
(a) all offences under this Act shall be triable  only by the Designated Court specified under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 6A ; 
(b) where a person accused of or suspected of the commission of an offence under  this Act is 
forwarded to a Magistrate under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 167 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), such Magistrate may authorise  the detention of such person in 
such custody as he thinks fit for a period not exceeding fifteen days in the whole where such 
Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate and seven days in the whole where such Magistrate is an 
Executive Magistrate:  
Provided that where such Magistrate considers, — 
(i) when such person is forwarded to him as aforesaid; or  
(ii) upon or at any time before the expiry of the period of detention authorised by him , 
that the detention of such person is unnecessary, he shall order such person to be forwarded to the 
Designated Court having jurisdiction;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  4 
 (c) the Designated Court may exercise, in relation to the person forwarded to it under clause ( b), 
the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a case may exercise under section 167 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , in relation to an accused person in such case 
who has been forwarded to him under that section;  
(d) a Designated Court may, upo n a perusal of a complaint made by an officer of the Central 
Government or the State Government , as the case may be , authorised in this behalf, take cognizance 
of that offence without the accused being committed to it for trial . 
(2) When trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court may also try an offence other than an 
offence under this Act, with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974), be charged at the same trial . 
6C. Application of C ode to proceedings before a Designated Court .—Save as otherwise provided 
in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973  (2of 1974) shall apply to  the 
proceedings before a Designated C ourt and the person conducting a prosecution before a Designated 
Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecut or.] 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
7. Provisions as to extradition .—(1) The offences under section 4 and section 5 shall be deemed to 
have been included as extraditable  offences and provided for in all the extradition treaties made by India 
with Convention countries and which extend to, and are binding on, India on the date of commencement 
of this Act . 
(2) For the purposes of the application of th e Extradition Act, 1962  (34 of 1962)  to offences under 
this Act, any aircraft registered in a Convention country shall, at any time while that aircraft is in flight, 
be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that country, whether or not it is for the time  being also within 
the jurisdiction of any other country . 
1[7A. Provision as to bail .—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974)  no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody , be released on 
bail or on his own bond unless — 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such 
release; and  
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application , the Court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to 
commit any offence while on bail . 
(2) The limitation s on granting of bail specified in sub -section ( 1) are in additio n to the limitations 
under the C ode of Crimina l Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force on 
granting of bail. 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers of the High Court 
regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Pr ocedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) .] 
8. Contracting parties to Convention .—The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, certify as to who are the contracting parties to the Hague Convention and to what extent 
they have availed themselves of the provisions of the Convention, and any such notification shall be 
conclusive evidence of the matters certified therein . 
9. Power to treat certain aircraft to be registered in Convention countries .—If the Central 
Government is satisfied that the requirem ents of Article 5 of the Hague Convention have been satisfied in 
relation to any aircraft, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such aircraft shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be treated as registered in such Convention country a s may be specified in the 
notification . 
10. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution .—No prosecution for an offence under this Act 
shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 1994, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  5 
 1[10A. Presumptions as to offences under sections 4 and 5 .—In a prosecution for an offence under 
section 4 or section 5 if it is proved — 
(a) that the arms, ammunition or explosives were recovered from the possession of the accused 
and there is reason to believe that such arms, ammunition or explo sives of similar nature were used in 
the commission of such offence; or  
(b) that there is evidence of use of force, threat of force or any other form to intimidation caused 
to the crew or passengers in connection with the commission of such offence,  
the De signated Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused had committed such 
offence . ] 
11. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of the provisions of this Act . 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government for any damage caused 
or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or in tended to be done in pursuance of the 
provisions of this Act . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 1994, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  
--------------------------The Chaparmukh-Silghat Railway Line and the Katakhal-Lalabazar Railway Line (Nationalisation) Act, 1982--------------------------
1 THE CHAPARMUKH -SILGHAT RAILWAY LINE AND  THE KATAKHAL -LAL ABAZA R 
RAILWAY LINE (NATIONALISATION ) ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 36 OF 1982  
[17th August , 1982 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition of the  undertakings of the Chaparmukh -Silghat Railway 
Company Limited  in relation to the Chaparmukh -Silghat Railway Line and the undertakings 
of the Katakhal -Lalabazar Railway Company Limited in relation to the Katakhal -Lalabazar 
Railway Line with a view to securing the efficient operation of the said Railway lines so as to  
subserve the needs of the north -eastern areas of India and to protect the links of 
communication between the said areas and the rest of the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Chaparmukh -Silghat Railw ay Line owned by the Chaparmukh -Silghat Railway 
Company Limited and the Katakhal -Lalabazar Railway Line owned by the Katakhal -Lalabazar Railway 
Company Limited, are vital communication links between the north -eastern areas of India and the rest of 
the country;  
AND WHEREAS the said Railway Lines are integrated with the met re gauge system of the contiguous 
North -East Frontier Railway;  
AND WHEREAS the condition of assets of the aforesaid companies has reached such a stage that it may 
not be possible to operate train s ervices for long on the railway lines owned by them;  
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to secure the efficient operation of the said Railway lines;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Chaparmukh -Silghat Railway Line and the                
Katakhal -Lalabazar Railway Line (Nationalisation) Act, 1982 . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the day on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(c) “specified company ” means a company specified in clause ( d); 
(d) “two specified companies ” means,— 
(i) the Chaparmukh -Silghat Railway Company Limited, being a company as defined in       
the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and having its registered office at 12, Mission Row, 
Calcutta; and  
(ii) the Katakhal -Lalabazar Railway Company Limited, being a company as defined in the  
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and having its registered office at Mcleod House, 3, Netaji 
Subhash Road, Calcutta;  
(e) “undertakings ” means,— 
(i) in relation to the Chaparmukh -Silghat Railway Company Limited, the                 
Chaparmukh -Silghat Railway Line and all other undertakings of that company relating to that 
Railway line;  
(ii) in relation to the Katakhal -Lalabazar Railway Company Limited, the Katakhal -Lalabazar 
Railway line and all other undertakings of that company relating to that Railway line;  
(f) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Compan ies                
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act . 2 CHAPTER I I 
ACQUISITION OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO S PECIFIED COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in the Central Government of the undertakings of the two specified 
companies .—On the appointed day, the undertakings of each of the two specified companies and the 
right , title and interest of each of the two specified companies in relation to such undertakings shall, by 
virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in , the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of each specified compan y shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and 
immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments , machinery  and equipment, cash 
balances, cash on hand , cheques, demand drafts, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other 
rights and interests in , or arising out of , such property as were immediately before the appointed day in 
the ownership, possession , power or control of the specified company, whether within or outside India, 
and all books of account , registers  and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other encumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court 
restricting the use of such proper ties in any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or 
any part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) For the removal of doubts , it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section (2), or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in , or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests , payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of t he amounts payable under sections 6 and 7 to the 
specified company owning such property, but no such mortgage , charge, lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(4) Any licence or other ins trument granted to a specified company in relation to any undertaking 
which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in 
force immediately before that day shall continue to be in force on and after such d ay in accordance with 
its tenor in relation to and for the purposes of such undertaking , and, on and from the date of vesting of 
such undertaking under section 3 in the Central Government, that Government shall be deemed to be 
substituted in such licence o r other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been granted to 
that Government and that Government shall hold it for the remainder of the period for which the specified 
company would have held it under the terms thereof.  
5. Owners of the two  specified companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—(1) Every 
liability of a specified company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of 
the specified company and shall be enforceable against it and not aga inst the Central Government.  
(2) For the removal of doubt s, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) no liability of either of the two specified companies in relation to its under takings in respect of 
any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable  against the Central Government;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of either of the two specified companies passed on or after the appointed day, in respect 
of any matter, claim or dispute, which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government;  
(c) no liability incurred by a specified company before the appointed day, for the contravention of 
any provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforc eable against the Central Government . 3 CHAPTER I II 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT  
6. Payment of amount .—(1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under 
section 3, of the right, title and interest of each of the two specified companies in relati on to its 
undertakin gs, there shall be paid in cash  by the Central Government, before the expiry of a period of three 
months from the appointed day, — 
(i) to the Chaparmukh -Silghat Railway Company Limited, an aggregate amount of rupees ten 
lakhs and fifty thou sand; and  
(ii) to the Katakhal -Lalabazar Railway Company Limited, an aggregate amount of rupees nine 
lakhs . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), out of the amount referred to in           
clause ( i) of that sub -section, the Central Government shall deduct, in the first instance, any amount due 
from the Chap armukh -Silghat Railway Company Limited to that Government and the liability of that 
company shall, to the extent of such deduction, stand discharged and such deduction shall have p riority 
over all other debts, secured or unsecured . 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), out of the amount referred to in clause ( ii) 
of that sub -section, the Central Government shall deduct, in the first instance, the amount due from  the 
Katakhal -Lalabazar Railway Company Limited in respect of the secured debentures  issued by that 
company and shall pay the sums so deducted for the redemption of such debentures  and the liability of 
that company in relation to the said debentures  shall,  to the extent of such deduction, stand discharged and 
such deduction shall have priority over all other debts, secured or unsecured . 
7. Interest .—The amount referred to in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6 as 
reduced by the deduction under that section, shall, if not paid to the company concerned before the expiry 
of the period specified in the said sub -section, carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum 
for the period commencing on the appointed day and en ding on the date on which payment of such 
amount as so reduced is made by the Central Government to that company:  
Provided that if the amount as so reduced is tendered to the specified company but not accepted by it, 
no interest shall run from the date of such tender . 
CHAPTER I V 
DUTY OF PERSONS IN CHARGE OF MANAGEMENT OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO SPECIFIED 
COMPANIES TO DELIVER ALL ASSETS, ETC.  
8. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the two specified companies 
to deliver all assets, etc. —On the vesting of the undertakings of the two specified companies in the 
Central Government, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings immediately before 
such vesting, shall be bound to deliver to the Central Government all assets, books of account, registers or 
other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings . 
9. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession .—(1) Any person who has, on the 
appointed day, in his possession or under his control any assets, books, documents or other papers relating 
to any undertaking owned by a specified company which have vested in the Central Government and 
which belong to the specified company, or would have so belonged, if the undertakings owned by the 
specified company had not vested in the Central Government, shall be liable to account for the said assets, 
books, documents and other papers to the Central Government and shall deliver them up to the Central 
Government or to such person or persons as the Central Government may specify in this behalf . 
(2) The Central Government may take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for securing possession 
of the un dertakings of the two specified companies which have vested in the Central Government under 
this Act . 4 (3) The two specified companies shall within such period as the Central Government may allow in 
this behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all their properties and assets, as on the 
appointed day, pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 
3 and, for this purpose, the Central Government shall afford to the two specified companies all reasonable 
facilities . 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
10. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority . 
11. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any undertaking of 
either of the two specified companies, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central 
Government; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains any property forming part of any undertaking of 
either of the two specified companies; or  
(c) wil fully withh olds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or any person or persons 
specified by that Government any document relating to such undertaking, which may be in his 
possession, custody or control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or any  person or persons specified by that 
Government, any assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, custody or 
control, relating to the undertakings of either of the two specified companies; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any undertaking of either of the 
two specified companies or prefers any claim which he knows or has reason to believe to be false or 
grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two y ears, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both . 
12. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time of the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to , the company for the conduct of the business of the company , as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything containe d in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of , or is attributable to any neglect on the part of , any director,  manager, secretar y or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly . 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm , means a partner in the firm . 5 13. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other employee of that Government or any 
officer or other person authorised by that Government for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act . 
(2) No suit  or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other 
employee of that Government or any officer or other person authorised by that Government for any 
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good f aith done or intended to be done 
under this Act . 
14. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification , direct that all or             
any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section and 
section s 15 and 16 may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the said 
notification . 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power i s made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government . 
15. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification , make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act . 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty d ays which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or bo th Houses agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of an ything previously done 
under that rule . 
16. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order , not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Chit Funds Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE CHIT FUNDS ACT, 1982  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act to override other laws, memorandum, articles, etc.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF CHITS, COMMENCEMENT AND CONDUCT OF CHIT BUSINESS  
4. Prohibition of chits not sanctioned or registered under the Act.  
5. Prohibition of invitation for subscriptions except under certain conditions.  
6. Form of chit agreement.  
7. Filing of chit agreement.  
8. Minimum  capital requirements for the commencement, etc. , of a chit, and cr eation of a reserve 
fund, by a c ompany.  
9. Commencement of chit.  
10. Copies of chit agreement to be given to subscribers.  
11. Use of the words “chit”, “chit fund”, “ chitty ” or “ kuri”. 
12. Prohibition of transacting business other than chit business by a company.  
13. Aggregate amount of chits.  
14. Utilisation of funds.  
15. Alteration of chit agreement.  
16. Date, time and place of conducting chits.  
17. Minutes of proceedings.  
18. Copies of mi nutes to be filed with Registrar.  
19. Restriction on opening of new place of business.  
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF FOREMAN  
20. Security to be given by foreman.  
21. Rights of foreman.  
22. Duties of foreman.  
23. Books, records, etc., to be kept by forem an. 
24. Ba lance sheet.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Liability of foreman to subscribers.  
26. Withdrawal of foreman.  
CHAPTER IV  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF NON -PRIZED SUBSCRIBERS  
27. Non -prized subscribers to pay subscriptions and obtain receipts.  
28. Removal of defaulting subscribers.  
29. Substitution of subscribers.  
30. Amounts due to defaulting subscribers.  
CHAPER V  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PRIZED SUBSCRIBERS  
31. Prized subscriber to furnish security.  
32. Prized subscriber to pay subscriptions regularly.  
33. Foreman to demand  future subscriptions by written notice.  
CHAPTER VI  
TRANSFERS  
34. Restrictions on transfer of rights of foreman.  
35. Transfer of non -prized subscriber’s rights to be in writing.  
36.  Recognition of transfer by foreman.  
37. Entry of transferee’s name in the  books.  
CHAPTET VII  
MEETINGS OF GENERAL BODY OF SUBSCRIBERS  
38. Meetings of general body of subscribers.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TERMINATION OF CHITS  
39. Provision for continuation of chits in certain cases.  
40. Termination of chits.  
41. Copy of assent or consent to be filed with Registrar.  
42. Refund of non -prized subscribers’ subscriptions.  
43. Subscribers’ dues to be first charge on chit assets.  
CHAPTER IX  
INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS  
44. Foreman to allow certain subscribers to inspect chit records.  
45. Preservation of chit records by foreman.  
46. Inspection of chit books and records by Registrar.  
47. Power of Reserve Bank to inspect chit books and records.  
  3 
 CHAPTER X  
WINDING UP OF CHITS  
SECTIONS  
48. Circumstances under which chits may be wound up.  
49. Application for w inding up.  
50. Bar to winding up proceedings.  
51. Commencement and effect of winding up order.  
52. Injunction order.  
53. Powers of Registrar.  
54. Vesting of chit assets in Registrar or other person s. 
55. Suits , etc., to be stayed on winding up order.  
56. Notification of winding up order.  
57. Cessation of winding up proceedings on insolvency of foreman , etc., or the winding up of the 
company and transfer of such proceedings . 
58. Award of compensation to foreman.  
59. Right to appeal.  
60. Limitation.  
CHAPTER XI 
APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS AND LEVY OF FEES  
61. Appointment of Registrar and other officers.  
62. Inspection of documents in Registrar’s office.  
63. Levy of fees.  
CHAPTER XII  
DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION  
64. Disputes relating to chit business.  
65. Period of lim itation.  
66. Settlement of disputes.  
67. Procedure for settlement of disputes and powers of Registrar or nominee.  
68. Attachment before judgment and other interlocutory orders . 
69. Decision of Registrar or nominee.  
70. Appeal against decision of Registrar or nominee.  
71. Money how recovered.  
72. Private transfer of property made after issue of certificate void against foreman.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
73. Advisory role of Reserve Bank.  
74. Appeals.  
75. Powers of Registrar to give extension of time for filing documents.  4 
 SECTIONS  
76. Penalties.  
77. Penalty for second and subsequent convictions.  
78. Application of fine.  
79. Offences by companies.  
80. Cognizance of offences.  
81. Power to compound offences.  
82. Power to enter and search any place and to seize any documents.  
83. Officers to be public servants.  
84. Power to delegate.  
85. Act not to apply to certain chits.  
86. Banks not to conduct chit business.  
87. Power to exempt.  
88. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
89. Power to make rules.  
90. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  5 
 THE CHIT FUNDS ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1982  
[19th August,  1982 .] 
An Act to provide for the regulation of chit funds and for matters connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of t he Republic  of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Chit Funds Act, 1982.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates  may be appointed for different States.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “approved bank ” means the State B ank of India constituted under s ection 3 of the State Bank 
of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955), or a sub sidiary bank constituted under s ection 3 of the Stat e        
Bank  of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959), or a correspond ing new bank       
constituted  under s ection 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)                             
Act, 1970 (5 of 1970), or a Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural 
                                                           
1. The provisions of this Act shall come into force in — 
 
 the State of West Bengal on 2nd April, 1984, vide notification No. S.O. 143(E), dated 1st March, 1984,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,    
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Tamil Nadu on 13th April, 1984, vide notification No. S.O. 281(E), dated 12th April, 1984, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,     
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Himachal Pradesh on 1st November, 1984, vide notification No. S.O. 808(E), dated  29th October, 1984, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Sikkim on 6th  November, 1984, vide notificati on No. S.O. 837(E), dated 14th November, 1984, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands on 1st July, 1985, vide notification No. S.O. 493(E), dated 27th June, 1985, see Gazette of 
India, E xtraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the Union territory of Pondicherry on 1st  November, 1986 vide notification No. S.O. 771(E), dated 28th October, 1986 see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Rajasthan on 1st July, 1989 vide notification No. S.O. 481(E), dated 26th June, 1989, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,   
sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Assam  on 1st March, 1990, vide notification No. S.O. 166(E), dated 22nd February, 1992, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,     
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Manipur on 1st  November, 1994, vide notification No. S.O. 779(E), dated 28th October, 1994, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Tripura on  1st March, 1995, vide notification No. S.O. 1 31(E), dated 1st March, 1995 see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (ii). 
the State of Bihar on 2nd October,1987, vide notification No. S.O. 864(E), dated 28th September, 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,    
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the S tate of Punjab on 1st April, 1999, vide notification No. S.O. 204(E), dated 31st March, 1999, see Gazette of  India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Karnataka on 2nd January, 1984 vide notification No. S.O. 946(E), dated 30th December, 198 3, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the Union terr itory of Chandigarh on 1st May, 1984, vide notification No. S.O. 322(E), dated 27th April, 1984, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli  on 3rd September, 1984, vide notification No. S.O. 660(E), dated 30th August, 1984, see Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Ori ssa on 1st September,  1985, vide notification No. S.O.  629(E), dated 26th August, 1985, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,    
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the Union territory of Goa, Daman  & Diu on 1st January, 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 910(E), dated 24th December, 1985,  see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Madhya Pradesh  on 1st July 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 381(E), dated 27th June, 1986, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Meghalaya on 2nd  January, 1988, vide notification No. S.O. 1135(E), dated 30th December, 1987, see Gazette of  India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
the State of Uttar Pradesh on 1st February, 1988, vide notification No. S.O. 133(E), dated 29th January, 1988, see Gazette of India, Extrao rdinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
 6 
 Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976), or a correspond ing new bank constituted under s ection 3 of the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980), or a banking 
company as defined under clause ( e) of s ection 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), 
or a banking institution notified b y the Central Government under s ection 51 of that Act or such other 
banking institution as the State Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, approve for 
the purposes of this Act;  
(b) “chit” means a transaction w hether called chit, chit fund, chitty, kuri  or by any other name by 
or under which a person enters into an agreement with a specified number of persons that every one 
of them shall subscribe a certain sum of money (or a certain quantity of grain instead) b y way of 
periodical instalments over a definite period and that each such subscriber shall, in his turn, as 
determined by lot or by auction of by tender or in such other manner as may be specified in the chit 
agreement, be entitled to the prize amount.  
Explanation.—A transaction is not a chit within the meaning of this c lause, if in such 
transaction, — 
(i) some alone, but not all, of the subscribers get the prize amount without any liability to pay 
future subscriptions; or  
(ii) all the subscribers get the chit amount by turns with a liabil ity to pay future subscriptions ; 
(c) “chit agreement ” means the document containing the articles of agreement between the 
foreman and the subscribers relating to the chit;  
(d) “chit amount ” means the sum -total of the subscriptions payable by all the subscribers for any 
instalment of a chit without any deduction of discount or otherwise;  
(e) “chit business ” means the business of conducting a chit;  
(f) “defaulting subscriber ” means a subscriber who has defaulted in the payment of subscriptions 
due in accordance with the terms of the chit agreement;  
(g) “discount ” means the sum of money or the quantity of grain which a prized subscriber is, 
under the terms of the chit agreement , required to forego and which is set apart under the said 
agreement to meet the expenses of running the chit or for distribution am ong the subscribers or for 
both; 
(h) “dividend ” means the share of the subscriber in the amount of discount available under the 
chit agreement for rateable distribution among the subscribers at each instalment of the chit;  
(i) “draw ” means the manner specified in the chit agreement for the purpose of ascertaining the 
prized subscriber at any instalment of the chit;  
(j) “foreman ” means the person who under the chit agreement is responsible for the conduct of 
the chit and includes any person discharging the functions of the foreman under s ection 39 ; 
(k) “non-prized subscriber ” does not include a defaulting subscriber ; 
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “prize amount ” means the difference between the chit amount and the discount, and in the 
case of a fraction of a ticket means the difference between the chit amount and the discount 
proportiona te to the fraction of the ticket, and when the prize amount is payable otherwise than in 
cash, the value of the prizes amount shall be the value at the time when it becomes payable;  
(n) “prized subscriber ” means a subscriber who has either received or is e ntitled to receive the 
prize amount;  
(o) “Registrar ” means the Regi strar of Chits appointed under s ection 61, and includes an 
Additional, a Joint, Deputy or an Assistant Registrar appointed under that section;  
(p) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(q) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator of that Union 
territory appointed by the President under article 239 of th e Constitution ; 7 
 (r) “subscriber ” includes a person who holds a fraction of a ticket and also a transferee of a ticket 
or fraction thereof by assignment in writing or by operation of law;  
(s) “ticket ” means the share of a subscriber in a chit.  
3. Act to override other laws, memorandum, articles, etc. —Save as otherwise expressly prov ided 
in this Act, — 
(a) the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in any other law for the time being in force or in the me morandum or articles of association or      
bye-laws or in any agreement or resolution whether the same be registered, executed or passed, as the 
case may be, before or after the commencement of this Act; and  
(b) any provision contained in the memorandum, articles, bye -laws, agreement or resolution 
aforesaid, shall, to the extent to which it is repugnant to the provisions of this Act, become or be void, 
as the case may be.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF CHITS, COMMENCEMENT AND CONDUCT OF CHIT BUSINESS  
4. Prohib ition of chits not sanctioned or registered under the Act .—(1) No chit shall be 
commenced or conducted without obtaining the previous sanction of the State Government within whose 
jurisdiction the chit is to be commenced or conducted or of such officer as may be empowered by that 
Government in this behalf, and unles s the chit is registered in that  State in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act:  
Provided that a sanction obtained under this sub -section shall lapse if the chit is not registered within 
twelve months from the date of such sanction or within such further period or periods not exceeding six 
months in the aggregate as the State Government may, on application made to it in this behalf, allow.  
(2) An application for the purpose of obtaining a sanction under sub -section ( 1) shall be made by the 
foreman in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The previous sanction referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be refused, if the foreman, — 
(a) had been convicted of any offence under this Act  or under any other Act regulating chit 
business and sentenced to imprisonment for any such offence; or  
(b) had defaulted in the payment of fees or the filing of any statement or record required to be 
paid or filed under this Act or had violated any of the  provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder; or  
(c) had been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced to imprisonment 
for any such offence unless a period of five years  has e lapsed since his release : 
Provided that before refusing any such sanction, the foreman shall be given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard.  
(4) The order of the State Government, and, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), the order of 
the officer empowered under sub -section ( 1), issuing or r efusing previous sanction under this section shall 
be final.  
(5) Any person aggrieved by the refusal to issue previous sanction by an officer empowered under 
sub-section ( 1) may appeal to the State Government within thirty days of the date of communication  to 
him of such refusal and the decision of that Government on such appeal shall be final.  
5. Prohibition of invitation for subscriptions except under certain conditions .—No person shall 
issue or cause to be issued any notice, circular, prospectus, proposal or other document inviting the public 
to subscribe for tickets in any chit unless such notice, circular, prospectus, proposal or document contains 
a statement that the pr evious sanction required under s ection 4 has been obtained and the particular s of 
such sanction.  8 
 6. Form of chit agreement .—(1) Every chit agreement shall be in duplicate and shall be signed by 
each of the subscribers or by any person authorised  by him in writing and the foreman and attested by at 
least two witnesses and it shall contain the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) full name and residential address of every subscriber;  
(b) the n umber of tickets including the f raction of a ticket held by each subscriber;  
(c) the number of instalments, the amount payable for each ticket at every instalment and the 
interest or penalty, if any, payable on any default in the payment of such instalments ; 
(d) the probable date of commencement and the duration  of the chit;  
(e) the manner of ascertaining the prized subscriber at each instalment;  
(f) the maximum amount of discount which the prized subscriber has to forego at any instalment;  
(g) the mode and proportion in which the discount is distributa ble by way  of dividend, foreman’ s 
commission or remuneration of expenses for runni ng the chit, as the case may be ; 
(h) the date, time and place a t which the chit is to be drawn ; 
(i) the instalment at which the foreman is to get the chit amount;  
(j) the name of the a pproved bank in which chit moneys shall be deposited by the foreman under 
the provisions of this Act;  
(k) where the foreman is an individual, the manner in which a chit shall be continued when such 
individual dies or becomes of unsound mind or is otherwise  incapacitated;  
(l) the consequences to which a non -prized or prized subscriber or the foreman shall be liable in 
case of violation of any of the provisions of the chit agreement;  
(m) the conditions under which a subscriber shall be treated as a defaulting  subscriber;  
(n) the nature and particulars of the securi ty to be offered by the foreman ; 
(o) the dates on which and time during which the foreman shall, subject to the provisions 
contained in s ection 44, allow inspection of chit records to non -prize d and unpaid prized subscribers ; 
(p) the names of the nominees of each subscriber, that is to say, the names of the persons to 
whom the benefits accruing to the subscriber under the chit may be paid in the case of the death of the 
subscriber or when he is otherw ise incapable of making an agreement;  
(q) any other particulars that may, from time to time, be prescribed.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, it shall be sufficient if the signature of each 
subscriber is obtained in separate copies of the agreement.  
(2) The duration of a chit shall not extend beyond a period of five years from the date of its 
commencement:  
Provided that the State Government may permit the duration of a chit up to a period of ten years if it 
is satisfied that it is necessar y so to do, having regard to, — 
(a) the fin ancial condition of the foreman ; 
(b) his methods of operation ; 
(c) the inter ests of prospective subscribers ; 
(d) the requirements as to security; and  
(e) such other factors as the circumstances of the case may require.  
(3) The amount of discount referred to in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shall not exceed 1[thirty per 
cent.] of the chit amount.  
(4) Where the prized subscriber at any instalment of the chit is required to be determined by auction 
and more than one person offer the maximum discount, the prized subscriber shall be determined by lot.  
                                                           
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) to read as “forty per cent.” by Act 10 of 2001 s. 2. 9 
 7. Filing of chit agreement .—(1) Every chit agreement shall be filed in duplicate by the foreman 
with the Registrar.  
(2) The Registrar shall retain one copy of the chit agreement and return the duplicate to the foreman 
with an endorsement that the chi t agreement has been registered : 
Provi ded that the Registrar may refuse to register the chit agreement on any one or more of the 
following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the securit y offered by the foreman under s ection 20 is insufficient;  
(b) that the foreman had been convicted of any offence under this Act or under any other Act 
regulating chit business and sentenced to imprisonment for any such offence;  
(c) that the foreman had defaulted in the payment of fees or the filing of any statement or record 
required to be paid or filed under this Act or had violated any of the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder;  
(d) that the foreman had been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced 
to imprisonment for any suc h offence unless a period of five year s has elapsed since his release : 
Provided further that before refusing to register a chit under the first proviso, the foreman shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Every endorsement made under su b-section ( 2) shall be conclusive evidence that the chit is duly 
registered under this Act and the registration of a chit shall lapse if the declaration by the foreman under 
sub-section ( 1) of s ection 9 is not filed within three months from the date of suc h endorsement or within 
such further period or periods not exceeding three months in the aggregate as the Registrar may, on 
application made to him in this behalf, allow.  
8. Minimum capital requirements for the commencement, etc. , of a chit, and cr eation of a 
reserve fund, by a c ompany .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Companies                    
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , but subject to the provisions of this Act, a company shall not commence or carry 
on chit business unless it has a paid -up capital of not less than rupee s one lakh.  
(2) Every company having a paid -up capital of less than rupees one lakh and carrying on chit business 
on the commencement of this Act, shall, before the expiry of a period of three years from such 
commencement, inc rease its paid -up capital o f not less than rupees one lakh : 
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necessary in the public interest or for 
avoiding any hardship, extend the said period of three years in respect of any c ompany by such fu rther 
period or  periods not excee ding two years in the aggregate : 
Provided further that no such company shall commence any new chit the duration of which would 
extend beyond the said period of three years or such extended period or periods under the first proviso 
unless it increases its paid -up capital to not less than rupees one lakh.  
(3) Every company carrying on chit business shall create and maintain a reserve fund and shall, out of 
the balance of profit of each year as disclosed in its profit and loss account and before any dividend on its 
shares is declared, transfer to such reserve fund, a sum equal to not less than ten per  cent. of such profit.  
(4) No company shall appropriate any sum or sums from the reserve fund except with the prior 
approval of th e Registrar and, for the purpose of obtaining such approval, it shall make an application in 
the prescribed form to the Registrar explaining the circumstances relating to such appropriation.  
9. Commencement of chit .—(1) Every  foreman shall, after all the tickets specified in the chit 
agreement are fully subscribed, file a declaration to that effect with the Registrar.  
(2) As soon as may be after a declaration is filed under sub -section ( 1), the Registrar shall, after 
satisfyin g himself that all the requirements relating to sanction, registration of chit and other matters have 
been duly complied with, grant a certificate of commencement to the foreman.  
(3) No foreman shall commence any auction or the draw of any chit or appropri ate any chit amount 
unless a certificate of commencement referred to in sub -section ( 2) is obtained by him.  10 
 10. Copies of chit agreement to be given to subscribers .—(1) A foreman shall, as soon as may be 
after he has obtained the certificate of commenc emen t under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 9, but not later 
than the date of the first draw of the chit, furnish to every subscriber, a copy of the chit agreement 
certified to be a true copy.  
(2) A foreman shall, within fifteen days after the close of the month in which the draw for the first 
instalment of the chit is held, file with the Registrar, a certificate to the effect that the provisions of      
sub-section ( 1) have been complied with.  
11. Use of the words “chit”, “chit fund ”, “chitty ” or “kuri”.—(1) No person shall carry on chit 
business unless he uses as part of his name any of the words “chit”, “chit fund ”, “chitty ” or “kuri” and no 
person other than a person carrying on chit business shall use as part of his name any such word.  
(2) Where at  the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any person is carrying on chit business without using as part of his name any of the words 
specified i n sub -section ( 1) ; or 
(b) any person not carrying on chit business is using an y such word as part of his name,  
he shall, within a period of one year from such commencement, add as part of his name any such word or, 
as the case may be,  delete such word from his name : 
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necessary in the public interest or for 
avoiding any hardship, extend the said period of one year by such further period or periods not exceeding 
one year in the aggregate.  
12. Prohibition of transacting business other than chit business by a company .—(1) Except with 
the general or special permission of the State Government, no company carrying on chit business shall 
conduct any other business.  
(2) Where at the com mencement of this Act, any company is carrying on any business in addition to 
chit business , it shall wind up such other business before the expiry of a period of three years from such 
commencement:  
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necessary in the public interest or for 
avoiding any hardship, extend the said period of three  years by such further period or  periods not 
exceeding two years in the aggregate.  
13. Aggregate amount of chits .—(1) No foreman, other than a firm or other as sociation of 
individuals or a company or co -operative society, shall commence or conduct chits, the aggregate chit 
amount of which at any time exceeds 1[twenty -five thousand rupees ]. 
(2) Where the foreman is a firm or other association of individuals, the aggregate chit amount of the 
chits conducted by the firm or other association  shall not at any time exceed, — 
(a) where the number of partners of the firm or the individuals constituting the association is not 
less than four, a sum of rupees 2[one lakh ]; 
(b) in any other case, a sum calculated on the basis of 1[twenty -five thousand rupees ] with respect 
to each such partner or individual.  
(3) Where the foreman is a company or co -operative society, the aggregate chit amount of the chits 
conducted by it shall not at any time exceed ten times the n et owned funds of the company or  the           
co-operative society, as the case may be.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “net owned funds ” shall mean the aggregate of 
the paid -up capital and free res erves as disclo sed in the last audited balance sheet of the company or     co-
operative society, as reduced by the amount of accumulated balance of loss, deferred revenue, 
expenditure and other intangible assets, if any, as disclosed in the said balance -sheet.  
                                                           
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) to read as “rupees one lakh” by Act 10 of 2001 , s. 3. 
2. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) to read as “six lakhs” by s. 3, ibid.  11 
 14. Utilisation of funds .—(1) No person carrying on chit business shall utilise the moneys collected 
in respect of such business (other than commission or remuneration payable to such person or interest or 
penalty, if any, received from a de faulting subscriber), except for — 
(a) carrying on chit business; or  
(b) giving loans and advances to non -prized subscribers on the security of subscriptions paid by 
them; or  
(c) investing in trustee se curities within the meaning of s ection 20 of the Indian Trusts             
Act, 1882 (2 of 1882); or  
(d) making deposits with approved banks mentioned in the chit agreement.  
(2) Where any person carrying on chit business has utilised  the moneys collected in respect of such 
business before the commencement of this Act, otherwise than for the purposes specified in                 
sub-section ( 1), he shall secure that so much of such moneys as have not been realised before such 
commencem ent are realised before the expiry of a period of three years from such commencement:  
Provided that the State Government may, if it considers it necessary in the public interest or for 
avoiding any hardship, extend the said period of three years by such fu rther period or periods not 
exceeding one year in the aggregate.  
15. Alteration of chit agreement .—A chit agreement shall not be altered, added to  or cancelled 
except with the consent in writing of the foreman and all the subscribers to the chit.  
16. Date,  time and place of conducting chits .—(1) Every draw in a chit shall be held on the date, at 
the time and place mentioned in the chit agreement and a notice therefor in such form and in such manner 
as may be prescribed shall be issued by the foreman to all the subscribers.  
(2) Every such draw shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the chit agreement and 
in the presence of not less than two subscribers.  
(3) Where any draw was not conducted on the ground that two subscribers required to be present at a 
draw under sub -section (2) were not present or on any other ground, the Registrar may, on his own 
motion or on an application made by the foreman or any of th e subscribers, direct that the draw shall be 
conducted in his presence or in the presence of any person deputed by him.  
17. Minutes of proceedings .—(1) The minutes of the proceedings of  every draw shall be prepared 
and entered in a book to be kept for that  purpose immediately after the closure of the draw and shall be 
signed by the foreman, the prized subscribers, if present, or their authorised agents, and at  least two other 
subscribers who are present, and where a direction has been made under sub -section  (3) of s ection 16, 
also by the Registrar or the person deputed by him under that sub -section.  
(2) The minutes referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall state clearly — 
(a) the date and hour when proceedings began and ended and the place where the draw was held;  
(b) the number of the instalment of the chit to which the proceedings relate ; 
(c) the names of the subscribers present;  
(d) the person or persons who become entitled to the  prize amount in the instalment ; 
(e) the amount of discount;  
(f) full particulars r egarding the disposal of the unpaid prize amount, if any, in respect of any 
previous instalment; and  
(g) any other particulars that may be prescribed.  
18. Copies of minutes to be filed with Registrar .—A true copy of the minutes of the proceedings of 
every draw certified as such by the foreman shall be filed by the foreman with the Registrar within 
twenty -one days from the date of the draw to which it relates.  
19. Restriction on opening of new place of business .—(1) No person carrying on chit business shall 
open a  new place of business without obtaining the prior approval of the Registrar within whose territorial 
jurisdiction his registered office or, as the case may be, the place or the principal place of business is 
situated.  12 
 (2) Before granting approval un der sub -section ( 1), the Registrar shall consult the Registrar of the 
State within whose territorial jurisdiction the new place of business is proposed to be opened and shall 
also keep in view the financial condition and methods of operation of the foreman , the extent to which 
public interest will be served by the opening of the new place of business and such other matters as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) Where a person carrying on chit business opens a new place of business in a State other than the 
State (herein after referred to as the State of origin) in which his registered office or the place or the 
principal place of his business is situated, the Registrar of the State in which such new place of business is 
opened may also exercise and perform any of the powe rs and functions whi ch the Registrar of the State of  
origin may exercise and perform in respect of the chit business carried on at such new place of business.  
(4) For the purposes of this section, “place of business ” shall include any branch office, sub -office, or 
any place of busin ess where the chit business may  be conducted by such person.  
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF FOREMAN  
20. Security to be given by foreman .—(1) For the proper conduct of the chit, every foreman shall, 
before applying for a previous sanction under s ection 4, — 
1[(a) deposit in an approved bank an amount equal to the chit amount in the name of the 
Registrar; or] 
(b) transfer Government securities of the face value or market value (whichever is less) of not less 
than one and a half times the chit amount in favour of the Registrar; or  
(c) transfer in favour of the Registrar such other securities, being securities in w hich a trustee may 
invest money under s ection 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), of such value, as may be 
prescribed by the Sta te Government from time to time : 
Provided that the value of the securities referred to in clause ( c) shall not, in an y case, be less than 
one and a half times the value of the chit amount.  
(2) Where a foreman conducts more than one chit, he shall furnish security in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) in respect of each chit.  
(3) The Registrar may, at any time during the currency of the chit, permit t he substitution of the 
security : 
Provided that the face value or market value (whichever is less) of the substituted security shall not be 
less than the value of the security given by the foreman under sub -section (1). 
(4) The security given by the foreman under sub -section ( 1), or any security substituted under        
sub-section ( 3), shall not be liable to be attached in execution of a decree or otherwise until the chit is 
terminated and the claims of all the subscribers are fully satisfied.  
(5) Where the chit is terminated and the Registrar has satisfied himself that the claims of all the 
subscribers have been fully satisfied, he shall order the release of the security furnished by the foreman 
under sub -sectio n (1), or the security substituted under sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, and in doing 
so, he shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law f or the time being in force, 
the security furnished under this section shall not be dealt with by the foreman during the currency of the 
chit to which it relates and any dealing by the foreman with respect thereto by way of transfer or other 
encumbrances shall be null and void.  
  
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 10 of 2001 , s. 4 to read as under:  
“(a) deposit in the  name of the Registrar, an amount equal to, — 
(i) fifty per cent. of the chit amount in cash in an approved bank; and  
(ii) fifty per cent. o f the chit amount in the form of bank guarantee from an approved bank; or”.  13 
 21. Rights of foreman .—(1) The foreman shall be entitled, — 
(a) in the absence of any provision in the chit agreement to the contrary, to obtain the chit amount 
at the first instalment  without deduction of the discount specified in the chit agreement, subject to the 
condition that he shall su bscribe to a ticket in the chit:  
Provided that in a case where the foreman has subscribed to more than one ticket, he shall not be 
eligible to obta in more than one chit amount in a chit without discount;  
(b) to such amount not exceeding five per cent . of the chit amount as may be fixed in the chit 
agreement, by way of commission, remuneration or for meeting the expenses of running the chit;  
(c) to in terest and penalty, if any, payable on any default in the payment of instalments and to 
such other amounts as may be payable to him under the provisions of the chit agreement;  
(d) to receive and realise all subscriptions from the subscribers and to distrib ute the prize am ounts 
to the prized subscribers;  
(e) to demand sufficient security from any prized subscriber for the due payment of futur e 
subscriptions payable by him.  
Explanation. —A security shall be deemed to be sufficient for the purposes of this clause if its 
value exceeds by one -third, or of it consists of immovable properties, the value of which exceeds by 
one-half, of the amount  due from the prized subscriber;  
(f) to substitute subscribers in place of defaulting subscribers; and  
(g) to do all o ther acts that may be necessary for the due and proper conduct of the chit.  
(2) Where any dispute arises with regard to the value of the property offered as security under      
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1), it shall be referred to the R egistrar for arbitra tion under s ection 64.  
22. Duties of foreman .—(1) The foreman shall, on the prized subscriber furnishing sufficient 
security for the due payment of future subscriptions, be bound to pay him the prize amount:  
Provided that the prized subscriber shall be entitled to the payment of the prize amount without any 
security whatsoever if he agrees to the deduction therefrom of the amount of all future subscriptions and 
in such a case, the foreman shall pay the prize a mount to the prized subscriber within seven days after the 
date of the draw or before the date of the next succeeding i nstalment, whichever is earlier : 
Provided further that where the prize amount has been paid to the prized subscriber under the first 
proviso, the amount deducted shall be deposited by the foreman in an approved bank mentioned in the 
chit agreement and he shall not withdraw the amount so deposited except for the payment of future 
subscriptions.  
(2) If, owing to the default of the prized subs criber, the prize amount due in respect of any d raw 
remains unpaid until the dat e of the next succeeding instalment, the foreman shall deposit the prize 
amount forthwith in a separate account in an approved bank mentioned in the chit agreement and intimate  
in writing the fact of such deposit and the reasons therefor to the prized subscriber and the Registrar:  
Provided that  where any prized subscriber doe s not collect the prize amount in respect of any 
instalment  of a chit within a period of two months from the date of the draw, it shall be open to the 
foreman to hold another draw in respect of such instalment.  
(3) Every payment of the prize amount or the amount of future subscriptions under sub -section ( 1), 
and t he deposit of the prize amount under sub -section ( 2), shall be intimated to the subscribers at the next 
succeeding draw and the particulars of such payment or deposit shall be entered in the minutes of the 
proceedings of that draw.  
(4) The foreman shall no t appropriate to himself any amount in excess of what he is entitled to under 
clause ( b) or cl ause (c) of sub -section ( 1) of s ection 21:  
Provided that where the foreman is himself a prized subscriber, he shall be entitled to appropriate to 
himself the priz e amount subject to his complying wi th the provisions of s ection 31 : 14 
 Provided further that the foreman may appropriate to himself the interest accruing on the amount 
deposited under the second proviso to sub -section ( 1). 
(5) The foreman shall not admit any  person as a subscriber to a chit , if, by such admission, the total 
number of tickets mentioned in the chit agreement is increased.  
(6) The foreman shall distribute among the subscribers, in accordance with the chit agreement, the 
dividend either in cash, grain or by way of adjustment towards the subscriptions payable for the next 
instalment, if any.  
23. Books, records, etc., to be kept by foreman .—The foreman shall maintain in his registered 
office, or, as the case may be, in the plac e or the principal place of his business, or, where the foreman has 
any branch office, sub -office or any place of business for the conduct of chit business in a State other than 
the State in which his registered office or the principal place of his business  is situated, in such branch 
office, sub -office or place of business in respect of the bu siness conducted in that State — 
(a) a register containing — 
(i) the names and full particulars of the subscribers in each chit together with the number of 
tickets held by each subscriber;  
(ii) the dates on which the subscribers signed the chit agreement; and  
(iii) in the case of an assignment of a ticket by a subscriber, the name and full address of the 
assignee with the date of assignment and the date on which the assignment had been recognised 
by the foreman;  
(b) a book containing the minutes of the proceedings of each draw;  
(c) a ledger containing — 
(i) the amounts paid by the subscribers in each chit and the dates of such payments;  
(ii) the amounts paid to the prized subscribers and the dates of such payments; and  
(iii) in the case of any deposit in an approved bank mentioned in the chit agreement, the date 
and the amoun t of such deposit;  
(d) a register in the prescribed form showing the amounts deposited in approved banks as 
required under the provisions of this Act in respect of all chits conducted by the foreman at his office; 
and 
(e) such other registers and books in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government 
within whose jurisdiction the chit is conducted.  
24. Balance  sheet .—Without prejudice to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), 
every foreman shall prepare and file with the Registrar within such time as may be prescribed, a     
balance  sheet as on the last date of each calendar year, or, as the case may be , the financial year of the 
foreman, and a profit and loss account relating to the year of account, in the forms set out in Parts I and II 
of the Schedule, or as near thereto as circumstances admit, in respect of the chit business and audited by 
auditors q ualified to act as auditors under the Companies Act, 1956, or by a chit auditor appointed under 
section 61 : 
Provided that where a balance sheet is audited by an auditor qualified to act as auditor under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), a chit auditor appointed under s ection 61  shall have the right to audit 
the balance sheet at any time if so authorised by the Registrar in this behalf.  
25. Liability of foreman to subscribers .—(1) Every foreman shall be liable to account to the 
subscribers for the amount s due to them.  
(2) Where there are more than one foreman in a chit, each one of them jointly and severally and, if the 
foreman is a firm or other association of individuals, each one of the partners or individuals thereof jointly 
and severally and, if the foreman is a company, the company as such, shall be liable to the subscribers in 
respect of the obligations arising out of the chit.  15 
 26. Withdrawal of foreman .—(1) No foreman, or where there are more than one foreman in a chit, 
none of them shall withdraw from the chit until its termination unless such withdrawal is assented to in 
writing by all the non -prized and unpaid prized subscribers and a copy of such assent has been filed with 
the Registrar under s ection 41.  
(2) The withdrawal from a chit of any one of the foreman shall not affect the security gi ven by him 
under section 20 or s ection 31.  
CHAPTER IV  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF NON -PRIZED SUBSCRIBERS  
27. Non-prized subscribers to pay subscriptions and obtain receipts .—Every non-prized 
subscriber shall pay his subscription due in respect of every instalment on the dates and times and at the 
places mentioned in the chit agreement and shall, on such payment, be entitled to obtain a receipt from the 
foreman.  
28. Removal of defaulting subscribers .—(1) A non -prized subscriber who defaults in paying his 
subscription in accordance with the terms of the chit agreement shall be liable to have his name removed 
from the list of subscribers and a written notice of such removal shall be given by the foreman to the 
defaulting subscriber within fourteen days of the date of such removal:  
Provided that if the defaulter pays the defaulted instalment with interest at such rate as may be 
prescribed within seven days of the date of receipt of such notice, his name shall be re -entered in the list 
of such subscribers.  
(2) Every such removal under sub -section ( 1) shall with the date thereof be entered in the relevant 
book maintained by the foreman.  
(3) A true copy of the entry referred to in sub -section (2) shall be filed by the foreman with the 
Registrar within fourteen days from the date of removal.  
(4) Any defaulting subscriber aggrieved by the removal of his name from the list of subscribers may, 
within seven days of the date of receipt of the notice of removal refer the matter to the R egistrar for 
arbitration under s ection 64.  
29. Substitution of subscribers .—(1) A foreman may substitute in the list of subscribers any person 
(thereafter in this Chapter referred to as the substituted subscriber)  in place of the defaulting subscriber 
whose name has been removed under sub -section ( 1) of s ection 28.  
(2) Every substitution referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, with the date thereof, be entered in the 
relevant book maintained by the foreman and a true  copy of every such entry shall be filed by the foreman 
with the Registrar within fourteen days from the date of substitution.  
30. Amounts due to defaulting subscribers .—(1) A foreman shall, out of the amounts payable by 
and realized from the substituted s ubscriber towards the instalments relatable to the period before the date 
of the substitution (including the arrears due from the defaulting subscriber), deposit, before the date of 
the next succeeding instalment, in a separate identifiable account in an a pproved bank mentioned in the 
chit agreement, an amount equal to the contributions made by the defaulting subscriber less such 
deductions as may be provided for in the chit agreement, and shall inform the defaulting subscriber as 
well as the Registrar of t he fact of such deposit and shall not withdraw the amount so deposited except for 
payment to the defaulting subscriber.  
(2) The amount so deposited under sub -section  (1) shall be paid to the defaulting subscriber as and 
when he claims the amount and the amount so deposited shall not be withdrawn by the foreman for any 
purpose other than for such payment.  
(3) The contributions of any defaulting subscriber who has not been substituted till the termination of 
the chit shall be paid to him within fifteen days  from the date of termination of the chit subject to such 
deductions as may be provided for in the chit agreement.  
  16 
 CHAPER V  
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PRIZED SUBSCRIBERS  
31. Prized subscriber to furnish security .—Every prized subscriber shall, if he has not of fered to 
deduct the amount of all future subscriptions from the prize amount due to him, furnish, and a foreman 
shall take, sufficient security for the due payment of all future subscriptions and, if the foreman is a prized 
subscriber, he shall give securi ty for the due payment of all the future subscriptions to the satisfaction of 
the Registrar.  
32. Prized subscriber to pay subscriptions regularly .—Every prized subscriber shall pay his 
subscriptions regularly on the dates and times and at the place mentioned in the chit agreement and, on his 
failure to do so, he shall be liable to make a consolidated payment of all the future subscriptions 
forthwith.  
33. Foreman to demand future subscriptions by written notice .—A foreman shall not be entitled 
to claim a consolidated payment from a defa ulting prized subscriber under s ection 32 unless he makes a 
demand to that effect in writing.  
(2) Where a dispute is raised under this Act by a foreman for a consolidated payment of future 
subscriptions from a defaulting prized subscriber and if the subscriber pays to the foreman on or before 
the date to which the dispute is posted for hearing the arrears of subscriptions till that date together with 
the interest thereon at the rate p rovided for in the chit agreement and the cost of adjudication of the 
dispute, the Registrar or his nominee hearing the dispute shall, notwithstanding any contract to the 
contrary, make an order directing the subscriber to pay to the foreman the future sub scriptions on or 
before the dates on which they fall due, and that, in case of any default of such payments by the 
subscriber, the foreman shall be at liberty to realise, in execution of that order, all future subscriptions and 
interest together with the c osts, if any, less the amount, if any, already paid by the subscriber in respect 
thereof:  
Provided that if any such dispute is on a promissory note, no order shall be passed under this          
sub-section unless such promissory note expressly states that the amount due under the promissory note is 
towards the payment of subscriptions to the chit.  
(3) Any person who ho lds any interest in the property furnished as security or part thereof, shall be 
entitled to make the payment under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) All consolidated payments of future subscriptions realised by a foreman shall be deposited by him 
in an approved bank mentioned in the chit agreement before the date of the succeeding instalment and the 
amount so deposited shall not be withdrawn except f or payment of future subscriptions.  
(5) Where any property is obtained as security in lieu of the consolidated payment of future 
subscriptions, it shall remain as security for the due payment of future subscriptions.  
CHAPTER VI  
TRANSFERS  
34. Restrictions on transfer of rights of foreman .—(1) No transfer of the rights of a foreman to 
receive subscriptions from the prized subscribers shall be made without the previous sanction in writing 
of the Registrar.  
(2) Any transfer of the rights of a foreman to receiv e subscriptions from the prized subscribers shall, 
if it is likely to defeat or delay the interest s of a non -prized or unpaid prized subscriber, be voidable at the 
instance of such subscriber.  
(3) When under sub -section ( 2), a transfer is disputed by a sub scriber, the burden of proving that the 
foreman was in  solvent in circumstances at the time of the transfer and that the transfer does not defeat or 
delay the interests of such subscriber is on the transferee.  
35. Transfer of non -prized subscriber’ s rights  to be in writing .—Every transfer by a non -prized 
subscriber of his rights in the chit shall be in writing duly attested by at least two witnesses and shall be 
filed with the foreman.  17 
 36.  Recognition of transfer by foreman .—Every transfer under s ection 35  shall, within a period of 
fourteen days from the date of receipt of the proposal for tran sfer by the foreman, be recognis ed by him 
unless the transferee is not solvent or the transfer was effected with a view to defeating the provisions of 
any law includi ng this Act and the decision of the foreman to recognise the transfer or not shall forthwith 
be communicated to the parties concerned.  
37. Entry of transferee’s name in the books. —Every transfer under section 34 or s ection 35 shall 
be entered by the forema n in the books of the chit forthwith and a true copy of such entry shall be filed by 
the foreman with the Registrar within fourteen days from the date of making such entry.  
CHAPTET VII  
MEETINGS OF GENERAL BODY OF SUBSCRIBERS  
38. Meetings of general body of  subscribers .—(1) The foreman may, on his own motion, convene a 
special meeting of the general body of subscribers for considering any proposal to pass a special 
resolution.  
(2) The foreman shall convene such a meeting on the requisition in writing of not less than         
twenty -five per cent . of the number of non -prized and unpaid prized subscribers, and the meeting so 
convened shall be held within thirty days of the date of r eceipt of the requisition and if the foreman 
refused or fails to call such a meeting within fourteen days of the date of receipt of such requisition, not 
less than twenty -five per cent . of the number of non -prized and unpaid prized subscribers may give not ice 
of the fact to the Registrar.  
(3) The Registrar shall, within twenty -one days of the receipt of the notice under sub -section ( 2), 
convene or direct the convening of a special meeting of the general body of the subscribers and on receipt 
of such a direc tion, it shall be the duty of the foreman to comply with such direction.  
(4) Notice of not less than fourteen days shall be given to all the subscribers of a meeting under this 
section  specifying the object, date, hour and place of meeting and a copy of th e special resolution shall 
also be sent along with the notice of the meeting.  
Explanation. —For th e purposes of this section and s ection 39, “special resolution ” means a resolution 
which is passed at a meeting of the general body of the subscribers specially convened for the purpose , by 
a majority of not less than two -thirds of the subscribers to the chit present at the meeting in person or by 
proxy and representi ng not less than three -fourths of the amount or , as the case may be, the value of the 
grain, subscribed by all the non -prized and unpaid prized subscribers, if any.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TERMINATION OF CHITS  
39. Provision for continuation of chits in certain cases .—(1) Where a foreman dies or becomes of 
unsound mind or is otherwise incapacitated, the chit may continue in accordance with the provisions of 
the chit agreement.  
(2) Where a foreman is adjudicated an insolvent, or  withdraws from the chit under s ection 26,  or fails 
to conduct the chit at any instalment or on any other date before the next succeeding instalment as may 
have been agreed upon by a special resolution, any one or more of such subscribers authorised by such 
resolution may, in the absence of any pr ovision in the chit agreement for the future conduct of the chit, 
take the place of the foreman and continue the chit or make other arrangements for the further conduct of 
the chit.  
40. Termination of chits .—A chit shall be deemed to have terminated, — 
(a) when the period specified therefor in the chit agreement has expired provided the payment of 
dues to all the subscribers has been completed; or  
(b) when all the non -prized and unpaid prized subscribers and the foreman consent in writing to 
the termination of the chit and a copy of such consent is filed with t he Registrar as required under 
section 41 ; or 
(c) where a foreman dies or becomes of unsound mind or is otherwise incapacitated and the chit 
is not continued in accordance with the provisions of the chi t agreement:  18 
 Provided that, in a case where the foreman is a firm, if a partner thereof dies or becomes of unsound 
mind or is otherwise incapacitated, the chit shall not be deemed to have terminated and the surviving 
partner or partners shall conduct the c hit in the absence of any provision to the contrary in the chit 
agreement.  
41. Copy of assent or consent to be filed with Registrar .—A true copy of ev ery assent referred to 
in section 26 and of every consen t referred to in clause ( b) of s ection 40 with their dates shall be filed by 
the foreman or by the surviving partner or partners, as the case may be, with the Registrar within fourteen 
days from the date of such assent or consent.  
42. Refund of non -prized subscribers’  subscriptions .—Exce pt in the cases referred to in       
clauses (a) and ( b) of s ection 40, — 
(a) every non -prized subscriber shall, unless otherwise provided for in this Act or in the chit 
agreement, be entitled to get back his subscriptions at the termination of the chit without any 
deduction for dividend, if any, earned by him : 
Provided that, any person to whom the rights of a non -prized subscriber are transferred in 
accordance with the provisi ons of s ection 35, shall, in addition to his own subscriptions, be entitled to 
get back the subscriptions paid by such non -prized subscriber, subject to the condi tions specified in 
this section ; 
(b) if a chit terminates on a date earlier than the date originally fixed in the chit agree ment, the      
non-prized subscriber’ s claim shall be deemed to have arisen on the date on which he has notice 
thereof.  
43. Subscribers’  dues to be first charge on chit assets .—Any amount due to the subscriber from a 
foreman in relation to the chit business shall be a first charge on the chit assets.  
CHAPTER IX  
INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS  
44. Foreman to allow certain subscribers to  inspect chit records .—Every foreman shall, on 
payment of such fee not exceeding five rupees as may be specified in the chit agreement, allow the      
non-prized subscribers and unpaid prized subscribers reasonable facilities on all the dates of draw or on  
such other dates and within such hours as may be provided for in the chit agreement, for the inspection of 
security bonds and documents, receipts and other records taken from the prized subscribers or furnished 
by the foreman as a subscriber and all chit records, including books of account , pass books, balance sheet 
and profit and loss accounts and such other records as may show the actual financial position of the chit.  
45. Preservation of chit records by foreman .—All the records pertaining to a chit shal l be kept by 
the foreman for a period of eight years from the date of termination of the chit.  
46. Inspection of chit books and records by Registrar .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of 
sections 209 and 209 A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the Registrar or an officer authorised by 
the State Governm ent in this behalf may inspect c hit books and all the records of a chit during working 
hours on any working day at the premises of the foreman with or with out giving notice and it shall be the 
duty of every foreman to produce to the Registrar or the officer so authorised, all such books and records 
as are in his custody or power and to furnish him with any statement or information relating to the chits as 
he may require from the foreman within such time as he may specify.  
(2) The Registrar or an officer authorised by the State Government in this beha lf may, after giving 
seven days’  notice in writing to the foreman, direct him to produce before him for inspect ion such chit 
books and records as he may require at the time and place mentioned in the notice.  
(3) If on an inspection made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), any defects are found, the 
Registrar may bring such defects to the notice of the foreman  and may also make an order directing the 
foreman to take such action as may be specified in the order to remedy the defects with in the time 
specified therein.  
(4) Every foreman shall be bound to comply with the directions contained in an order made under 
sub-section ( 3). 19 
 47. Power of Reserve Bank to inspect chit books and records .—(1) Nothing in s ection 46 shall be 
deemed to affect the power of the Reserve Bank to inspect the books and records of any f oreman under 
the provisions of s ection 45 N of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, if it considers necessary, forward a copy of its report or of any part of its 
report on the inspection of the books and records of a foreman to the foreman for taking necessary action.  
(3) Every foreman shall, on receipt of the report or part thereof under sub -section ( 2), be bound to 
comply with the directions, if any, given by the Reserve Bank in this behalf and shall, if so required, 
submit periodical reports in regard to the action taken by him.  
(4) The Reserve Bank may also forward a copy of the report on the inspection of the books and 
records of a foreman to the State Government within whose jurisdiction the registered office of the 
company, if the foreman is a company, or the pla ce or the principal place of business of the foreman in 
any other case, is situated for such action as may be considered necessary.  
CHAPTER X  
WINDING UP OF CHITS  
48. Circumstances under which chits may be wound up .—A chit may be wound up by the 
Registrar w ithin whose territorial jurisdiction the chit has been registered, either on his own motion or on 
an application made by any non -prize d or unpaid prized subscriber, — 
(a) if the chit has terminated under clause ( c) of s ection 40 ; or 
(b) if the foreman commits any such act in respec t of the security specified in s ection 20 as is 
calculated to impair materially the nature of the security or the value thereof; or  
(c) if he fails to deposit any amount required to be deposited under any of the provisions of this 
Act; or  
(d) if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Registrar that the foreman is unable to pay the amounts 
due to the subscribers; or  
(e) if the execution or other process issued on an order passed by the Registrar in favour of any 
subscriber in r espect of amounts due to him from the foreman in relation to the chit business is 
returned unsatisfied in whole or in part; or  
(f) if it is proved that there has been a fraud or collusion on the part of the foreman in the matter 
of taking securities from a ny prized subscriber; or  
(g) if the foreman has appropriated the prize amount in his capacity as a subscriber without 
furnishing sufficient se curity for future subscriptions ; or 
(h) if the Registrar is satisfied that the affairs of the chit are being conducted in a manner 
prejudicial to the interests of the subscribers; or  
(i) if it is just and equitable that the chit should be wound up.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( d), in d etermining whether the foreman is unable to pay the 
amounts due to the subscribers, the Registrar shall take into account his contingent and future liabilities in 
respect of the chit.  
49. Application for winding up .—An application for the winding up of a c hit shall be made by a 
petition presented by any non -prized or unpaid prized subscriber to the Registrar signed and verified in 
the manner laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), and shall contain such p articulars 
as may be prescribed : 
Provided that no application for the winding up of a chit under clause ( d) or clause ( i) of s ection 48 
shall lie unless such application is presented, — 
(a) by non -prized and unpaid prized subscribers representing not less than twenty -five per cent . of 
the amount or, as the case may be, the value of the grain subscribed by all the non -prized and unpaid 
prized subscribers, if any; or  20 
 (b) with the previous sanction of the State Government within whose jurisdiction the chit is 
commenced or conducted.  
Explanatio n.—For the purposes of clause ( a), of the proviso, a subscriber of a fraction of a ticket 
shall be deemed to be a subscriber only to the extent of such fraction.  
50. Bar to winding up proceedings .—Notwith standing anything contained in s ections 48 and 49, no 
petition for the winding up of a chit shall be  entertained by the Registrar, — 
(a) if proceedings relating to insolvency are pending against the foreman; or  
(b) where the foreman is a firm, if proceedings relating to insolvency are pending against all the 
partners or all the partners except one thereof, or proceedings for the dissolution of the firm are 
pending; or  
(c) where the foreman is a company or co -operative society, if proceeding s for the winding up of 
such company or co -operative society are pe nding.  
51. Commencement and effect of winding up order .—An order for the winding up of a chit shall 
operate in favour  of all the subscribers to whom amounts are due from the foreman and it shall be deemed 
to have commenced from the date of the presentation of the application for the winding up.  
52. Injunction order .—The Registrar may, on the application of the foreman or of any subscriber to 
whom amounts are due in respect of a chit, at any time after the presentation of the application for the 
winding up of the chit under this Act and before the making of an order fo r the appointment of an interim 
receiver or for the winding up of the chit, restrain any other proceedings instituted against the foreman for 
the realisation of amounts due from him on such terms as the Registrar think s fit. 
53. Powers of Registrar .—The Re gistrar may, after hearing an application under this Chapter, 
dismiss it with or without costs, or adjourn the hearing conditionally or unconditionally or make an 
interim or any other order that he deems fit.  
54. Vesting of chit assets in Registrar or othe r person s.—On the making of an order for the 
winding up of a chit, all the chit assets pertaining to such chit shall vest in the Registrar or in any person 
appointed by him for distribution amongst the subscribers to whom amounts are due in respect of the chit. 
55. Suits , etc., to be stayed on winding up order .—When a winding up order has been made or a 
receiver has been appointed, no suit or other legal proceedings shall be continued or commenced against 
the foreman by a subscriber for the realisation of a mounts due to him in respect of the chit except with the 
leave of the Registrar winding up the chit and on such terms as he may impose.  
56. Notification of winding up order .—On the making of a winding up order, the Registrar shall 
make an entry in his book relating to the chit and shall notify in the Official Gazette that the order has 
been made.  
57. Cessation of winding up proceedings on insolvency of foreman , etc., or the wind ing up of the 
company and transfer of such proceedings .—Where during the pendency of the proceedings for the 
winding up of a chit, the foreman is adjudicated an insolvent, or where the foreman is a firm , all the 
partners or all the partners except one ther eof are adjudicated insolvents, or where the foreman is a 
company, the company has bee n ordered to be wound up by the C ourt, the winding up proceedings under 
this Chapter shall cease and the distribution of the chit assets shall, subject to the  provisions of       
sections 43 and 52, be made by the insolvency court or the court winding up the company, as the case 
may be.  
58. Award of compensation to foreman .—(1) Where an application for the winding up of a chit is 
dismissed and the Registrar is satisfied that the petition is frivolous or vexatious, he may, on the 
application of the forema n, award against the petitioner  such amount, not exceeding one thousand rupees, 
as he deems reasonable as compensation to the foreman for the expenses or injury caused to him by the 
presentation of the application and the proceedings thereon, and such amount may be realised as if the 
award were a decree of a Civil Court.  
(2) On the making of an award under sub -section ( 1), no suit for compensation in respect of an 
applicati on for any winding up of the chit shall be entertained.  21 
 59. Right to appeal .—The foreman or any subscriber or any other person aggrieved by a decision or 
order of the Registrar in any proceedings for the winding up of a chit may, within sixty days from the  date 
of such decision or order, appeal to the State Government.  
60. Limitation .—(1) Where an order refusing to wind up a chit has been made under this Act, the 
chit shall be deemed to have been under suspension from the date of presentation of the applica tion to the 
date of such order in re spect of non -prized subscribers ; and, notwithstanding anything contained in the 
chit agreement, no non -prized subscriber who was not a defaulter on the date of the presentation of the 
petition for winding up, shall be deemed to be a defaulter on the date of such order.  
(2) Where an order refusing to wind up a chit has been made under this Act, in computing the period 
of limitation prescribed for any suit or other legal proceedings (other than a suit or application in re spect 
of which the leave of the court has been obtained) which might have been brought or instituted, but for 
the presentation of the application for the winding up of the chit, the period from the date of the 
presentation of the application to the date of  the order refusing to wind up a chit shall be excluded.  
(3) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall affect the rights of a subscriber to proceed against the 
foreman personally for the balance, if any, of the amount due to him after the declaration of the final 
dividend in the proceedings for the winding up of the chit and in computing the period of limitation 
prescribed for any such proceedings, the period from the date of the presentation of the application for the 
winding up of the chit to the date of th e declaration of the final dividend shall be excluded.  
CHAPTER XI  
APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS AND LEVY OF FEES  
61. Appointment of Registrar and other officers .—(1) The State Government may, by notification 
in the Official G azette, appoint a Registrar of C hits and as many Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant 
Registrars as may be necessary for the purpose of discharging the duties imposed upon the Registrar by or 
under this Act.  
(2) The Registrar may appoint as many inspectors of  chits and chit auditors as may  be necessary for 
the purpose of discharging the duties imposed on the inspectors of chits or chit auditors by or under this 
Act. 
(3) All inspectors of chits and chit auditors shall discharge the duties imposed upon them by or under 
this Act under the gene ral superintendence and control of the Registrar.  
(4) If the Registrar is of the opinion that the accounts of any chit are not properly maintained and that 
such accounts should be audited, it shall be lawful for him to have such accounts audited by a chit auditor.  
(5) It shall be the duty of the foreman of the chit whose accounts are to be audited by a chit auditor 
under sub -section ( 4) to produce before the chit auditor, all accounts, books and other records relating to 
the chit, to furnish him with such i nformation as may be required and afford him all such assistance and 
facilities as may be necessary and reasonable in regard to the audit of the accounts of the chit.  
(6) The foreman shall pay to the chit auditor such fees as may be prescribed for the audi t of the 
accounts of the chit under sub -section ( 4): 
Provided that different scales of fees may be prescribed for different chits depending on the quantum 
of the chit amount.  
62. Inspe ction of documents in Registrar’ s office .—The foreman of a chit or any subscriber in a 
chit or the heirs or legal representatives of any foreman or subscriber may, on payment of such fees as 
may be prescribed, — 
(a) inspect the documents of the concerned chit kept by the Registrar; or  
(b) obtain a certified copy or on extract of any such document or record.  
63. Levy of fees .—(1) There shall be paid to the Registrar such fees as the State Government may, 
from time to time, prescribe for, — 
(a) the issue of pr evious sanction under section 4 ; 22 
 (b) the  filing of the chit agreement with the Registrar and the registration of the chit under  
section 7;  
(c) the filing of a declaration with the Registrar and the grant of a cer tificate of commencement 
under s ection 9;  
(d) the filing of copies of documents und er any of the provisions of this Act;  
(e) the audit of the accounts of the foreman under section 61 ; 
(f) the inspection of documents under section 62 ; 
(g) the obtaining of certified copies or extracts of documen ts and records under section 62 ; and  
(h) such  other matters as may appear necessary to the State Government.  
(2) A table of fees prescribed under sub -section (1) shall be exhibited on a notice board in the office 
of the Registrar.  
CHAPTER XII  
DISPUTES AND ARBITRATION  
64. Disputes relating to chit business .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, any dispute touching the management of a chit business shall be referred by any 
of the parties to the dispute, to the Registrar for arbitration if each party the reto is one or the other of the 
following, namely :— 
(a) a foreman, a prized subscriber or a non -prized subscriber, including a defaulting subscriber, 
past subscriber or a person claiming through a subscriber, or a deceased subscriber to a chit;  
(b) a surety of a subscriber, past subscriber, or a deceased subscriber.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, a dispute touching the management of  a chit 
business shall include — 
(i) a claim by or against a foreman for any debt or demand due to him  from a subscriber, or due 
from him to a subscriber, past subscriber or the nominee, heir or legal representative of a deceased 
subscriber whether such debt or demand is admitted or not;  
(ii) a claim by a surety for any sum or demand due to him from the pr incipal borrower in respect 
of a loan by a foreman and recovered from the surety owing to the default of the principal borrower, 
whether such sum or demand is admitted or not; and  
(iii) a refusal or failure by a subscriber, past subscriber or the nominee, heir or legal 
representative of a deceased subscriber to deliver possession to a foreman of land or any other asset 
resumed by him for breach of conditions of the assignment.  
(2) Where any question arises as to whether any matter referred to for the award of the Registrar is a 
dispute or not for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the same shall be decided by the Registrar whose 
decision thereon shall be final.  
(3) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other proceedings in respect of any 
dispute referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
65. Period of limitation .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation                     
Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), but subject to the specific provisions contained in this Act, the period of 
limitation in the case of a dispute referred to the Registrar u nder s ection 64, shall — 
(a) if the dispute relates to the recovery of any sum, including interest thereon, due to a foreman 
from a deceased subscriber, be three years, computed from the date on  which such subscriber dies or 
ceases to be a subscriber; or  
(b) if the dispute is between a foreman and a subscriber or a past subscriber, or the nominee, heir 
or legal representative of a deceased subscriber, and the dispute relates to any act or omissio n on the 
part of either party to the dispute, be three years from the date on which the act or omission with 
reference to which the dispute arose, took place.  
(2) The period of limitation in the case of any dispute other than those referred to in sub -section (1) 
which are required to be referred to the Registrar unde r section 64 shall be regulated by the provisions of 
the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), as if the dispute were a suit, and the Registrar, a Civil Court.  23 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything containe d in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Registrar may admit a dispute 
after the expiry of the period of limitation specified therein, if the applicant satisfies the Registrar that he 
had sufficient cause for not referring the dispute within such period.  
66. Settlement of disputes .—(1) If the Registrar is satisfied that any matter referred to him or 
brought to his notice is a  dispute within the meaning of s ection 64, he shall, subject to such rules as may 
be prescribed, settle the dispute himself, or refer it for disposal to a person appointed by him (hereafter in 
this Chapter referred to as the nominee).  
(2) Where any dispute is referred under sub -section ( 1) for settlement to the nominee, the Registrar 
may, at any time for reasons to be recorded in writing, w ithdraw such dispute from the nominee and may 
settle the dispute himself, or refer it again for settlement to any other nominee appointed by him.  
67. Procedure for settlement of disputes and powers of Registrar or nominee .—(1) The Registrar 
or the n ominee hearing a dispute under s ection 66, shall, in addition to the powers conferred on him under 
that section, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;  
(b) requiring the discov ery and inspection of documents ; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits ; 
(d) requisitioning  any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) Except with the permission of the Registrar or the nominee, no party  shall be represented at the 
hearing of a dispute by a legal practitioner.  
(3) (a) If the Registrar or the nominee is satisfied that any person, whether he is a subscriber or not, 
has acquired any interest in the property of a person who is a party to a di spute, he may order that the 
person who has acquired the interest in the property may be joined as a party to the dispute, and any 
decision that may be given by the Registrar or the nominee on the dispute shall be binding on the party so 
joined, in the sam e manner as if he were an original party to the dispute.  
(b) Where a dispute has been referred in the name of a wrong person, or where all the necessary 
parties have not been included, the Registrar or the nominee may, if he is satisfied that it was due to  a 
genuine mistake, order any other person to be substituted or added as parties to the dispute at any stage of 
hearing of the dispute on such terms as he thinks just.  
(c) The Registrar or the nominee may, at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or wi thout the 
application of either party and on such terms as may appear to the Registrar or the nominee to be just, 
order that the name of any party improperly joined be struck off.  
(d) Any person who is a party to the dispute and entitled to more than one r elief in respect of the same 
cause of action may claim  all or any such reliefs, but if  he omits to claim any such relief, he shall not be 
entitled to claim that relief, except with the leave of the Registrar or the nominee.  
68. Attachment before judgment a nd other interlocutory orders .—(1) Where a dispute has been 
referr ed under s ection 64 and the Registrar or the nominee hearing the dispute is satisfied on enquiry or 
otherwise that a party to such dispute, with intent to defeat or obstruct the execution of any award or the 
carrying out of any order that may be made, — 
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property; or  
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of the property from the jurisdiction of the Registrar,  
he may, unless adequate security is furnished, direct conditional attachment of the said property, and such 
attachment shall have the same effect as if it is made by a competent Civil Court.  24 
 (2) Where the Registrar or the nominee directs the attachment of any property under sub -section ( 1), 
he shall issue a notice calling upon the person whose property is so attached to furnish such security as he 
thinks adequate within a specified period, and if the person fails to provide such security, the Registrar or 
the nominee may confirm the order, and may, after the decision in the dispute, direct the disposal o f the 
property so attached towards the claim, if awarded.  
(3) Any attachment made under this section shall not affect the rights, subsisting prior to the 
attachment of the property, of persons who are not parties to the dispute, or bar any person holding a  
decree against the person whose property is so attached from applying for the sale of the property under 
the attachment of such decree.  
(4) The Registrar or the nominee may, in order to prevent the ends of justice being defeated, make 
such interlocutory o rders pending the award in a dispute referred to in sub -section ( 1) as may appear to be 
just and convenient.  
69. Decision of Registrar or nominee .—When a dispute is referred to arbitration under this Chapter, 
the Registrar or the nominee, may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the parties to the dispute to be 
heard, make an award on the dispute, on the expenses incurred by the parties to the d ispute in connection 
with the proceedings and the fees and expenses payable to the Registrar or the nominee, and such an 
award shall not be invalid merely on the ground that it was made after the expiry of the period, if any, 
fixed for deciding the dispute  by the Registrar, and shall, subject to appeal under s ection 70, be final and 
binding on the parties to the dispute.  
70. Appeal against decision of Registrar or nominee .—Any party aggrieved by any order passed 
by the Registrar or the nominee or the award of the Registrar or the nominee under s ection 69, may, 
within two months from the date of the order or award, app eal to the State Government.  
71. Money how recovered .—Every order passed by the Registrar or t he nominee under section 68 or 
section 69 and every order passed by the St ate Government in appeal under s ection 70 for payment of any 
money shall, if not carried out, — 
(a) on a certificate issued by the Registrar, b e deemed to be a decree of a Civil Court, and shall be 
executed in the same manner as a decree of such Court, or  
(b) be executed in accordance with the provisions of any law for the time being in force for the 
recovery of amo unts as arrears of land revenue : 
Provided that no application for execution under clause ( b) shall be made after the expiry of th ree 
years from the date fixed in the order, and if no such date is fixed, from the date of the order.  
72. Private transfer of property made after issue of cer tificate void against foreman .—Any 
private transfer of delivery of, or encumbrance or charge on, property made or created after the issue of 
the cert ificate by the Registrar under s ection 71 shall be null and void against the foreman on whose 
application the said certificate was issued.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
73. Advisory role of Reserve B ank.—The Reserve Bank may tender to any State Government such 
advice on questions of policy with respect to this Act as it thinks fit either on its own motion or on a  
request made by the State Government.  
74. Appeals .—(1) Any foreman aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar, — 
(a) refusing to register the chit agr eement under s ection 7;  
(b) refusing to grant a certificate of commenc ement under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 9;  
(c) refusing to accept any security under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 or under section 31 ; or 
(d) refusing to release the security charged un der section 20 or s ection 31,  
may, within thirty days of the communication to him of such decision, appeal to the State Government or 
to such officer or authority as may be empowered by notification in the Official Gazette by the State 
Government in that behalf.  25 
 (2) Any foreman or other person aggrieved by the order of the Registrar under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 34 may, within thirty days of the communication to him of such decision, appeal to the State 
Government or to such officer or authority as may be empowered by notification in the Official Gazette 
by the State Government in that behalf.  
(3) The State Government or such officer or authority aforesaid may, after giving the appellant an 
opportunity of making his representation, pass such order on the appeal as it or he thinks fit and such 
order shall be final.  
75. Powers of Registrar to give extensi on of time for filing documents .—The Registrar may, in his 
discretion and upon an application in writing by a foreman made within the period specified for the filing 
of documents, under sub -section ( 3) of section 28, sub -section ( 2) of section 29, section 37 or s ection 41, 
allow the foreman further time not exceeding fifteen days to file copies of such documents.  
76. Penalties .—(1) Whoever contravenes or abets the contraventi on of any of the provisions of 
section s 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 22, 24, 30, 31, sub-section ( 4) of section 33, s ection s 46, 47 or 
sub-section ( 5) of s ection 61 shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or with fine which may exten d to fi ve thousand rupees or with both.  
(2) Any foreman, — 
(a) who fails to file  any document required to be fi ed under this Act within the period specified 
therefor or within such further time as may be allowed; or  
(b) who fails to comply with the requirements of the chit agreement regarding the date, time and 
place at which the chit is to be drawn or who fails to comply with the requirements of any direction 
given under sub -section ( 3) of s ection 38; or  
(c) who contravenes or fails to comply with a ny other requirement under this Act,  
shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees.  
(3) Whoever wilfully  makes a statement in any document required to be filed under this Act which is 
false in any material particular shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to five thousand r upees or with both.  
77. Penalty for second and subsequent convictions .—If any person convicted of an offence under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 3) of s ection 76 is again convicted of an offence under any of the said    
sub-section s he shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.  
78. Application of fine .—A court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the whole  or any 
part thereof shall be applied in, or towards payment of, the cost of the proceedings.  
79. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing c ontained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part o f, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer for the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individuals; and  
  26 
 (b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
80. Cognizance of offences .—(1) All offences under s ection 11 shall be cognizable.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try an offence punishable under this Act.  
81. Power to compound offences .—(1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any officer 
empowered by the State Government in this behalf may, either before or after the institution of criminal 
proceedings under this Act, accept from the person who has committed or is reasonably suspected to have 
committed an offence un der this Act, by way of composition of such offence, a sum of money not 
exceeding such amount as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), the offender, if in custody, shall be 
discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.  
82. Power to enter and search any place and to seize any documents .—(1) If the Registrar or any 
other officer authorised by him in this behalf, has reason to suspect that any person conducts, or is 
responsible for the conduct of, a chit in any place in contravention of the provisions of this Act, he may, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing and at any reasonable time, enter into and search such place, and 
may seize such books, registers, accounts or do cuments as may be necessary.  
(2) The Registrar or officer authorised by him in this behalf, may apply for assistance to an officer in 
charge of a police station and t ake police officers to accompany and assist him in discharging his duties 
under sub -sectio n (1). 
(3) All searches under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in  accordance with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
83. Officers to be public servants .—The Registrar and all officers appointed by the State 
Government to perform any functions under this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal  Code (45 of 1860).  
84. Power to delegate .—The State Governme nt may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that any power (other than the power to hear appeals or to make rules) exercisable by it under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder may be exercised also by any officer of the State Government subjec t to such 
terms and conditions, if any, as may be specified therein.  
85. Act not to apply to certain chits .—Nothing in this  Act shall apply in respect of — 
(a) any chit started befo re the commencement of this Act;  or 
(b) any chit the amount of which, or where two or more chits were started or conducted 
simultaneously by the same foreman, the aggregate amount of which does not exceed one hundred 
rupees.  
86. Banks not to conduct chit business .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no 
bank shal l commence or carry on chit business after the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Where a chit had been started by any bank before such commencement, such chit may be 
continued after such commencement until it is completed, and the provisions of the chit agreem ent and 
such laws, if any, as were applicable to it immediately before the commencement of this Act shall apply 
to such chit.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section “bank ” means an approved bank or a co -operative 
bank as defined in clause ( bii) of s ection 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).  
87. Power to exempt .—The State Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notificati on, 
exempt any person or class of persons or any chit or class of chits from all or any of the provisions of this 
Act. 
88. Protection of action taken under the Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the State Government, the Registrar or other officers of the State Government or of the Reserve 27 
 Bank or any of its officers exercising any powers or discharging any functions under this Act in respect of 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of th is Act or the rules made 
thereunder.  
89. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form and manner in which an application for obtaining the previous sanction may be made 
under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 4;  
(b) the additional particulars that a chit agreement may contain under clause ( q) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 6;  
(c) the particulars that may be included in the minutes of the proceed ings of a draw under   
section 17 ; 
(d) the method of valuatio n by the Registrar in a grain chit for the purpose of furni shing security 
under section 20 ; 
(e) the procedure that may be followed by the Registrar in releasing the security furnished by the 
foreman under section 20 ; 
(f) the registers and books and the form in which such registers and books may be maintained by 
the foreman under s ection 23 ; 
(g) the time within which the balance sheet and the profit and loss account in respect of a chit 
business shall be filed under section 24; 
(h) the rate at which interest shall be payable on the defaulted instalments by a defaul ted 
subscriber under s ection 28 ; 
(i) the particulars that may be included in an application for the windi ng up of chits under   
section 49 ; 
(j) the procedure to be followed for the wind ing up of chits under Chapter X;  
(k) the fees payable under s ection 63 ; 
(l) the auditing of balance sheets and the profit and loss accounts of chit business and the issue of 
audit certificates ; 
(m) the form and manner in which a disput e shall be r eferred to the Registrar under s ection  64; 
(n) the procedure to be followed by the Registrar or his nominee for settling the disputes r eferred 
to him under s ection 64 ; 
(o) the matters referred to in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of s ection 67 ; 
(p) the conditions subject to which and the amount on the payment of which composition of 
offenc es ma y be made under s ection 81 ; 
(q) the form and manner in which an appeal may be preferred under this Act and the fees payable 
for such appeal;  
(r) the issue and service of notices or other process under this Act;  
(s) the procedure for, and the manner of, receiving any sum payable under this Act;  
(t) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or, where such Legislature consists of one 
House before that House.  28 
 90. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Andhra Pradesh Chit Funds Act, 1971 (And hra Pradesh              
Act 9 of 1971), the Kerala Chitties Act, 1975 (Kerala Act 23 of 1975), the Maharashtra Chit Funds      
Act, 1974 (Maharashtra Act LV of 1974), the Tamil Nadu Chit Funds Act, 1961 (Tamil Nadu               
Act 24 of 1961), as in for ce in the State of Tamil Nadu and in the Union territories of Chandigarh and 
Delhi, the Uttar Pradesh Chit Funds Act, 1975 (Uttar Pradesh Act 53 of 1975), the Goa, Daman and Diu 
Chit Funds Act, 1973 (Goa , Daman and Diu Act 16 of 1973)  and the Pondicherry Chit Funds               
Act, 1966 (Pondicherry Act 18 of 1966), are hereby repeale d and the provisions of s ection 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall apply to such repeal as if each such Act so repealed were a 
Centr al Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, the Acts mentioned in sub -section ( 1) shall continue to apply to chits 
in operation on the commencement of this Act, in the same manner as they applied to such chits before 
such commencement.  
  29 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 24]  
PART I. —FORM OF BALANCE SHEET  
 
 Liabilities     Assets    
1. Capital    1. Cash   Rs. 
  Authorised    .       .        .        .       .   Rs.  2. Balance s with banks:    
  Issued     .      .       .       .       .        .   Rs.    (a) Current account     .     .      .   Rs.   
  Paid-up   .      .       .       .      .        .    Rs. Rs.   (b) Deposit account    .      .      .  Rs. Rs. 
    3. Investments :    
2. Reserve Fund    .      .       .       .      .    Rs.  (a) In chits     .       .       .         .  Rs.  
3. Deposits      .        .        .        .        .    Rs.  (b) In government securities   . Rs.  
4. Borrowings    .       .       .       .        .     Rs.  (c) Others       .       .        .       .  Rs. Rs. 
5. Foreman’ s liability in tickets prized   Rs. 4. Share amount due from prized 
subscribers :   
6. Prize amount payable    .     .     .     .   Rs.  (a) Secured     .       .      .        .  Rs.  
7. Defaulted subscribers’  amount 
payable       .         .         .       .         .    Rs.  (b) Unsecured     .      .     .      .  Rs. Rs. 
8. Advance subscription received        .  Rs. 5. Arrears due from prized  
subscribers :   
9. Liability to non -prized subscribers    Rs.  (a) Secured     .     .      .    .      . Rs.  
 (Arrears from non -prized subscribers 
to be indicated)        .       .       .        .            (b) Unsecured    .      .       .      .  Rs. Rs. 
10. Amount payable in terminated chit s .  Rs. 6. Amount due in terminated 
chits:    
11. Auction profit payable to  non-prized    Rs.  (a) Secured     .    .     .    .    .     .  Rs.  
 Subscribers     .       .       .       .        .      (b) Unsecured    .    .     .     .     .     Rs. Rs. 
12. Other liabilities        .       .       .       .         Rs. 7. Chit prize amount paid earlier   Rs. 
13. Profit and loss account     .       .       .      Rs. 8. Loans and advances to 
subscribers    .    .     .     .    .     .   Rs. 
    9. Litigation expenses       .    .      .   Rs. 
    10. Premises      .     .     .      .     .    .   Rs. 
    11. Furniture and fixture       .    .    .   Rs. 
    12. Stamps in stock    .     .    .    .    .    Rs. 
    13. Other assets    .     .    .    .     .    .   Rs. 
    14. Profit and loss account    .    .    .   Rs. 
 TOTAL   Rs.  TOTAL   Rs. 
   Particulars to be specified in respect of amounts 
shown against 4, 5 and 6.  
Total chit amounts of the chits in fore, i.e., running 
chits.  (i) Amounts due from directors or officers of the 
company or any of them either join tly or 
severally with any other person.  
 (ii) Am ounts due by companies or firms  in which 
the directors o f the company are interested as  
directors, partners or in the case of private 
companies, as members.  
         
 
  30 
 PART  II.—FORM OF PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT  
 
 Expenditure    Income   
1. To interest paid on deposits, borrowings,   1. By foreman’s commission      .       .       .             Rs. 
 etc.    .        .       .       .       .       .      .  Rs. 2. By bonus        .       .      .          .      .      .       Rs. 
2. To salaries, allowances, bonus and   3. By interest      .       .       .         .      .      .     Rs. 
 provident fund         .        .       .        .           Rs. 4. By indivisible income in auction profit  .  Rs. 
3. To directors’ sitting fees    .       .       .            Rs. 5. By rent            .       .        .        .       .     .   Rs. 
4. To rent, taxes, insurance, lighting      . Rs. 6. By net profit on sale of investments  .    . Rs. 
5. To law charges    .      .       .       .       .     Rs. 7. By other receipts       .      .       .     .       .           Rs. 
6. To postages, telegrams and stamps    .        Rs. 8. By loss        .       .        .         .        .      . Rs. 
7. To auditors’ fees    .       .       .      .     . Rs.    
8. To filing fees       .       .       .        .     . Rs.    
9. Ro depreciation and repairs    .     .     .           Rs.    
10. To stationery, printing and 
advertisement    .       .       .      .    .    . Rs.    
11. To other expenditure    .      .       .      .     Rs.    
12. To balance of profit     .       .       .      .    Rs.    
      
TOTAL  Rs. TOTAL  Rs. 
 
--------------------------The Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE CUSTOMS TARIFF (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1982  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. Amendment with respect to certain stainless steel articles to have retrospective effect.  
 
  2 
 THE CUSTOMS TARIFF (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 15 OF 1982  
[11th May , 1982.] 
An Act further to amend the Customs Tariff Act, 1975.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Customs Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1982.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
3. Amendment with respect to certain stainless steel articles to have retrospective effect. —The 
amendment made by clause ( a) of section 2 in Heading No. 73.15 of the First Schedule to the principal 
Act, in so far as it relates to the standard rate of duty on circles, angles, shapes and sections of stainless 
steel shall be deemed to have, and to have always had, effect on and from the 1st day of January, 1981, 
but during the period commencing from that day and ending with the date o f introduction of the Customs 
Tariff (Amendment) Bill, 1982 in the House of the People — 
(a) such circles, angles, shapes and sections shall be deemed to have been exempt from so much 
of the duty of customs leviable thereon under the said First Schedule as amendment by the said 
amendment as is in excess of the rate of 220 per cent. ad valorem ; 
(b) the rate of auxiliary duty of customs chargeable on such circles, angles, shapes and sections 
shall be, and shall be deemed to have been, the same as that chargeab le on sheets falling under         
sub-heading No. ( 2) of the said Heading No. 73.15 . 
                                                           
1. Section 2  rep. by the Act 19 of 1988, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).   
 
--------------------------The East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Chandigarh Amendment) Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE EAST PUNJAB URBAN RENT RESTRICTION (CHANDIGARH  
AMENDMENT) ACT, 1982  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. Special provision as to pending cases.  
  2 
 THE EAST PUNJAB URBAN RENT RESTRICTION (CHANDIGARH  
AMENDMENT ) ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1982  
[21st August, 1982.]  
An Act further to amend the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, as in force in the 
Union t erritory of Chandigarh.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of t he Republic of  India as follows :— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Chandigarh 
Amendment) Act, 1982.  
1*                                       *                                  *                                   *                                  * 
4. Special provision as to pending cases .—The provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this 
Act, shall apply to and in relation to every case, under the principal Act, for eviction of a tenant from a 
building let under a single tenancy for use for the purpose of business or trade and also for the purpose of 
residence which is pending immediately before the commencement of this Act, and any order made in 
such case before such commencement by any authority, shall, on an appl ication made in this behalf to 
such authority, be modified so as to be in conformity with the provisions of the principal Act as amended 
by this Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, a case relating to eviction of a tenant  shall be deemed 
to be pending — 
(a) if no order has been made in such case for the eviction or otherwise of the tenant; or  
(b) if an order has been made in such case for the eviction of the tenant and such order remains to 
be executed.  
 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 and 3 rep.  by Act  19 of 1988 , s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
--------------------------The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND PRIVILEGES) ACT, 1982  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Emoluments . 
4. Leave allowance . 
5. Use and maintenance of official residences . 
6. Household establishment . 
7. Medical treatment  
8. Conveyance . 
9. Traveling allowance on assumption or vacation of office . 
10. Allowances for renewing furnishings and for maintenance of official residences . 
11. Other privileges and allowances . 
12. Additional expenses.  
12A. Entitlement of ex-Governor to secretarial assistance.  
13. Power to make rules . 
14. Validation.  
15. Saving.  
  2 
  THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND PRIVILEGES) ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1982  
[28th August , 1982 .] 
An Act to determine the emoluments, allowances and privileges of Governors . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may  be called the Governors 
(Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982.  
(2) It extends to the  whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “ex-Governor ” means a person who has been the Governor of a State or two or more States;  
(aa) “Governor ” means the Governor, or any person discharging the functions of the Governor, of 
any S tate or of two or more States; ] 
(b) “maintenance ”,— 
(i) in relation  to official residences, includes the provisio n of electricity, gas and water;  
(ii) in relation to motor vehicles, includes the pay and allowances of chauffeurs and the 
provision of oil and petrol or other fuel;  
(c) “members of the family ”, in relation to a Governor, means the  3[spouse, dependent children 
and the dependent parents] of the Governor;  
(d) “official residences ”, in relation to a Governor, means such residences as may be specified by 
the President, by notification in the Official Gazette, as the official residences of the Governor and 
includes the staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto and the gar dens thereof;  
(e) “rules ” means rules made under this Act;  
(f) “State ” does not include a Union territory.  
3. Emoluments .—There shall be paid to every Governor emoluments at the rate of  4[rupees 5[three 
lakh fifty thousand]  permensem ]: 
Provided that if a Governor, a t the time of his appointment, — 
(a) is in receipt of a pension (other than disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous 
service under the Government of India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the 
Government of a State or any of its predecessor Governments his emol uments shall be reduced, — 
(i) by the amount of that pension; and  
                                                           
1. 1st April  1987, vide notification No. G.S.R. 342(E), dated 30th March, 1987,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(i). 
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 2014, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2009, s. 2, for “spouse and the  dependent children” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2007).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “rupees thirty -six thousand per mensem ” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s 161, for “ one lakh ten thousand ” (w.e.f 1 -1-2016).  3 
 (ii) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portion of the pension due to him 
in respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of 
the pension;1[or] 
2*   *   *   *  * 
(b) is in receipt of any benefit by way of contributory provident fund, his emoluments shall be 
reduced by the pension equivalent of such benefit.  
4. Leave allowance .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the President shall grant such 
leave to a Governor as he may consider necessary.  
(2) Where a Governor is granted leave by the President, he shall, during the period of such leave, be 
paid leave allowance at such ra te as the President may by order determine:  
Provided that such leave allowance shall be reduced to the extent, if any, to which the emoluments of 
the Governor are liable to be reduced under the proviso to section 3.  
5. Use and maintenance of official resid ences .—A Governor shall be entitled, without payment of 
rent, to the use of his official residences throughout his term of office and no charge shall fall on the 
Governor personally in respect of the furnishing or the maintenance of such residences.  
6. Household establishment .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf, no charge shall fall on a 
Governor personally in respect of pay, allowances or pension or other emoluments paid to, or facilities 
provided for, the members of the household establishment provi ded to the Governor.  
7. Medical treatment .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf, a Governor and the members of his 
family shall be entitled during the term of his office and thereafter also, to free medical attendance, 
accommodation and treatment in th e hospitals maintained by the Central Government or the Government 
of any State.  
8. Conveyance .—(1) A Governor shall be entitled to use without payment of rent or hire, such 
number of motor vehicles as the President may by order determine.  
(2) No charge shall fall on a Governor personally in respect of the maintenance of the motor vehicles 
referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The use of the motor vehicles referred to in sub -section ( 1) by the members of the family of a 
Governor shall be regulated by rules made in this behalf.  
9. Traveling allowance on assumption or vacation of office .—Subject to any rules made in this 
behalf, a Governor shall be entitled to traveling allowance for himself and the members of his family and 
for the transport of his and his fa mily’s effects — 
(a) in respect of the journey for assuming office from the place where he is ordinarily residing to 
the place of his duty; and  
(b) in respect of the journey on relinquishing office from the place of his duty to the place where 
he would ordinarily reside thereafter or if he is to take up any other office under the Government 
(including the office of the Governor of another State) after s uch relinquishment, to the place of duty 
with respect to such other office.  
10. Allowances for renewing furnishings and for maintenance of official residences .—Subject to 
any rules made in this behalf, a Governor shall be entitled to such allowances for re newing the furnishings 
and for the maintenance of the official residences, as the President may by order determine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1994, s. 2, for “and” (w.e .f. 1-6-1988).  
2. Sub -clause ( iii) omitted by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1988).  4 
 11. Other privileges and allowances .—For the purpose of enabling a Governor to discharge 
conveniently and with dignity the du ties of his office, he shall be — 
(i) entitled to such other privileges as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf, and  
(ii) paid, subject to any rules made in this behalf, such amount, as th e President may, by general 
or special order, determine by way of the f ollowing, namely: — 
(a) entertainment allowance;  
(b) hospitality grant;  
(c) household establishment expenses;  
(d) office expenses;  
(e) contract allowance, i.e., an allowance for miscellaneous expenses;  
(f) tour expenses; and  
(g) such  other allowances or expenses as may be provided for by rules.  
12. Additional expenses .—(1) Where, in the case of any Governor , the President is satisfied that the 
amount authorised  under this Act by way of any allowances or for meeting any expenses with respect to 
any matter requires to be increased or that a need has arisen to sanction expenses with respect to any 
matter for which provision, though permissible, has not been made in  the rules made under this Act, he 
may by special order increase such amount or sanction such expenses to such extent as may be specified 
in such order.  
(2) An order may be made under sub -section ( 1) so as to have retrospective effect.  
(3) Every order made  under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before both 
Houses of Parliament.  
1[12A. Entitlement of ex -Governor to secretarial assistance .—Subject to any rules made in this 
behalf, the ex -Governor shall, for the remainder of his life, be entitled to secretarial assistance of one 
Personal Assistant on reimbursement basis:  
Provided that where such ex -Governor is re -appointed to the office of the Governor or elected to 
Parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any office of  profit under the Union or a State 
Government, he shall not be entitled for such secretarial assistance for the period during which he holds 
such office.]  
13. Power to make rules .—(1) The President may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) grant of leav e to a Governor und er Section 4 ; 
(b) matters relating to the household establishment provided to a Governor under section 6;  
(c) medical attendance, accommodation and treatment of a Governor and the members of his 
family under section 7;  
(d) the use of motor vehicles by the members of the family of a Governor under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 8 ; 
(e) the travelling allowance on assumption or vacation of office of a Governor under section 9;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2014, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  5 
 (f) allowance  for renewing the furnishings and for the maintenance of the official residences 
under section 10 ; 
(g) the privileges to which a Governor is entitled and the allowances or expenses payable to a 
Governor under section 11 ; 
1[(h) the manner of providing secre tarial assistance and reimbursement under section 12A.]  
(3) Every rule made by the President under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is made, 
before  each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which  may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive session s aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses  agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be ; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
14. Validation .—(1) Every special order issued, before the commencement of this Act, by the 
President in regard to the allowances, expenses (including medical expenses) or privileges of any 
Governor (other than the Governor  of Nagaland) shall, notwithstanding that such order was made with 
retrospective effect, or is inconsistent with any general order issued under any law with respect to those 
matters, be as valid and effective as if such special order formed part of this su b-section and this sub -
section had been in force at all material times.  
(2) Every general or special order issued, before the commencement of this Act, by the President in 
regard to the allowances, expenses (including medical expenses) or privileges of the  Governor of 
Nagaland shall, notwithstanding that such order was made with retrospective effect, be as valid and 
effective as if it formed part of this sub -section and this sub -section had been in force at all material times.  
15. Saving .—Nothing contained in this Act or the rules made there under shall have effect so as to 
diminish the emoluments and allowances of any Governor during his term of office.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 2014, s. 4 (w.e.f. 4 -3-2014).  
--------------------------The Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1982--------------------------
THE LIMESTONE AND DOLOMITE MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND (AMENDMENT) 
ACT, 1982  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed. ] 
3. [Repealed. ] 
4. [Repealed. ] 
5. [Repealed. ] 
6. [Repealed. ] 
7. [Repealed. ] 
8. Validation.  
  THE LIMESTONE AND DOLOMITE MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND (AMENDMENT) 
ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 70 OF 1982  
[13th November , 1982.]  
An Act to amend the Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1972.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Limestone and Dolomite Mines Labour Welfare Fund 
(Amendment) Act, 1982.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
8. Validation. —Notwithstanding  any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority, — 
(a) all duties of excise levied, assessed or collected or purported to have been levied, assessed or 
collected under the principal Act before the commencement of this Act shall, for  all purposes, be 
deemed to be, and to have always been, as validly and effectively levied, assessed or collected as if 
the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the principal Act as amended by sections 3 and 4 of this Act had 
been in force at all material tim es; 
(b) no suit or proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of, and no 
enforcement shall be made by any court of any decree or order directing the refund of, any such duty 
of excise which had been collected and which would ha ve been validly collected if the provisions of 
sections 3 and 4 of the principal Act, as amended by sections 3 and 4 of this Act, had been in force at 
all material times;  
(c) refunds shall be made of all such duties of excise which have been collected but which would 
not have been  so collected if the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the principal Act, as amended by 
sections 3 and 4 of this Act, had been in fo rce at all material times;  
(d) recoveries shall be made of all such duties of excise which have not  been collected or, as the 
case may be, which have been refunded but which would have been collected or, as the case may be, 
would not have been refunded if the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the principal Act, as amended 
by sections 3 and 4 of this Act , had been in force at all material times.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or omission on the part 
of any person, before the commencement of this Act, shall be punishable as an offence which would 
not have been so punishable if t his Act had not come into force.  
                                                           
1. Sections  2 to 7 rep. by Act  19 of 19 88, s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  
--------------------------The Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Amendment Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE METRO RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS)  
  AMENDMENT ACT, 1982   
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. [Repealed .] 
8. [Repealed .] 
9. [Repealed .] 
10. [Repealed .] 
11. [Repealed .] 
12. [Repealed .] 
13. [Repealed .] 
14. [Repealed .] 
15. [Repealed .] 
16. [Repealed .] 
17. Transfer of applications pending before arbitrator under the principal Act.  
  2 
 THE METRO RAILWAYS (CONSTRUCTION OF WORKS)  
 AMENDMENT ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1982  
[21st August, 1982.]  
An Act to amend to Metro Railwa ys (Construction of Works) Act, 1978.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Metro Railways (Construction 
of Works) Amendment Act, 1982.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2*                                        *                                   *                                    *                                   *  
17. Transfer of applications pending before arbitrator under the principal Act. —Every 
application under sub -section ( 3) of section 13 of the principal Act as it stood immediately before the 
commencement of this Act , which is pending before an arb itrator referred to therein shall, on such 
commencement, stand transferred to the appellate authority to whom an appeal could have been preferred 
under the principal Act as amended by thi s Act if the amount to which such application relates had been 
determined by the competent authority under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of the said section after 
the commencement of this Act, and such appellate authority may deal with such application from the 
stage at which it stood transferred to it as if it were an appeal pending with him:  
Provided that either of the parties to the case may demand that before proceeding further, the previous 
proceeding or any part thereof be reopened or that he be re -heard.  
                                                           
1. 15th May , 1983, vide notification N o. S.O. 2129, dated 6 th May, 1983,  see Gazette  of India, Part II , sec. 3( ii). 
2. Sections 2 to 16 rep. by Act 19 of 1988 , s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
--------------------------The National Waterway (Allahabad-Haldia Stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River) Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (ALLAHABAD -HALDIA STRETCH OF THE GANGA -
BHAGIRATHI -HOOGHLY RIVER) ACT, 1982  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement  
2. Declaration of a certain stretch of Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly river  to be national waterway.  
3. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union of Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly river for 
certain purposes.  
4. [Omitted .] 
5. [Omitted .] 
6. [Omitted .] 
7. [Omitted .] 
8. [Omitted .] 
9. [Omitted .] 
10. [Omitted .] 
11. [Omitted .] 
12. [Omitted .] 
13. [Omitted .] 
14. [Omitted .] 
15. [Omitted .] 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (ALLAHABAD -HALDIA STRETCH OF THE GANGA -
BHAGIRATHI -HOOGHLY RIVER) ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1982  
[18th October , 1982 .] 
An Act to provide for the declaration of the Allahabad -Haldia  Stretch of the Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly 
river to be a national waterway and also to provide for the regulation and development of that river 
for purposes of shipping and navigation on the said waterway and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental the reto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The National Waterway (Allahabad -
Haldia Stretch of the Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly River) Act, 1982.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of a certain stretch of Ganga -Bhagira thi-Hooghly river to be national 
waterway .—The Allahabad -Haldia Stretch of the Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly river, the limits of which 
are specified in the Schedule, is hereby declared to be a national waterway.  
3. Declaration as to expediency of control by th e Union of Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly river for 
certain purposes .—It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the1[Union] should 
take under its control the regulation and development of Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly river for purposes of 
shipping and navigation on the national waterway2[to the extent provided in the Inland Waterways 
Authority of India Act, 1985  (82 of 1985) ]. 
3*   *   *   *   *  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 82 of 1985, s. 3 8 for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 27 -10-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for “to the extent hereinafter provide d” (w.e.f. 27 -10-1986).  
3. Sections 4 to 15 omitted by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-1986).  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
LIMITS OF THE  NATIONAL  WATERWAY  (ALLAHABAD -HALDIA  STRETCH OF THE  
GANGA -BHAGIRATHI -HOOGHLY  RIVER ) 
From road bridge at Allahabad across the river Ganga, about 2 kms . up-stream of the confluence of 
the rivers Ganga and Yamuna at Triveni to the inland waterway limit on the tidal waters of the river 
Hooghly fr om a line drawn between  no. 1 Refuge house at the entrance to Baratola riv er commonly called 
channel cree k, to a position 2.5 kms. due south of Saugor lighthouse, and then connected to the right or 
south bank at the entrance to the Hijili or Russulpore riv er, through river Ganga, lock canal and feeder 
canal at Farakka, river Bhagirathi and river Hooghly.  
 
 
--------------------------The State Bank of Sikkim (Acquisition of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE BANK OF SIKKIM (ACQUISITION OF SHARES) AND  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1982  
 
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF CERTAIN SHARES OF SIKKIM BANK  
3. Vesting in the Central Government of certain shares of Sikkim .  
CHAPTER III  
VESTING OF UNDERTAKINGS OF SIKKIM BANK IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
4. Vesting of undertaking of Sikkim Bank . 
5. General effect of vesting . 
6. Vesting of the shares and undertakings of Sikkim Bank in the State Government . 
7. Power of State Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of Sikkim Bank the Sikkim          
Co-operative bank.  
CHAPTER IV  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amounts . 
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF SIKK 
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of Sikkim Bank  
10. Date of delivery, possession of property acquired and documents relating  thereto.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE SIKKIM BANK  
11. Transfer of service of existing officers and employees of the Sikkim Bank to the                             
co-operative bank.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
12. Act to have overriding effect . 
13. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
14. Penalties.  
15. Offences by companies.  
16. Delegation of powers . 
17. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
18. Power to remove difficulties . 2 
 SECTIONS  
19. References to Sikkim Bank in other laws . 
20.  Dissolution of Sikkim Bank . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE STATE BANK OF SIKKIM (ACQUISITION OF SHARES) AND  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 62 OF 1982  
[6th November, 1982 .] 
An Act to provide, in the public interest, for the acquisition of certain shares of the State Bank of 
Sikkim for the purpose of better consolidation and extension of banking facilities in the State 
of Sikkim and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  for the purpose of better consolidation and extension of banking facilities in the State of 
Sikkim, it is expedient to provide for a single apex banking in stitution in that State, and for that purpose 
to provide for the acquisition of certain shares of the State Bank of Sikkim and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the State Bank of Sikkim 
(Acquisition of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1982.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoin t. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “co-operative bank ” means the Sikkim State Co -operative Bank Limited, a society registered 
under the Sikkim Co -operative Societies Act, 1978  (Sikkim Act No. 12 of 1978) ; 
(c) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescri bed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “Sikkim Bank ” means the State Bank of Sikkim constituted under the State Bank of Sikkim 
Proclamation, 1968;  
(f) “State Government ” means the State Government of Sikkim;  
(g) “United Commercial Bank ” means the United Com mercial Bank constituted under section 3 
of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Un dertakings)Act, 1970 (5 of 1970 ); 
(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956 ), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF CERTAIN SHARES OF SIKKIM BANK  
3. Vesting in the Central Government of certain shares of Sikkim Bank .—(1) On the appointed 
day, all the shares  in the share  capital of the State Bank of Sikkim, other than the shares held by the State 
Government, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government.  
(2) All the shares which have vested in the Central Government under su b-section ( 1) shall, by force 
of such vesting, be freed and discharged of all trusts, liabilities, obligations, mortgages, charges, liens and 
other encumbrances affecting them, and any attachment or injunction or any decree or order of any court, 
tribunal or other authority restricting the use of such shares in any manner shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  4 
 (3) Notwithstanding the transfer of the shares of the Sikkim Bank to the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 1), any person holding such shares, who immediately before the appointed day is entitled to 
payment of dividend on such shares, shall be entitled to rec eive from the co -operative bank — 
(a) all dividends accruing due on his shares in respect of the half -year which ended before the 
appo inted day and remaining unpaid;  
(b) dividends calculated at a rate to be specified by the Central Government in respect of any 
period immediately preceding the appointed day for which the Sikkim Bank had not declared any 
dividend.  
CHAPTER III  
VESTING OF UNDERTAKINGS OF SIKKIM BANK IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
4. Vesting of undertaking of Sikkim Bank .—On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Sikkim 
Bank shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Governmen t. 
 5. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Sikkim Bank shall be deemed to include 
all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, cash 
balances, reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property 
as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the 
Sikkim Bank in relation to its undertakings, and all book s of account, registers, records and all o ther 
documents of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, 
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the Sikkim Bank in relation to its 
undertakings.  
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers 
of attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having 
effect immediately before the appointed day and to which the Sikkim Bank is a party or wh ich are in 
favour of the said Bank shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the Central Government.  
(3) If, on the appointed day, any  suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
business of the undertakings wh ich have been transferred under section 4 is pending by or against the 
Sikkim Bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued, or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason 
of the transfer of the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank or of anything contained  in this Act, but the suit, 
appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the Central 
Government.  
6. Vesting of the shares and undertakings of Sikkim Bank in the State Government .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3, 4 and 5, the Central Government shall , as soon as may 
be, after the commencement of this A ct, direct , by notification , that the shares of the Sikkim Bank which 
have vested in the Central Government under section 3 and the undertakings of the  Sikkim Bank which 
have vested in the Central Government under section 4 shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central 
Government, vest in the State Government of Sikkim, on the date of the notification.  
(2) Where the shares and the undertakings of t he Sikkim Bank vest I n the State Government under 
sub-section ( 1), the State Government shall, on and from the date of such vesting , be deemed to have 
become the owner in relation to such shares and undertakings and all the rights and liabilities of the 
Central Government in relation to such shares and undertakings shall, on and from the date of such 
vesting , be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the State Government.  
7. Power of State Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of Sikkim Bank the Sikkim 
Co-operative bank .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 4, 5 and 6, the State 
Government may, if it is satisfied that the co -opera tive bank is willing to comply, or has complied, with 
such terms and cond itions as that Government may think fit to impose, including the terms and conditions 
regarding allotment of its shares, direct, by notification , that the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank which 
have vested in the Central Government under section 4 and there after in the State Government under 
section 6, shall , instead of continuing to vest in the State Government, vest in the co -operative bank either 5 
 on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed 
day) as maybe specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank vest in the co -operative bank under sub -section ( 1), 
that bank shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to 
such undertakings , and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government or the State Government in 
relation to such undertakings shall, on and  from the date of such vesting , be deemed to have become the 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of the co -operative bank.  
CHAPTER IV  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amounts .—(1)For the transfer to, and vesting in , the Central Government, of the 
shares of the Sikkim Bank under section 3, there shall be given by the Central Government to the holders 
of such shares in cash and in the manner specified in the Schedule, an amount of rupees eight lakhs 
twelve thousand two  hundred and ninety -five. 
(2)The amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall carry simple interest at the rate of five and a half per 
cent. per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which 
payment of such amount is mad e to the shareholders.  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF SIKKIM BANK  
9. Management , etc., of the undertakings of Sikkim Bank .—(1) The State Government in which 
the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank have vested under section 6 shall be entitled to exercise all such 
powers and do all such things as the Sikkim Bank is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its 
undertakings.  
(2) The general superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the 
undertakings of the Sikkim Bank which have vested under section 4 in the Central Government and under 
section 6in the State Government shall, where a directio n has been made by the State Government under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7, vest in the co -operative bank specified in such direction , and, thereupon, the 
co-operative bank shall be entitled t o exercise all such powers and do all such things as the Sikkim Bank 
is authorised to exercise and do in relation to its undertakings.  
10. Date of delivery , possession of property acquired and documents relating thereto .—(1) On 
the vesting of the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank in the State Government under section 6, every person 
in whose possession or custody or under whose control any property referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5 may be , shall deliver the property to the State Government forthwith . 
(2) Any person , who, on the appointed day, has in his possession or under his control any books , 
documents or other papers relating to the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank which have vested in the State 
Government under section 6 and which belong to that Bank, or would ha ve so belonged if the 
undertakings of the Sikkim Bank had not vested in the State Government , shall be liable to account for 
the said books, documents or other papers to the State Government and shall deliver them up to the State 
Government.  
(3) The State Government may take , or cause to be taken, all necessary steps for securing possession 
of all properties which have vested in that Government under this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE SIKKIM BANK  
11. Transfer of service of existing officers and employees of the Sikkim Bank to the co -operative 
bank .—(1) Every officer or other employee of the Sikkim Bank (excepting the Managing Director 
thereof) in the employment of the Sikkim Bank immediately before the appointed day shall become,— 
(a) an officer or other employee of the State Government on  any from the appointed day, and  6 
 (b) where the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank are directed, under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, to 
vest in the co -operative bank, an officer or other employee of the co -operative bank on and from the 
date of such vesting,  
and shall hold his office or service under the State Government or the co -operative bank, as the case may 
be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matt ers as would have been 
admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment under the State Government or the co -operative bank, as the case may be, is duly terminated 
or until his remuneration and  other conditions of service are duly altered by the State Government , or by 
the co -operative bank, as the case may be.  
(2) Any person who, on the appointed day, is entitled to , or is intercept of , a pension or other 
superannuation or compassionate allowance or benefit f rom the Sikkim Bank or any provident fund, 
pension or other fund or any authority administering such fu nd shall be entitled to be paid  by, and to 
receive from, the co -operative bank or any provident fund , pension or other fund or any authority 
administering such fund , the same pension, allowance or benefit so long as he observes the conditions on 
which the pension, allowance or benefit was granted, and if any question arises as to whe ther he has so 
observed such conditions , the question shall be determined by the State Government.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), no appointment made or 
promotion, increment in salary, pension allowance or any  other benefit granted to any person after the 
16th day of November , 1976, and before the appointed day which would not ordinarily have been made 
or granted or which would not ordinarily have been admissible under the rules  or authorisations  of the 
Sikkim  Bank or of any provident fund or other fund in force prior to the 1 6th day of November , 1976 , 
shall have effect or be payable or claimable from the co -operative bank or from any provident fund, 
pension or other fund or from any authority administering the  fund, unless the State Government has , by 
general or special order, confirmed the appointment , promotion or increment , or has directed the 
continued grant of the pension , allowance or other benefit , as the case may be.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contain ed in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of the 
Sikkim Ban k to the State Government or th e co-operative bank shall not entitle s uch officer or other 
employee to  any compensation under that Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
(5) Any person holding office as Managing Director of the Sikkim Bank immediately before the 
appointed day shall be deemed to have vacated his office as such on the appointed day and , 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
agreement or contract, he  shall not be entitled to any amount from th e Sikkim Bank, State Government , or 
the co -operative bank for the loss of office or for the premature termination of any agreement or contact 
relating to his employment , except such pension, amount or other benef it which the co -operative bank 
may grant to him , having regard to what that person would have received as an officer of the Sikkim Bank 
if this Act had not been passed and if he had retired from his employment in the ordinary course.  
(6) Where the Managing  Director of the Sikkim Bank has , after the 16th day of November , 1976 and 
before the appointed day, been paid any sum by way of compensation or gratuity, the co -operative bank 
shall be entitled to claim refund of any sum so paid if the payment is not conf irmed by the State 
Government by general or special order.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
12. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this A ct shall have  effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
  7 
 13. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the State Government, o r 
the co -operative bank or any  officer of the State Government or the co -operative bank or other person 
authorised by the Central Government or the State Government or the co -operative bank, for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other 
employee of that Governmen t or the State Government or the co -operative bank or any of ficer or other 
employee of the S tate Government or of the co -operative bank or other person authorised  by the State 
Government or the co -operative bank, for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
14. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession , custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Sikkim Bank, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government, or the State 
Government or the co -operative bank; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of , or retains , any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Sikkim Bank or wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the State 
Government or the co -operative bank, or any pers on or body of persons specified  by that Government 
or the Stat e Government or the co -operative bank , any document relating to such undertaking which 
may be in his possession , custody  or control or fails to deliver to the Central Government, or the State 
Government or the co -operative bank or any person   or body of pe rsons specified by the Central 
Government or the State Government or the co -operative bank, any assets, books of account, registers 
or other documents in his possession , custody or control, relating to the undertakings of the Sikkim 
Bank; or  
(c) wrongfully  removes or destroys any property forming part of any undertaking of the Sikkim 
Bank or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be 
false or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term w hich may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
15. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this A ct has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was  committed was in charge of, an d was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against an y punished accordingly:  
Provi ded tha t nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment , if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where any offence under this A ct has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has  been committed with the consent  or 
connivance  of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary  or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary , or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm , means a partner in the firm.  
16. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may,  by notification , direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by sections 17 and 18, may 
also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  8 
 (2) Whenever any delega tion of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall a ct under the direction, control  and supervision of the Central Government.  
17. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may , by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid , as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament , while it is in session , for a total pe riod of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification i n the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified from or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however , that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to th e validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
18. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Centr al Government may, by order, not  inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
19. References to Sikkim Bank in o ther laws .—On and from the appointed day, an y reference to 
Sikkim Bank in any law (other than this Act or the Stat e Bank of Sikkim Proclamation, 1968)or  in any 
contract or other instrument shall, except as otherwise provided in any general or special order made by 
the Central Government, be deemed to be a reference to the co -operative bank.  
20. Dissolution of Sikkim Bank .—On the date of the issue of notif ication under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6, the Sikkim Bank shall stand dissolved, and the State Bank of Sikkim Proclamation , 1968, shall 
stand repealed; and the provisions of se ction 6 of the General Clauses A ct, 1897 (10 of 1897) , shall apply 
to such rep eal as if the said Proclamation were a Central Act.  
___ 
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 8( 1)] 
MANNER OF PAYMENT OF AMOUNT FOR THE TRASNFER OF SHARES OF THE STATE BANK OF SIKKIM TO 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
1. In this Schedule, “shareholder ” means any person who, immediately before the appointed day , is 
registered as the h older of a share in the Sikkim B ank, other than the State Government of Sikkim . 
2. For every share in the share capital of the Sikkim  Bank which, by reason of this A ct, is t ransferred 
to and vested in the Central Government , the Central Government shall pay to every holder thereof in the 
manner specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule an amount calculated at the rate of rupees fifty -five per 
share.  
3. Every person who is reg istered as the holder of a share in the Sikkim Bank on the appointed day 
and whose shares have been acquired under the provisions of this Act shall, for every such share so held 
by him, be paid an amount calculated at the rate specified in paragraph 2 by c heque drawn on the Reserve 
Bank of India.  
_____  
--------------------------The Sugar Cess Act, 1982--------------------------
1 THE SUGAR CESS ACT, 1982  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Imposition of cess . 
4. Crediting proceeds of duty to Consolidated Fund of India . 
5. Power to call for reports and returns.  
6. Power to make rules . 
  2 THE SUGAR CESS ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1982  
[19th March , 1982.]  
An Act to provide for the imposition of a cess on sugar for the development of sugar industry 
and for matters connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Sugar Cess Act, 1982.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “occupier ”, in relation to any sugar factory, means the person  who has ultimate control over 
the affairs of the sugar factory or the owner of the sugar factory in case he is not the occupier;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “sugar factory ” means any premises (including the precincts thereof) in any part of which 
sugar is manufactured by vacuum pan process;  
(d) “sugar ” means any form of sugar including crushed sugar or sugar in crystalised or powder 
form, containing ninety per cent.  or more of sucrose and produced by the vacuum pan process and 
includes raw sugar produced by the said process.  
3. Imposition of cess. —(1) There shall be levied and collected as a cess, for the purposes of the 
Sugar Development Fund Act, 1982, a duty of excise on a ll sugar produced by any sugar factory in India, 
at such rate not exceeding 2[twenty-five rupees] per quintal of sugar, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time:  
3*    *  *   *   * 
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to the duty of excise leviable 
on sugar under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) , or any other law for the time being in 
force.  
(3) The duty of excise levied under sub -section ( 1) sha ll be payable by the occupier of the sugar 
factory in which sugar is produced.  
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises and S alt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944 ), and the rules made 
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to the levy and collection of the said duty of excise as they apply in relation to the levy and 
collection of the duty of excise on sugar under that Act.  
4. Crediting proceeds of duty to Consolidated Fund of India. —The proceeds of the duty of excise 
levied under section 3 shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India  
                                                           
1. 1st June, 198 2, vide notification No. G.S.R.  435(E), dated 29th May , 198 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,                
sec. 3( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 2008 , s.3, for “fifteen rupees”  (w.e.f. 5-2-2008 ). 
3. The proviso o mitted by s.3, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-2-2008).  3 5. Power to call for reports and returns. —The Cent ral Government may require an occupier of a 
sugar factory to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in such form 
and within such period as may be prescribed.  
6. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for the form in which and the period within which statist ical and other information may be 
furnished under section 5.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be c omprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree th at the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
--------------------------The Sugar Development Fund Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE SUGAR DEVELOPMENT FUND ACT, 1982  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Sugar Development Fund . 
4. Application of Fund . 
5. Applications for loans or grants . 
6. Committee.  
7. Annual report of activities financed under the Act.  
8. Power to call for reports and returns . 
9. Power to make rules . 
 
 
  2 
 THE SUGAR DEVELOPMENT FUND ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 4 OF 1982  
[19th March , 1982.]  
An Act to provide for the financing of activities for development of sugar industry and for 
matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Su gar Development 
Fund Act, 1982.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Committee ” means the Committee constituted under section  6; 
(b) “Fund” means the Sugar Developme nt Fund formed under section 3;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(d) all other words and expressions used in this Act and not defined, but defined in the Sugar Cess 
Act, 1982  (3 of 1982) , shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Sugar Development Fund. —(1) There shall be formed a fund to be cal led the Sugar Development 
Fund.  
(2) An amount equivalent to the proceeds of the duty of excise levied and collected under the Sugar 
Cess Act, 1982 (3 of 1982) , reduced by the cost of collection as determined by the Central Government, 
together with any moneys received by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act, shall, after 
due appropriation made by Parliament b y law, be credited to the Fund.  
(3) The Fund shall consist of the amounts credited under sub -section ( 2) and any income from 
investment of s uch amounts.  
4. Application of Fund .—(1) The Fund shall be appl ied by the Central Government, — 
(a) for making loans for facilitating the rehabilitation and modernisation  of any sugar factory or 
any unit thereof or the undertaking of any scheme for development of sugarcane in the area in which  
any sugar factory is situated;  
2[(aa) for making loans to any sugar factory or any unit thereof for bagasse -based co -generation 
power projects with a view to improving their viability;  
(aaa) for making loans to any sugar factory or any unit thereof for production of anhydrous 
alcohol  or ethanol from alcohol with a view to improving their viability;]  
(b) for making grants for the p urpose of any research project aimed at development of sugar 
industry;  
3[(bb) for defraying expenditure for the purpose of building up and maintenance of buffer stocks 
of sugar with a view t o establishing price of sugar;]  
2[(bbb) for defraying expenditure  on internal transport and freight charge to the sugar factories on 
export shipments of sugar with a view to promoting its export;]  
                                                           
1. 1st June, 1982, vide notification No. G.S.R. 436(E), dated 29th May , 1982,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,              
sec. 3( i). 
2. Ins.by Act 30 of 2002, s. 2  (w.e.f. 21-6-2002). . 
3. Ins. by Act 64 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f.12 -11-1982).  3 
 1[(bbbb ) for defraying expenditure for the purpose of financial assistance to sugar factories 
towards interest on loans give n in terms of any scheme approved by the Central Government from 
time to time; ] 
(c) for defraying any other expenditur e for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The manner in which any loans or grants may be made under this section and the terms and 
conditions su bject to which such  loans or grants may be made shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
5. Applications for loans or grants. —Every  application for loan or grant under section 4 shall be 
made to the Committee in such manner and in such form as may be prescribed.  
6. Committee. —(1) For the purpose of securing speedy consideration and disposal of applications 
received under section 5 an d for considering any problems arising in the course of the administration of 
this Act, the Central Government may constitute a committee of officers of that Government.  
(2) The composition of the Committee and the procedure to be followed by the Committee  in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act shall be such as may be prescribed.  
7. Annual report of activities financed under the Act .—The Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be, after the end of each financial year, cause to be published in th e Official Gazette, a report giving 
an account of the activities financed under this Act during the financial year, together with a statement of 
accounts.  
8. Power t o call for reports and returns. —The Central Government may require an occupier of a 
sugar factory to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information, in such form 
and within such period as may be prescribed.  
9. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules  for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , such rules may 
provide for, — 
(a) the manner in which any loans or grants may be made and the terms and conditions subject to 
which such loans or gran ts may be made under section 4;  
(b) the manner and form in which applicatio ns may be made under section 5;  
(c) the composition of the Committee under section 6 and the procedure to be followed by the 
Committee in the discharge o f its f unctions under this Act;  
(d) the form in which and the period within which statistical and other information ma y be 
furnished under section 8;  
(e) any other matter which is requi red to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice  to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5 -2-2008).  
--------------------------The Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982--------------------------
1 
 THE SUPPRESSION OF UNLAWFUL ACTS AGAINST  
SAFETY OF CIVIL AVIATION ACT, 1982  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
OFFENCES  
3. Offence of committing violence on board an aircraft in flight, etc . 
4. Destruction of, or damage to, air navigation facilities . 
5. Jurisdiction.  
5A. Conferment of powers of investigation, etc . 
5B. Designated Courts . 
5C. Offences triable by Designated Courts.  
5D. Application of the Code to proceedings before a Designated Court . 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS   
6. Provisions as to extradition . 
 6A. Provision as to bail . 
7. Contracting parties to Convention.  
8. Power to treat certain aircraft to be registered in Convention countries.  
9. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution . 
 9A. Presumptions as to offences under sections 3, 3A and 4 . 
10.  Protection of action taken in good faith . 
 
  2 
 THE SUPPRESSION OF UNLAWFUL ACTS AGAINST  
SAFETY OF CIVIL AVIATION ACT, 1982  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1982  
[6th November , 1982 .] 
An Act to give effect to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Act s against the Safety 
of Civil Aviation and for matters connected therewith.  
WHEREAS  a Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation 
was, on the 23rd day of September, 1971, signed at Montreal;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient that India should accede to the said Convention and make provisions 
for giving effect thereto and for matters connected therewith;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the 
Suppression of UnlawfulActs against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982.  
(2) It extends to thewhole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also toany 
offence under section 3 committed outside India by any person.  
(3) It shall come intoforce on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification inthe 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aircraft” means any aircraft, whether or not registered in India, other than a military  
aircraft or an aircraft used in customs or police service;  
(b) “aircraft registered in India ” means an aircraft which is for the time being  registered in 
India;  
2[(bb) “airport” means an aerodrome as  defined in clause ( 2) of section 2 of th e Aircraft Act, 
1934  (22 of 1934) ;] 
(c) “Convention  country” means a country in which the Montreal Convention is for the time  
being in force;  
(d) “military  aircraft” means an aircraft of the naval, military, air force or any other  armed 
forces of any country and includes every aircraft commanded for the time  being by a person in 
such force detailed for the purpose;  
(e) “Montreal  Convention ” means the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts  
against the Safety of Civil Aviation signed at Montreal  on the 23rd day of  September, 1971.  
(2) For the purposes of  this Act,— 
(a) an aircraft shall be  deemed to be in flight at any time from the moment when all its external 
doors  are closed following embarkation until the moment when any such door is opened  for 
disembarkation, and in the case of a forced landing, the flight shall be  deemed to continue until the 
                                                           
1. 15th November  1982, vide notification No. S .O. 799(E), dated 12th November  1982, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary ,     
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  3 
 competent authorities of the country in which such  forced landing takes place take over the 
responsibility for the aircraft and for  persons and propert y on board;  
(b) an aircraft shall be  deemed to be in service from the beginning of the pre -flight preparation of 
the aircraft by the ground staff or by the crew for a specific flight until  twenty -four hours after any 
landing and the period of such service shall include  the entire period during which the aircraft is in 
flight.  
CHAPTER II  
OFFENCES  
3. Offe nce of committing violence on b oard an aircraft in flight, etc. —(1) Whoever unlawfully 
and intentionally — 
(a) commits an act of violence against a person on board an aircraft in flight which is likely to 
endanger the safety of such aircraft; or  
(b) destroys an aircraft in service or causes damage to such aircraft in such a manner as to render 
it incapable of flight or which is likely to endanger its safety in flight; or  
(c) places or causes to be placed on an aircraft in service, by any means whatsoever, a device or 
substance which is likely to destroy that aircraft, or to cause damage to it which renders it incapable 
of flight, or to cause damage to it which is likely to endanger its safety in flight; or  
(d) communicate s such information which he knows to be false so as to endanger the safety of an 
aircraft in flight,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) Whoever attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, any offence under sub -section ( 1) shall 
also be deemed to be have committed such offence and shall be punished with the punishment provided 
for such offence.  
1[3A. Offence at airport .—(1) Whoever, at any  airport, unlawfully and intentionally, using a ny 
device, substance or weapon, — 
(a) commits an act of violence which is likely to  cause grievous hurt or death of any person; or  
(b) destroys  or seriously  damages any aircraft or facility at an airport or disr upts any service at the 
airport , 
endangering or threatening to  endanger safety at that airport, shall be punished with imprisonment for life 
and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) Whoever attempts to commit , or abets the commission of, any offence under sub-section ( 1) shall 
also be deemed to have committed such offence and shall be punished with the punishment  provided for 
such offence.]  
4. Destruction of, or damage to, air navigation facilities .—(1) Whoever unlawfully and 
intentionally destroys or damag es air navigation facilities or interferes with their operation in such a 
manner as is likely to endanger the safety of the aircraft in flight shall be punished with imprisonment for 
life and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) Whoever attempts to commit, or  abets the commission of, any offence under sub -section ( 1) shall 
also be deemed to have committed such offence and shall be punished with the punishment provided for 
such offence.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1994, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  4 
 5. Jurisdiction .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), where an  offence under section 3 is 
committed outside India, the person committing such offence may be dealt with in respect thereof as if 
such offence had been committed at any place within India at which he may be found.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 3 which is committed 
outside India unless — 
(a) such offence is committed on board an aircraft registered in India;  
(b) such offence is committed on board an aircraft which is for the time being leased without 
crew to a less ee who has his principal place of business, or where he has no such place of business, 
his permanent residence in India; or  
(c) the alleged offender is a citizen of India or is on board the aircraft in relation to which such 
offence is committed when it la nds in India or is found in India.  
1[5A. Conferment of powers of investigation, etc. —(1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , for the purposes of  this Act, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette,  confer on any officer of the Central Government, powers of arrest, 
investigation  and prosecution exercisable by a police officer under the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973.  
(2) All officers of police  and all officers of Government are  hereby required and empowered to assist 
the officer of the Central Government referred to in sub -section ( 1), in the  execution of the provisions of 
this Act.  
5B. Designated Courts .—(1) For the purpose of providing for speedy trial, the State Government 
shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify a Court of Session to be a Designated Court for such area or areas as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , a 
Designated Court shall, as far as practicable, hold the trial on a day -to-day basis.  
5C. Offences triable by Designated Court s.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ,— 
(a) all offences under this Act shall be triable only by the Designated Court specified under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 5B;  
(b) where a person accused of or suspected of the commission of an offence under this Act  is 
forwarded to a Magistrate under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 167 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , such Magistrate may authorise the detention of such person in 
such custody as he thinks fit for a period not exceeding fifteen days in the whole where such 
Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate and seven days in the whole where such Magistrate is an 
Executive Magistrate:  
Provided that where such Magistrate considers, — 
(i) when such person is forwarded to him as afo resaid; or  
(ii) upon or at any time before the expiry of the period of detention authorised by him,  
that the detention of such person is unnecessary, he shall order such person to be forwarded to the 
Designated Court having jurisdiction;  
(c) the Designated  Court may exercise, in relation to the person forwarded to it under clause ( b), 
the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a case may exercise under section 167 
                                                           
1.Ins. by Act 40 of 1994, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  5 
 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) in relation to an accuse d person in such case 
who has been forwarded to him under that section;  
(d) a Designated Court may, upon a perusal of a complaint made by an officer of the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, authorised in this behalf, take cogn izance 
of that offence without the accused being committed to it for trial.  
(2) When trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court may also try an offence other than an 
offence under this Act, with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973               
(2 of 1974) , be charged at the same trial.  
5D. Application of the Code to proceedings before a Designated Court .—Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)  shall apply to 
the proceedings before a Designated Court and the person conducting a prosecution before a Designated 
Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor. ] 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
6. Provisions as to extradition .—(1) The offences under section 3 and section 4 shall be deemed to 
have been included as extraditable offences and provided for in all the extradition treaties made by India 
with Convention countries and which extend to, and are binding on, India on the date of commencement 
of this Act.  
(2) For the purposes of the application of the Extradition Act, 1962  (34 of 1962)  to offences under 
this Act, any aircraft registered in a Convention country shall, at any time while that aircraft is in flight, 
be deemed to be within the jurisdicti on of that country, whether or not it is for the time being also within 
the jurisdiction of any other country.  
1[6A. Provision as to bail .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , no person accused of an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in 
custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless — 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such 
release; and  
(b) where the Public Pro secutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to 
commit any offence while on bail.  
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified i n sub -section ( 1) are in addition to the limitations 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force on 
granting of bail.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers  of the High Court 
regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .] 
7. Contracting parties to Convention .—The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, certify as to who are the contracting parties to the Montreal Convention and to what 
extent they have availed themselves of the provisions of the Convention, and any such notification shall 
be conclusive evidence of the matters certified therein.  
8. Power to treat certain aircraft to be regist ered in Convention countries .—If the Central 
Government is satisfied that the requirements of Article 9 of the Montreal Convention have been satisfied 
in relation to any aircraft, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such aircraft s hall, for 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1994, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  6 
 the purposes of this Act, be treated as registered in such Convention country as may be specified in the 
notification.  
9. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution .—No prosecution for an offence under this Act 
shall be instituted except with th e previous sanction of the Central Government.  
1[9A. Presumptions as to offences under sections 3, 3A and 4 .—In a prosecution for an offence 
under sectio ns 3, 3A and 4, if it is proved — 
(a) that the arms, ammunition or explosives were recovered from the possession of the accused 
and there is reason to believe that such arms, ammunition or explosives of similar nature were used in 
the commission of such offence; or  
(b) that there is evidence of violence committed by the accused against any person in connec tion 
with the commission of such offence,  
the Designated Court shall presume , unless the contrary is proved  that the accused had committed such 
offence.]  
10. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall  lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government for any damage caused 
or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the 
provisions of this Act.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1994, s. 6 (w.e.f. 19 -9-1996).  
