--------------------------The African Development Bank Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ACT, 1983  
ACT NO.13 OF 1983  
[26th May , 1983 .] 
An Act to implement the international agreement for the establishment and operation of the 
African Development Bank and for matters concerned therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the African Development 
Bank Act, 1983 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Agreement ” means the agreement for the establishment of the African Developm ent Bank;  
(b) “Bank” means the African Development Bank established under the Agreement . 
3. Payments to Bank .—(1) There shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, all such sums as may, from time to time, be 
required for the purpose of paying, — 
(a) the subscriptions payable by the Central Government to the Bank under Articles 6, 7, 10 and 
21 of the Agreement;  
(b) any  sums payable by the Central Government to the Bank under Article 28 of the Agreement;  
(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks fit so to do, create and issue to the Bank, in such form as 
it thinks fit, any non -interest bearing and non -negotiable notes  or other obligations . 
4. Reserve Bank to be depository for Bank .—The Reserve Bank of India shall be the depository of 
the Indian currency holdings of the Bank . 
5. Conferment of status and certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on Bank and 
conferment of certain immunities, exemptions and privileges on its officers and                    
employees .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any o ther law, the provisions of 
the Agreement set out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India;  
Provided that nothing in Article 57 of the Agreement shall be construed as — 
(a) entitling  the Bank to import into India goods free of any duty of customs without any 
restriction on their subsequent sale therein; or  
(b) conferring on the Bank any exemption from duties or taxes which form part of the price of 
goods sold; or  
(c) conferring on the  Bank any exemption from duties or taxes which are in fact no more than 
charges for services rendered . 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in 
conformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the Agreement set out 
therein . 
6. Power to make rules .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act . 
7. Notifications issued under section 5 and rules made under  section 6 to be laid before 
Parliament .—Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 5 and every rule made under 
section 6 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or made, before each of the House of 
                                                           
1. 15th December, 1983, vide notification No. G.S.R. 889(E), dated 14th December, 1983,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( i). 2 
 Parliament, while it is in se ssion, for a total period of thirty days which m ay be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both House s agree in maki ng any modification in the 
notification or, as the case may be, in the rule or both Houses agree that the notification or rule should not 
be issued or made, the notification or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect , as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or rule . 
 
  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
PROVISIONS OF THE AGREEMENT WHICH SHALL HAVE FORCE OF LAW  
AGREEMENT ESTABLISHING THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
CHAPTER VII  
STATUS  IMMUNITIES , EXEMPTIONS AND  PRIVILEGES  
ARTICLE 50  
STATUS  
To enable it to fulfil  its purpose and the functions with which it is entrusted, the Bank shall possess 
full international personality . To those ends, it may enter into agreements with members, non -member 
States and other international organi sations . To the same ends, the statu s, immunities, exemptions and 
privileges set forth in this Chapter shall be accorded to the Bank in the territory of each member . 
ARTICLE 51  
STATUS IN MEMBER  COUNTRIES  
In the territory of each member the Bank shall possess full judicial personality and, in  particular, full 
capacity:  
(a) to cont ract 
(b) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable property; and  
(c) to institute legal proceedings . 
ARTICLE 52  
JUDICIAL  PROCEEDINGS  
1. The Bank shall enjoy immunity from every form of legal process except in cases arising out of the 
exercise of its borrowing powers when it may be sued only in a court of competent jurisdiction in the 
territory of a member in which the Bank has its principa l office, or in the territory of a member or              
non-member State where it has appointed an agent for the purpose of accepting service or notice of 
process or has issued or guaranteed securities . No actions shall, however, be brought by members or  
persons acting for or deriving claims from members . 
2. The property and assets of the Bank shall, wherever located and by whomsoever held, be immune 
from all forms of seizure, attachment or execution before the delivery of final judgment against the Bank . 
ARTICLE 53  
IMMUNITY OF ASSETS AND  ARCHIVES  
1. Property and assets of the Bank, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall be immune from 
search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation or any other form of taking or foreclosure by executive or 
legislative action . 
2. The archives of the Bank and, in general, all documents belonging to it, or held by it, shall be 
inviolable, wherever located . 
ARTICLE 54  
FREED OM OF ASSETS FRO M RESTRICTION  
To the extent necessary to carry out the purpose and functions of the Bank and subject to the 
provisions of this Agreement, all property and other assets of the Bank shall be exempt from restrictions, 
regulations, controls and moratoria of any nature . 
  4 
 ARTICLE 55  
PRIVILEGE FOR COMMUNICATIONS  
Official communications of the Bank shall be accorded by each member the same treatment that it 
accords to the official communications of other members . 
ARTICLE 56  
PERSONAL  IMMUNITIES AND PRIVILEGES  
1. All governors, directors, alternates, officers and employees of  the Bank and experts and consultants 
performing missions for the Bank;  
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts performed by them in their official 
capacity;  
(ii) where they are not local nationals, shall be accorded the same immunities  from immigration 
restrictions, alien registration requirements and national service obligations, and the same facilities as 
regards exchange regulations as are accorded by members to the representatives, officials and 
employees of comparable rank of other  members; and  
(iii) shall be granted the same treatment in respect of travelling facilities as is accorded by 
members to representatives, officials and employees of comparable rank of other members . 
2. Experts and consultants performing missions for the Ba nk shall be accorded such immunities and 
privileges as are, in the opinion of the Bank, necessary for the independent exercise of their functions 
during the period of their mission, including the time spent on journeys in connection therewith . 
ARTICLE 57  
EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION  
1. The Bank, its property, other assets, income and its operations and transactions shall be exempt 
from all taxation and from all customs duties. The Bank shall also be exempt from any obligation relating 
to the payment, withholding  or collection of any tax or duty . 
2. No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emoluments paid by the Bank, to directors, 
alternates, officers and other professional staff of the Bank . 
3. No tax of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or security issued by the Bank, including any 
dividend or interest thereon, by whomsoever held:  
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is issued by the Bank; 
or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the place or currency in which it is issued, 
made payable or paid, or the location of any office or place of business maintained by the Bank . 
4. No tax of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or sec urity guaranteed by the Bank, including 
any dividend or interest thereon, by whomsoever held:  
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is guaranteed by the 
Bank; or  
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxatio n is the location of any office or place of 
business maintained by the Bank . 
ARTICLE 58  
NOTIFICATION OF IMPLEMENTATION  
Each member shall promptly inform the Bank of the specific action which it has taken to make 
effective in its territory the provisions of  this Chapter . 
 5 
 ARTICLE 59  
APPLICATION OF IMMUNIT IES, EXEMPTIONS AND PRIVILEGES  
The immunities, exemptions and privileges provided in this Chapter are granted in the interests of the 
Bank. The Board of Directors may waive, to such extent and upon such conditions as it may determine, 
the immunities and exemptions provided in Articles 52, 54, 56 and 57 of this Agreement in cases where 
its action would in its opinion further the interests of the Bank. The President shall have the right and the 
duty to waiv e the immunity of any official in cases where, in his opinion, the immunity would impede the 
course of justice and can be waived without prejudice to the interests of the Bank . 
 
--------------------------The Armed Forces (Punjab And Chandigarh) Special Powers Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE ARMED FORCES (PUNJAB AND CHANDIGARH) SPECIAL POWERS ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1983  
[8th December , 1983 .] 
An Act to enable certain special powers to be conferred upon members of the armed forces in the 
disturbed areas in the State of Punjab and the Union  territory of Chandigarh.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called t he Armed Forces (Punjab 
and Chandigarh) Special Powers Act, 1983.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Punjab and the Union territory of Chandigarh.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th day of October, 1983.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “armed forces ” means the military forces and the air forces operating as land forces, and 
includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating;  
(b) “disturbed area ” means an area which is for the time being declared by notification under 
section 3 to be a disturbed area;  
(c) all other words and expressions used herein, but not defined and defined in the Air Force Act, 
1950  (45 of 1950) , or the Army Act, 1950  (46 of 1950) , shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in those Acts.  
3. Power to declare areas t o be disturbed area s.—If, in relation to the State of Punjab or the Union 
territory of Chandigarh, the Governor of that State or the Administrator of that Union territory or the 
Central Government, in either case, is of the opinion that the whole or any part of such State or Union 
territory, as the case may be, is in such a disturbed or dangerous condition that the use of armed forces in 
aid of the civil power is necessary, the Governor of the State or the Administrator of that Union territory 
or the Cent ral Government, as the case may  be, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare the whole 
or such part of that State or Union territory to be a disturbed area.  
4. Special powers of the armed forces .—Any commissioned officer, warrant officer,                             
non-commissioned officer or any other person of equivalent rank in the armed for ces may, in a disturbed           
area,— 
(a) if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for the maintenance of public order, after giving 
such due warning as he may consider necessary, fire upon or otherwise use force, even to the causing 
of death, against any person who is acting in contravention of any law or order for the time being in 
force in the disturbed area prohibiting the assembly of five o r more persons or the carrying of 
weapons or of things capable of being used as weapons or of fire -arms, ammunition or explosive 
substances;  
(b) if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, destroy any arms dump, prepared or fortified 
position or she lter from which armed attacks are made or likely to be m ade or are attempted to be 
made or any structure used as a training camp for armed volun teers or  utilised as a hide -out by armed 
gangs or absconders wanted for any offence;  
(c) arrest, without warrant, any person who has committed a cognizable offence or against whom 
a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed or is about to commit a cognizable offence and 
may use such force as may be necessary to effect the arrest;  
(d) enter and search,  without warrant, any premises to make any such arrest as aforesaid or to 
recover any person believed to be wrongfully restrained or confined or any property reasonably 
suspected to be stolen property or any arms, ammunition or explosive substances believe d to be 
unlawfully kept in such premises, and may for that purpose use such force as may be necessary, and 
seize any such property, arms, ammunition or explosive substances;  
(e) stop, search and seize any vehicle or vessel reasonably suspected to be carryi ng any person 
who is a proclaimed offender, or any person who has committed a non -cognizable offence, or against 2 
 whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed or is about to commit a non -cognizable 
offence, or any person who is carrying any arms , ammunition or explosive substance believ ed to be 
unlawfully held by him and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be necessary to effect such 
stoppage, search or seizure, as the case may be.  
5. Power of search to include powers to break open locks , etc.—Every person making a search 
under this Act shall have the power to break open the lock of any door, almirah, safe, box, cupboard, 
drawer, pac kage or other thing, if the key  thereof is withheld.  
6. Arrested person and seized property to be made over  to the police .—Any person arrested and 
taken into custody under this Act and every property, arm, ammunition or explosive substance or any 
vehicle or vessel seized under this Act, shall be made over to the officer -in-charge of the nearest police 
station w ith the least possible delay, together with a  report of the circumstances occasioning the arrest, or, 
as the case may be, occasioning the seizure of such property, arm, ammunition or explosive substance or 
any vehicle or vessel, as the case may be.  
7. Protection of persons acting in good faith under this Act .—No prosecution, suit or other legal 
proceeding shall be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government, against any 
person in respect of anything done or purported to be do ne in exercise of the powers conferred by this 
Act. 
8. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Armed Forces (Punjab and Chandigarh) Special Powers Ordinance, 
1983  (9 of 1983) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE CHANDIGARH DISTURBED AREAS ACT, 1983  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Powers to declare areas to be disturbed areas.  
4. Power to fire upon persons contravening certain orders . 
5. Powers  to destroy arms dump, fortified positions, etc . 
6. Protection of persons acting under sections 4 and 5 . 
7. Repeal and saving . 
  2 
  
THE CHANDIGARH DISTURBED AREAS ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1983  
 [8th December, 1983.]  
An Act to make better provision for the suppression of disorder and for the restoration and 
maintenance of public order in disturbed areas in Chandigarh.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Chandigarh Disturbed 
Areas Act, 1983.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Chandigarh.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7th day of October, 1983.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of the Union territory of Chandigarh appointed 
under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “disturbed area ” means the area which is for the time being declared by notification under 
section 3 to be a disturbed area.  
3. Powers to declare areas to be disturbed areas. —The Administrator may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare that the whole or any part of the Union territory of Chandigarh as may be 
specified in the notification, is a disturbed area.  
4. Power to fire upon  persons contravening certain orders. —Any Magistrate or Police Officer not 
below the rank of Sub -Inspector or Havildar in case of the Armed Branch of the Police may, if he is of 
opinion that it is necessary so to do for the maintenance of public order, aft er giving such due warning, as 
he may consider necessary, fire upon, or otherwise use force, even to the causing of death, against any 
person who is acting in contravention of any law or order for the time being in force in the disturbed area, 
prohibiting the assembly of five or more persons or the carrying of weapons or of things capable of being 
used as weapons or of fire -arms, ammunit ion or explosive substances.  
5. Powers to destroy arms dump, fortified positions, etc. —Any Magistrate or Police Officer no t 
below the rank of a Sub -Inspector may, if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, destroy any arms 
dump, prepared or fortified position or shelter from which armed attacks are made or are likely to be 
made or are attempted to be made or any struc ture used as training camp for armed volunteers or utilised 
as a hide -out by armed gangs or absconders wanted for any offence.  
6. Protection of persons acting under sections 4 and 5. —No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall be instituted excep t with the previous sanction of 1[the Central Government ]against any 
person in respect of anything done or purporting to be done in exercise of the powers conferred by 
sections 4 and 5.  
7. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Ordinance, 1983  (6 of 1983) , is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1989, s. 2 ,for “the Administrator”  (w.e.f. 18 -5-1989).  
--------------------------The Dangerous Machines (Regulation) Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE DAN GER OUS MACHINES (REGULATION) ACT, 1983  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by Union.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Act to override all other enactments.  
CHAPTER II  
ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACT 
5. Appointment and functions of Controllers.  
6. Power of Controller to issue orders.  
7. Appointment of Inspectors.  
8. Controller, etc., to be public servants.  
CHAPTER III  
ISSUE, RENEWAL AND CANCELLATIO N OF LICENCES TO MANUFACTURERS  AND DEALERS  
9. Licensing of manufacturers and dealers.  
10. Suspension and cancellation of licences.  
11. Cancellation of licence on application by manufacturer or dealer.  
12. Licence  to a firm to be invalid on the change of partnership.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES O F THE MANUFACTURER OR DEALER OF A DANGEROUS MACHINE  
13. Manufacturer to ensure that every part of a dangerous machine conforms to prescribed 
standards.  
14. Parti culars to be specified on every dangerous machine.  
15. Duties of the manufacturer to supply operator ’s manual with each dangerous machine.  
16. Certificate and guarantee by manufacturers and dealers.  
17. Liability of the manufacturer for reimbursement.  
18. Manufacturers and dealers to maintain records.  
CHAPTER V  
DUTIES AND OBLIGATION S OF USERS OF DANGEROUS MACHINES  
19. User to get each dangerous machine registered.  
20. Matters to be ensured by users.  
21. Modification of existing dangerous machine.  2 
 SECTIONS  
22. Employer ’s liability for compensation . 
23. Notice of accident.  
24. Duty of employer to take out insurance policies.  
25. Omission or failure of the employer to take out insurance policies.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE  
26. Examination of mac hine causing death or injury.  
27. Inspection of records, etc.  
28. Power to enter and search.  
29. Power of seizure.  
30. Search and seizure to be made in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND THEIR TRIAL  
31. Punishment for contravention of the provisions of the Act.  
32. Offences by companies.  
33. Cognizance and trial of offences.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
34. Appeals.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
36. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
37. Power of State Government to make rules.  
38. Power to give direction.  
  3 
 THE DANGEROUS MACHINES (REGULATION) ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 35 OF 1983  
[14th December, 1983 .] 
An Act to provide for the regulation of trade and commerce in, and production, supply, 
distribution and use of, the product of any industry producing dangerous machines with a 
view to securing the welfare of labour operating any such machine and for paymen t of 
compensation for the death or bodily injury suffered by any labourer while operating any 
such machine, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Dangerous Machine s 
(Regulation) Act, 1983.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) This section and clause ( c) of section 3 shall come into force at once in all the States and the 
remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force in a State on such date as the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act; and any reference in any provision of this Act to the commencement of this Act 
shall in relation to any State be construed as a reference to the commencement of that provision in that 
State.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by Union .—It is hereby  declared that it is expedient in 
the public interest that the Union should take under its control the industries engaged in the manufacture 
or production of power threshers or any other machines which are intended to be used in the agricultural 
or rural s ector and which are of such nature that any accident in the course of operation thereof may cause 
its operator death, dismemberment of any limb or other bodily injury.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “child ” means a person who has not completed his fourteenth year of age;  
(b) “Controller ” means the person appointed by the State Government to give effect to the 
provisions of this Act, and includes every Additional, Deputy or Assistant Controller who may be 
authorised by the Controller under sub -section ( 3) of section 5 to exercise any power under this Act;  
(c) “dangerous machine ” means a power thresher, and includes any such machine intended to be 
used in the agricultural or rural sector as the Central Gover nment, being of opinion that it is of such a 
nature that any accident in the course of operation thereof is likely to cause to its operator death, 
dismemberment of any limb  or other bodily injury, may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify as da ngerous machine;  
(d) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours beginning at midnight;  
(e) “dealer ”, in relation to any dangerous machine or any part thereof,  means a person who, or a 
firm or a Hindu undivided family which, carries on,  directly or otherwise , the business of buying , 
selling, supplying or distributing any dangerous machine or any part thereof, whether for cash or for 
deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuab le consideration, and includes — 
(i) a commission agent who carries on such business on behalf of any principal;  
(ii) an importer who sells, supplies, distributes or otherwise delivers an y dangerous machine 
to any user, manufacturer, repairer, consumer or any other person,  
but does not include  a manufacturer who sells, supplies, distributes or otherwise delivers any 
dangerous machine or any part thereof to any person or category of persons referred to in this clause.  4 
 Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that a manufactu rer who sells, 
supplies, distributes, or otherwise delivers any dangerous machine or any part thereof to any person 
other than a dealer, shall be deemed to be a dealer, and shall in addition to his liability to comply with 
the provisions of this Act relati ng to manufacturers, also be liable to comply with the provisions of 
this Act relating to dealers;  
(f) “employer ”, in relation to the operator of any dangerous machine, means the person by whom 
such operator has been employed, whether for any remuneration or otherwise, for operating such 
machine;  
(g) “family ”, in relation to an operator, means his wife and dependent children and includes his 
dependent parents;  
(h) “Inspector ” means an  Inspector appointed under this Act;  
(i) “machine ” includes prime movers, transmission machinery and all other appliances whereby 
power is generated, transferred, transmitted or applied to a dangerous machine;  
(j) “manufacturer ”, in relation to any dangerous machine or any part thereof, means a person who , 
or a firm or a  Hindu undivided family which, — 
(i) makes or manufactures such dangerous machine or part thereof,  
(ii) makes or manufactures one or more parts, and acquires the other parts of such dangerous 
machine and, after assembling those parts, claims  the end product to be a product manufactured 
by himself, or itself, as the case may be,  
(iii) does not make or manufacture any part of such dangerous machine but assembles parts 
thereof made or manufactured by others and claims the end product to be a pro duct manufactured 
by himself, or itself, as the case may be,  
(iv) puts, or causes to be put, his or its own mark on any complete dangerous machine made 
or manufactured by any other person and claims such product to be a product made or 
manufactured by hims elf, or itself, as the case may be;  
(k) “operator ” means a person employed directly or by or through any agency (including a 
contractor), whether as a regular worker or as a casual worker, with or without the knowledge of the 
principal employer, whether for remuneration or not, in the operation or cleanin g of any dangerous 
machine or any part thereof or in any other kind of work incidental to, or connected with, the 
operation or cleaning of any dangerous machine or any part thereof;  
(l) “power ” means electrical or mechanical energy, or any other form of en ergy which is 
mechanically transmitted into a dangerous machine;  
(m) “power thresher ” means a machine, operated with the aid of power, for threshing one or more 
kinds of agricultural produce;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) “prime mover ” means an engine, motor or other appliance which generates or otherwise 
provides power to a dangerous machine;  
(p) “transmission machinery ” means any shaft, wheel, drum, pulley, system of pulleys, coupling, 
clutch, driving belt or other appliance or device by which the motion of a prime mover is transmitted 
to, or received by, any dangerous machine.  
4. Act to override all other enactments .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
in any contract or instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or any decree or ord er 
of any court, tribunal or authority.  
 
  5 
 CHAPTER II  
ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACT 
5. Appointment and functions of Controllers .—(1) The State Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint a Controller for carrying out the provisions of this Act, and may also by the 
same or subsequent notification appoint such number of Additional, Deputy or Assistant Controllers as it 
may deem fit.  
(2) The Controller shall discharge his functions under this Act subject to the general control and 
directio ns of the State Government.  
(3) The Controller may authorise such persons as he thinks fit also to exercise all or any of the powers 
exercisable by him under this Act other than the powers under sub -section ( 5) and different persons may 
be authorised  to exercise different powers.  
(4) Subject to any general or special direction given or imposed by the Controller, any person 
authorised by the Controller to exercise any powers may exercise those powers in the same manner and 
with the same effect as if th ey have been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of 
authorisation.  
(5) The Controller may also — 
(a) perform all or any of the functions of, and  
(b) exercise all or any of the powers conferred by this Act or any rule or order made      
thereunder on,  
any officer lower in rank than himself.  
6. Power of Controller to issue orders .—The Controller may, if he thinks fit, make orders, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
7. Appointment of Inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint as many Inspectors as it deems fit to carry out the provisions of this Act relating to 
inspection, search, seizure of dangerous machines and examinati on of the records of manufacturers, 
dealers and users relating to such machines.  
(2) Every Inspector shall discharge his functions subject to the general direction and control of the 
Controller.  
8. Controller, etc., to be public servants .—The Controller, a nd any person authorised by the State 
Government or the Controller to perform any functions under this Act, and every Inspector, shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of  1860) . 
CHAPTER III  
ISSUE, RENEWAL AND CANCELLATI ON OF LICENCES TO MANUFACTURERS  AND DEALERS  
9. Licensing of manufacturers and dealers .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no 
person shall manufacture, or commence or carry on business as a manufacturer or dealer of,  any 
dangerous machine unless he holds a valid licence issued in this behalf by the Controller:  
Provided that a person engaged in the manufacture of, or carrying on business as a manufacturer or 
dealer of, any dangerous machines of any class immediately be fore the appointed day in relation to 
dangerous machines of such class may continue to manufacture such machines or carry on such business 
without such a licence for a period of one month from that date, and if he makes an application for such 
licence unde r this section within the said period of one month, till the communication to him of the order 
of the Controller disposing of such application.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this p roviso, “appointed day ” means, — 
(i)  in relation to the class of dangerous machines being power threshers, the date of 
commencement of this Act;  6 
 (ii) in relation to any other class of dangerous machines, the date with effect from which such 
machines have been specified to be dangerous machines by the Central Government by notification 
under clause ( c) of section 3, or in the case of a State in which this section has come into force with 
effect from a later date, such later date.  
(2) A lic ence issued under this section — 
(a) shall  be valid for a period of five years;  
(b) may be renewed from time to time, for a like period; and  
(c) shall be in such form, and shall be subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
(3) A person who intends to commence the manufacture, or carry on business as manufacturer or 
dealer, of any dangerous machine shall make an application in such form and on payment of such fees, 
not exceeding five hundred rupees, as may be prescribed, for the issue of a licence.  
(4) No applicatio n for the issue of a licence to commence the manufacture, or to carry on business as 
a manufacturer or dealer, of any dangerous machine shall be granted unless the Controller, after making 
such inquiry as he thinks fit, is satisfied — 
(a) in the case of a m anufacturer carrying on business at the commencement of this Act, of 
manufacturing any dangerous machine, that such machine complies with the standards prescribed 
under section 13; and  
(b) in the case of a person who intends to commence business, after suc h commencement, as a 
manufacturer of a dangerous machine, that the applicant has declared that he would manufacture such 
machine in accordance with the standards laid down by or under this Act.  
(5) An application for the renewal of a licence issued under t his section shall be made not less than 
forty -five days before the date of expiry of the period of validity thereof and shall be accompanied by 
such fees, not exceeding two hundred rupees, as may be prescribed.  
(6) No application for the renewal of a licen ce for the manufacture, or for the carrying on the business 
as a manufacturer, of a dangerous ma chine shall be rejected unless — 
(a) the holder of such licence has been given a reasonable opportunity of presenting his case; and  
(b) the Controller is satisfied that — 
(i) the application for such renewal has been made after the expiry o f the period specified 
therefor : 
Provided that an application for the renewal of a licence made after the expiry of the specified 
period may be entertained on payment of such late fees, not exceeding one hundred rupees, as 
may be prescribed;  
(ii) any statement made by the applicant at the time of the issue or renewal of the licence was 
incorrect or false in material particulars;  
(iii) the applicant has omitte d or failed to manufacture any dangerous machine in accordance 
with the prescribed standards; or  
(iv) the applicant has contravened any term or condition of the licence or any provision of this 
Act, or any rule or order made thereunder or of any law for th e time being in force in so far as 
such law prohibits the bringing into or taking out of India, any dangerous machine.  
(7) Every person to whom a licence has been issued or renewed under this section shall comply with 
the terms and conditions specified in the licence and the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders 
made thereunder.  
(8) Every person to whom a licence has been granted or renewed under this section shall ensure that 
every person employed by him complies, in the course of such employment , with the provisions of this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  7 
 (9) Every order granting or rejecting any application for the issue or renewal of a licence under this 
section shall be made in writing.  
(10) Every licensed dealer and every licensed m anufacturer shall display his licence at a conspicuous 
place of the premises in which he carries on business as such licensed dealer or manufacturer.  
10. Suspension and cancellation of licences .—(1) The Controller may, if he has any reasonable 
cause to believe that the holder of a licence granted under section 9 has made a statement in, or in relation 
to, any application for the issue or renewal of a licence, which is incorrect or false in material particulars, 
or has contravened any provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder or of any other law for 
the time being in force which regulates the bringing into or taking out of India any dangerous machine, 
suspend such licence pending the completion of any inquiry or trial against the holder of such licence, for 
making such incorrect or false statement or for such contravention, as the case may be:  
Provided that no such licence shall be suspended for a period exceeding ten days unless the h older 
thereof has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed action.  
(2) The Controller may, if he is satisfied after making such inquiry as he may think fit, that the holder 
of any licence issued or renewed under this Act ha s made such incorrect or false statement as is referred 
to in sub -section ( 1), or has omitted or failed to manufacture any dangerous machine in accordance with 
the prescribed standards or has contravened the provisions of such law, rule or order, as is ref erred to in 
that sub -section, cancel such licence:  
Provided that no licence shall be cancelled unless the holder thereof has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed action.  
(3) Every person whose licence has been suspended  or cancelled shall, immediately after such 
suspension or cancellation, stop functioning as such licensee and shall not resume business as such 
licensee until the order of such suspension or cancellation has been vacated.  
(4) Every person who holds a licen ce which is suspended or cancelled shall, immediately after such 
suspension or cancellation, surrender such licence to the Controller.  
11. Cancellation of licence on application by manufacturer or dealer .—A person licensed to 
manufacture or carry on business as a manufacturer or dealer of any dangerous machines who 
discontinues such manufacture or business or who intends to discontinue such manufacture or business, 
may make an application to the Controller for the cancellation of his licence, and thereupon, the 
Controller may cancel such licence.  
12. Licence to a firm to be invalid on the change of partnership .—Where any firm has been 
licensed under this Act to manufacture or carry on business as a dealer or  manufacturer of a dangerous 
machine, such licence shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, become invalid on and form 
the date on which there is a change in the partnership of such firm, unless such change in the partnership 
of the firm has been approved by the Controller.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES O F THE MANUFACTURER OR DEALER OF A DANGEROUS MACHINE  
13. Manufacturer to ensure that every part of a dangerous machine conforms to prescribed 
standards .—(1) Every manufacturer of a dangerous machine shall ensure that such machine and every 
part thereof complies with such standards, conforming to t he standards laid down therefor  by the Indian 
Standards Institution, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) In particular, and  without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the manufacturer 
of a dangerous machine shall ensure that the following parts are secured by safeguards of substantial 
construction, namely: — 
(a) the prime mover and every part thereof,  
(b) the transmission machinery and every part thereof,  
(c) every other dangerous part, such as, rollers, blowers, sieves, elevator and the like.  8 
 (3) Every manufacturer of a dangerous machine shall also clearly and legibly provide such machine 
with danger signa ls indicating the point beyond which no limb shall be inserted for the purpose of feeding 
the machine or for any other purpose.  
14. Particulars to be specified on every dangerous machine .—The manufacturer shall ensure that 
the following particulars are legibly and conspicuously marked or inscribed on every dangerous machine 
by such method as wo uld make it indelible, namely: — 
(a) the direction of the rotation and the number of rotations per minute;  
(b) its power requirement; and  
(c) the name and correct a ddress of the manufacturer, the year of its manufacture, and the date, 
number and other particulars of the licence of the manufacturer.  
15. Duties of the manufacturer to supply operator ’s manual with each dangerous machine .—
Every manufacturer shall supply along with each dangerous machine a manual containing general 
instructions regarding the operation of such machine, and shall also include therein such cautions, as may  
be prescribed.  
16. Certificate and guarantee by manufacturers and dealers .—Before trans ferring the possession 
of any dangerous machine, whether by sale, lease, hire or otherwise, every manufacturer and every dealer 
shall deliver, to the person acquiring the possession of such machine, a declaration to the effect that the 
machine conforms to the standards laid down by or under this Act and also complies with in all respects, 
the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made there under.  
17. Liability of the manufacturer for reimbursement .—Whenever  any person operating a 
dangerous machine suffers death or dismemberment of any l imb or any other bodily injury — 
(i) by reason of any manufacturing defect in the machine whereby such death, dismemberment or 
injury was caused, or  
(ii) by reason of the omission of the manufacturer to comply with the provisions of this Act and 
the rules and orders made thereunder,  
such manufacturer shall be liable to reimburse the person by whom compensation had to be paid under 
this Act to the members of t he family of the person whose death was caused by such machine or, as the 
case may be, to the person by whom such dismemberment or bodily injury was suffered.  
18. Manufacturers and dealers to maintain records .—Every manufacturer and every dealer shall 
main tain such registers, records and accounts as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
DUTIES AND OBLIGATION S OF USERS OF DANGEROUS MACHINES  
19. User to get each dangerous machine registered .—(1) Every person who owns a dangerous 
machine or acquires control over such machine, whether as a lessee or hirer or otherwise (in this Act 
referred to as the user) shall make, before beginning to operate such machine, an application to the 
Controller, on payment of such fees, not exceeding five rupees, as may be prescribed, for t he registration 
of such machine.  
(2) On receipt of an application made under sub -section ( 1), the Controller shall, if he is satisfied that 
the machine complies with, in all respects, the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made 
thereunder, reg ister the same and grant to the applicant a certificate showing such registration.  
(3) The Controller shall maintain a register containing the particulars of the dangerous machines 
registered by him and the names and addresses and other particulars of the persons on whose application 
such registration has been made.  
(4) No dangerous machine shall be operated until it has been registered in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.  
  9 
 20. Matters to be ensured by users .—Every user of a dange rous machine  shall ensure that — 
(a) such machine conforms to the standards laid down by or under this Act and also complies 
with, in all respects, the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made thereunder;  
(b) no child is employed for the operation of such m achine; and  
(c) adequate arrangements exist for rendering first aid to any person who may suffer any injury 
while operating any such machine.  
21. Modification of existing dangerous machine .—(1) Every person who has, immediately before 
the commencement of t his Act, in his custody or control, any dangerous machine which does not comply 
with, in all respects, the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made thereunder, shall, within 
such time, not being less than one hundred and eighty days from such c ommencement, as the State 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , specify, get the same modified in accordance 
with such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf.  
(2) No such machine shall be used or operated, after th e expiry of the period specified under          
sub-section ( 1), unless the modification s referred to in sub -section ( 1) have been made.  
22. Employer ’s liability for compensation .—(1) If, during his employment as an operator of a 
dangerous machine, death or dismemberment of any limb or any other bodily injury is caused to such 
operator, his employer shall  be liable to pay compensation — 
(a) in the case of death of the operator, to his family, and  
(b) in any other case, to the operator:  
Provided that where the operator does not have a family, the compensation shall be paid to the person 
or persons nominated in this behalf by the operator in writing and notified to the Controller:  
Provided further that the e mployer shall not be so liable — 
(i) in respect of an y injury which does not result in the total or partial disablement of the operator 
for a period exceeding three days; or  
(ii) in respect of any injury, not resulting in death, caused by an accident whi ch is directly 
attributable to — 
(a) the operator having  been at the time thereof under the influence of any intoxicant or   
drug, or  
(b) the wi lful removal by the worker of any safety guard or other device which he knew to 
have been provided in the machine for the purpose of securing the safety of the operator . 
(2) The amount of the compensation payable under sub -section ( 1) shall be determined and paid in 
accordance wit h the provisions of the Workmen’ s Compensation Act, 1923  (8 of 1923) as if the operator 
were a workman within the meaning of that Act, and, for  this purpose, the provisions of the said Act shall 
apply to him as they apply to a workman within the meaning of that Act.  
23. Notice of accident .—(1) Where the death or dismemberment of any limb or any other bodily 
injury has been caused to an operator, during the course of his employment, notice of such death, 
dismemberment or injury shall be given to the employer within three days from the date on which such 
death, dismemberment or injury was caused.  
(2) Such notice shall be given by the operator if he is alive or by any member of his family or any 
other person interested in him.  
(3) Omission to give the notice referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall not disentitle the operator or the 
members of his family, as the case may be, to receive the compensation pa yable under this Act.  
24. Duty of employer to take out insurance policies .—(1) Every employer shall take out, as soon as 
may be practicable after the commencement of this Act, one or more insurance policies providing for 
contracts of insurance whereby he is insured against any liability arising out of sub -section ( 1) of     
section 22 to make payment of compensation to any operator of a dangerous machine and such contract of 10 
 insurance may provide for the payment of annuities to the operator, or in case of his death, to the 
members of his family or to his nominee, if he does not have a family.  
(2) Every employer shall get the insurance policy referred to in sub -section ( 1) renewed from time to 
time before the expiry of the period of validity thereof so that the policy of insurance may remain in force 
throughout the period during which any person is employed by him to operate any dangerous machine.  
25. Omission or failure of the employer to take out insurance policies .—(1) In the event of the 
omission or failu re of the employer to take out an insurance policy referred to in section 24 or in the event 
of the omission, failure or inability of the employer to keep such insurance policy in force or to obtain, 
from the insurer, any amount required to be paid as comp ensation to an operator, or to the members of his 
family or nominee, as the case may be, the employer shall make payment of compensation from his own 
funds, to the operator, or to the members of his family or his nominee, as the case may be, as soon as 
possible after the date on which the operator suffers death or dismemberment of limb or other bodily 
injury but not later than thirty days from such date a nd on such payment the employer’ s liability for 
payment of compensation to the operator or to the member s of his family shall stand fully discharged.  
(2) The discharge of the liability referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall not take away or abridge the right 
of, the employer to receive, from the insurer, such payment as may be due to him under the policy of 
insurance taken out or renewed by him.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE  
26. Examination of machine causing death or injury .—(1) As soon as the employer comes to 
know, whether on receipt of a notice under section 23 or otherwise, that the operator has suffered death, 
dismemberment of any limb or other bodily injury during the operation of any dangerous machine, he 
shall forthwith give notice of such death or injury to the Inspector.  
(2) Whenever an Inspector comes to know about any death or injury, whether on receipt of a notice 
referred to under sub -section ( 1) or otherwise, he shall, as soon as practicable, enter into the premises 
where the dangerous machine whereby such death, dismemberment of limb or other bodily injury has 
been caused, is locate d and examine the machine with a view to finding out whether the machine 
conforms to the standards laid down by or under this Act and contains all the prescribed safety devices, 
and, where, after such examination, he is of the opinion that the machine is u nsafe, he shall, by an order, 
prohibit the use of such machine until it is certified by him to be safe.  
(3) No machine shall be operated during the period of operation of the prohibitory order made under 
sub-section ( 2). 
27. Inspection of records, etc. —Every register, record and accounts maintained under this Act and 
every licence issued or renewed under this Act shall be open to the inspection of the Inspector.  
28. Power to enter and search .—An Inspector authorised in this behalf by the Controller may, if he 
has any reason to suspect that any provision of this Act has been, or is being, or is about to be, 
contravened, enter and search, at any reasonable time of the day, any premises in which any dangerous 
machine is operated.  
29. Power of seizure .—Whenever the Inspector is satisfied that any dangerous machine, which does 
not comply with, in all respects, the provisions of this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder, is being 
operated in contravention of the provisions of this Act, he may seize such dange rous machine and the 
records and registers connected therewith.  
30. Search and seizure to be made in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 .—
Every search and seizure made under this Act shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974).  
  11 
 CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND THEIR TRIAL  
31. Punishment for contravention of the provisions of the Act .—Whoever, in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act, or any rule or  order made thereunder — 
(a) manufactures, or carries on business as a manufacturer or dealer of, any dangerous machine 
without being in possession of a valid licence issued or renewed under this Act;  
(b) employs a child in the operation of any dangerous machine;  
(c) causes any person  to operate a dangerous machine which does not conform to the standards 
specified by or under this Act;  
(d) causes any person to operate any dangerous machine referred to in section 21, without 
carrying out the prescribed modifications;  
(e)  omits to take out or renew an insurance policy as required by section 24;  
(f) sells or otherwise transfers any dangerous machine which does not conform to the provisions 
of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(g) operates  or causes any person to operate any dangerous machine during the period of 
operation of a prohibitory order made under sub -section ( 2) of section 26; or  
(h) contravenes any other provision of this Act, or rule or order made thereunder,  
shall be punishable  with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less th an three months and also with fine 
which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but not more than one thousand rupees.  
32. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offe nce was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offe nce. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the  part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanati on.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
33. Cognizance and trial of offences .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of  1974) , no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act except on a complaint in writing made by the Controller or any person authorised by him in this 
behalf.  
(2) Every offence under this Act may be tried summarily by a Magistrate.  
  12 
 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
34. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any order granting or refusing to issue or renew a licence  
under this Act or refusing to register a dangerous machine, may prefer an appeal against the order to the 
State Government.  
(2) Every such appeal shall be filed within thirty days from the date of the order:  
Provided that the State Government may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal 
within the said period.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the State Government, the Controller, any Inspector or any other person authorised by the 
Controller for exercising any powers or discharging any functions under this Act for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
36. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 9, 
and the provisions of sections 13 and 21.  
(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under clause ( c) of section 3, and every rule 
made by it under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid, as soon as may be aft er it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
sessio n or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification or rule, or both Houses agree that the notification or rule should not be made, the notification 
or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modi fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that notification or rule.  
37. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act other than those specified in       
sub-section ( 1) of section 36.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) all matters specified in section 9 except those specified in sub -section ( 2) thereof;  
(b) the fees  (including late fees), within the limits specified in section 9, for the issue and renewal 
of licences under that section and for the registration of dealers, as provided in section 19;  
(c) the cautions to be specified in the manual of instructions as req uired by section 15;  
(d) the registers, records and accounts which are required to be maintained under section 18;  
(e) the arrangement required to be made under section 20 for rendering first aid to any injured 
operator of a dangerous machine;  and 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or wh ere such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
38. Power to give direction .—The Central Government may give directions to any State 
Government as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any 
rule or order made thereunder.  
 
--------------------------The Emigration Act, 1983--------------------------
1 THE E MIGRATION  ACT, 1983  
_________  
  ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
EMIGRATION AUTHORITIES  
3. Protectors of Emigrants.  
4. General duties of Protectors of Emigrants.  
5. Power to authorise persons to exercise functions of a Protector.  
6. Emigration check -posts.  
7. Other emigration officers and staff.  
8. Emigration officers to be public servants.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF RECRUITING AGENTS  
9. Registering authority.  
10. No person to function as recruiting agent without a valid certificate.  
11. Application for registration.  
12. Terms and conditions of registration.  
13. Renewal of registration.  
14. Cancellation, suspension, etc., of a certificate.  
CHAPTER IV  
PERMITS FOR RECRUITM ENT BY EMPLOYERS  
15. Competent authority . 
16. Recruitment by employers to be through recruiting agent or under permit.  
17. Procedure for obtaining permits.  
18. Period of validity of permit.  
19. Registration of certain permits.  
20. Cancellation or suspension of a permit.  
21. Power to exempt.  
CHAPTER V  
EMIGRATION CLEARANCE  
22. Requirement, etc., as to emigration clearance.  
CHAPTER VI  
APPEALS  
23. Appeals.   2 CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
24. Offences and penalties.  
25. Offences by companies.  
26. Offences to be cognizable.  
27. Previous sanction of Central Government necessary.  
28. Punishment to be without prejudice to any other action.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Determination of question as to whether a person is an emigrant.  
30. Power to prohibit emigration to any country in  the interests of the general public, etc.  
31. Power to prohibit emigration due to outbreak of epidemics, civil disturbances, etc., in a           
country.  
32. Power to prohibit emigration of any class or category of person s. 
33. Provision s as to security . 
34. Refund of secur ity. 
35. Power to search, seize and detain persons, conveyance, etc.  
36. Returns and registers . 
37. Authorities and officers to have certain powers of civil court . 
38. Power to give directions . 
39. Effect of other laws . 
40. Delegation . 
41. Power to exempt . 
42. Act not to apply to certain  emigrants . 
43. Power to make rules . 
44. Notifications and rules to be laid before Parliament . 
45. Repeal of Act 7 of 1922 . 
  3 THE EMIGRATION ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1983  
[10th September , 1983 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to emigration of citizens of India . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Emigration 
Act, 1983.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India and applies also to citizens of India outside India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and 
different date s may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that 
provision.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “certificate ” means a certificate of registration issued under section 11;  
(b) “conveyance ” includes a vessel, vehicle, country -craft and an aircraft;  
(c) “dependent ” means any person who is related to an emigrant and is dependent on that 
emigrant;  
(d) “emigrant ” means any citizen of India who intends to emigrate, or emigrates, or has emigrated 
but does not include — 
(i) a dependent of an emigrant, whether such dependent accompanies that emigrant, or 
departs subsequently for the purp ose of joining that emigrant in the country to which that 
emigrant has lawfully emigrated;  
(ii) any person who has resided outside India at any time after attaining the age of eighteen 
years, for not less than three years or the spouse or child of such per son; 
(e) “emigrant conveyance ” means any conveyance specially chartered for conveyance of 
emigrants or for conveying emigrants exceeding such number as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, declare that any conveyanc e 
conveying emigrants to such place as may be specified in the notification shall not be deemed to be 
an emigrant conveyance;  
(f) “emigrate ” and “emigration ” mean the departure out of India of any person with a view to 
taking up any employment (whether or not under an agreement or other arrangements to take up such 
employment and whether with or without the assistance of a recruiting agent or employer) in any 
country or place outside India;  
(g) “employer ” means any person providing or offering to provide, employment in any country or 
place outside India;  
(h) “employment ” means any service, occupation or engagement (not being service, occupation 
or engagement un der the Central Government or a State Government), in any kind of work within the 
meaning of clause ( o), for wages or for reward, and all its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly;  
(i) “notification ” means a notifica tion published in the Official Gazette;  
                                                           
1. 30th December , 198 3, vide notification No. S.O. 940(E), dated 30th December , 198 3, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,   
Part II, sec. 3  (ii). 4 (j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “Protector of Emigrants ” means a Protector of Emigrants appointed under section 3 and 
includes a person authorised under section 5;  
(l) “recruiting agent ” means a person engaged in India in the business of recruitment for an 
employer and representing such employer with respect to any matter in relation to such recruitment 
including dealings with persons so recruited or desiring to be so recruited;  
(m) “recruitment ” includes the issuing of any advertisement for the purpose of recruitment, the 
offering by advertisement to secure or assist in securing any employment in any country or place 
outside India and the entering into any correspondence, negotiatio n, agreement or arrangement with 
any individual for or in relation to the employment of such individual in any country or place outside 
India;  
(n) “registering authority ” means the officer appointed under section 9 to be the registering 
authority for the purposes of this Act;  
(o) “work ” means— 
(i) any unskilled work, including any form of industrial or agricultural labour;  
(ii) any domestic service;  
(iii) any service, not being a service in a managerial capacity, in any hotel, restaurant, tea -
house or other place of public resort;  
(iv) work as a driver of a truck or other vehicle, mechanic, technician or skilled labourer or 
artisan;  
(v) work as an office assistant or accoun tant or typist or stenographer or salesman, or nurse or 
operator of any machine;  
(vi) work in connection with, or for the purposes of, any cinema, exhibition or entertainment;  
(vii) any such work of a professional or of any other nature as the Central Gove rnment may, 
having regard to the need for the protection of citizens of India who may be employed in such 
work outside India and other relevant circumstances, specify by notification:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necess ary so to do having regard 
to the conditions of service applicable with respect to employment in any of the aforementioned 
categories of work or any sub -category thereof, whether generally or in relation to any particular 
country or place and other relevan t circumstances, declare by notification that such category of work 
or sub -category of work shall not be deemed to be work within the meaning of this definition.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER I I 
EMIGRATION AUTHORITIES  
3. Protectors of Emigrants .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Protector 
General of Emigrants and as many Protectors of Emigrants, as it deems fit, for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, define the area to which the authority 
of a Protector of Emigrants so appointed shall extend and, where two or more  Protectors of Emigrants are 
appointed for the same area, also provide, by such order, for the distribution and allocation of the work to 
be performed under this Act in relation to such area.  
(3) The Protectors of Emigrants shall perform the functions assi gned to them by or under this Act 
under the general superintendence and control of the Protector General of Emigrants.  
(4) The Protector General of Emigrants may, in addition to the special function assigned to him by or 
under this Act, perform all or any of the functions assigned to any Protector of Emigrants.  5 4. General duties of Protectors of Emigrants .—Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every 
Protector of Emigrants shall, in addition to the special duties assign ed to him by or under this Act — 
(a) protect and aid with his advice all intending emigrants and emigrants;  
(b) cause, so far as he can, all the provisions of this Act and of the rules made thereunder to be 
complied with;  
(c) inspect, to such extent and in su ch manner as may be prescribed — 
(i) any emigrant conveyance, or  
(ii) any other conveyance if he has reason to believe that any intending emigra nts or 
emigrants are proceeding  from, or returning to, India to or from a place outside India by such 
other conveyance;  
(d) inquire into the treatment received by emigrants during their voyage or journey to, and during 
the period of their residence in the country to which they emigrated and also during the return voyage 
or journey to India and report thereon to the Protector General of Emigrant s or such other authority as 
may be prescribed;  
(e) aid and advise, so far as he reasonably can, emigrants who have returned to India.  
5. Power to authorise persons to exercise functions of a Protector .—The Central Government 
may, if satisfied that it is n ecessary so to do in the interest of emigrants or intending emigrants, authorise 
any person to perform all or any of the functions of a Protector of Emigrants under this Act.  
6. Emigration check -posts .—(1) Where the Central Government considers that, with a view to 
preventing or checking the contravention of the provisions of this Act, it is necessary so to do, it may, by 
notification, set up such number of emigration check -posts at such places as may be specified.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general  or special order made in this behalf, appoint an officer 
of the Central Government or of a State Government to be an officer in charge of an emigration check -
post set up under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) An officer in charge of an emigration check -post shall be subject to the general control and 
supervision of the Protector of Emigrants within the local limits of whose jurisdiction that emigration 
check -post is situated.  
7. Other emigration officers and staff .—The Central Government may appoint such other officers 
and employees (hereinafter referred to as the emigration officers and emigration employees), as it may 
think fit, to assist the Protector General of Emigrants and the Protector s of Emigrants in the performance 
of their duties under this Act.  
8. Emigration officers to be public servants .—The Protector General of Emigrants, Protectors of 
Emigrants, the officers in charge of emigration check -posts, emigration officers and emigration 
employees appointed under this Act shall be public servants within th e meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
CHAPTER I II 
REGISTRATION OF RECRUITING AGENTS  
9. Registering authority .—The Central Government may, by notification, appoint the Protector 
General of Emigrants or any other officer of that Gove rnment of a rank higher than that of a Protector of 
Emigrants to be the registering authority for the purposes of this Act.  
10. No person to function as recruiting agent without a valid certificate .—Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, no recruiting agent shall, after the commencement of this Act, commence or carry on 
the business of recruitment except under and in accordance with a certificate issued in that behalf by the 
registering authority:  
Provided that a person carrying on the business of recru iting agent immediately before the 
commencement of this Act may continue to carry on such business without such a certificate for a period 
of one month from such commencement , and if he has made an application for such certificate under this 
Act within the  said period of one month and such application is in the prescribed form and contains the 
prescribed particulars, till the disposal of such application by the registering authority.  6 11. Application for registration .—(1) An application for registration shall be made to the 
registering authority in such form and shall contain such particulars as to the applicant ’s financial 
soundness, trustworthiness, premises at which he intends to carry on his business, facilities at his disposal 
for recruitment, his an tecedents (including information as to whether any certificate had been issued to 
him under this Chapter earlier and if so, whether such certificate had been cancelled) and previous 
experience, if any, of recruitment and other relevant matters as may be pr escribed and shall be 
accompanied by a receipt evidencing the payment of the prescribed fee and an affidavit giving his current 
financial standing and an undertaking in the form prescribed to the effect that in the event of any 
information furnished in or along with the application for registration being found to be false or incorrect 
in any respect, the certificate shall be liable to be cancelled at any time in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed:  
Provided that no application shall be entertained unde r this sub -section from a person disqualified 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 14 till the expiry of the period of such disqualification.  
(2) On receipt of such application, th e registering authority shall, — 
(a) if the application is not in the prescribed form or does not contain any of the prescribed 
particulars, return the application to the applicant;  
(b) if the application is in the prescribed form and contains the prescribed particulars, inform the 
applicant that he is eligible for the grant of the cer tificate applied for and, after giving the applicant an 
opportunity to be heard, determine, under sub -section ( 3), the amount of the security which the 
applicant shall furnish.  
(3) The registering authority shall, for securing the due performance of the te rms and conditions of 
the certificate proposed to be issued by it under sub -section ( 2) to an applicant and for securing 
compliance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder and for meeting expenses which 
may have to be incurred in the event of the repatriation to India of any of the emigrants who may be 
recruited by the applicant determine, in accordance with the rules made in this behalf, the amount of 
security (not being in any case less than one lakh of rupees) which shall be furnish ed by the applicant.  
(4) If an applicant furnishes in the prescribed manner the amount of security determined under        
sub-section ( 3) within a period of one month from the date on which the registering authority requires him 
to furnish such security, h e shall be issued the certificate applied for by him together with an endorsement 
thereon to the effect that the security required has been furnished by him.  
(5) If an applicant fails to furnish the security required to be furnished by him within the perio d 
specified in sub -section ( 4), his application shall be deemed to have been rejected by the registering 
authority on the date of expiry of that period.  
12. Terms and conditions of registration .—A certificate issued unde r section 11 shall be — 
(a) in such f orm as may be prescribed;  
(b) valid for such period not exceeding five years as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a certificate may be issued for a period shor ter than the prescribed period — 
(i) if the person to whom it is issued so desires; or  
(ii) if the registering authority, for reasons to be communicated in writing to the applicant for 
the certificate, considers in any case that the certificate should be issued for a shorter period;  
(c) subject to such other terms and conditions, including in particular , the maintenance by the 
holder of the certificate of the prescribed records containing details of his financial transactions in 
regard to recruitment, persons recruited or assisted to emigrate by him, employers concerned, 
contracts and other arrangements entered into in connection with recruitment, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a certificate may contain, in addition to the prescribed terms and conditions, such 
other terms and conditions as the registering authority may, for securing the purposes of t his Act, 
impose in any particular case.  7 13. Renewal of registration .—A certificate may be renewed from time to time and the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder (including provisions as to fees) shall apply to the renewal of a 
certificate a s they apply to the issue thereof:  
Provided that no certificate shall be renewed unless , the application for its renewal is made not less 
than three months prior to the date on which the certificate, would, but for such renewal, cease to be 
valid:  
Provided  further that the registering authority may entertain an application for the renewal of a 
certificate which has been made at any time during the period of three months prior to the date on which 
the certificate would, but for such renewal, cease to be vali d if the applicant satisfie d the registering 
authority that he had sufficient cause for not making such application before the said period.  
14. Cancellation, suspension, etc., of a certificate .—(1) The registering authority may cancel any 
certificate on any one or more of the following grounds a nd on no other ground  namely:— 
(a) that having regard to the manner in which the holder of the certificate has carried on his 
business or any deterioration in his financial position, the facilities at his disposal for recruitment, the 
holder of the certificate is not a fit person to continue to hold the certificate;  
(b) that the holder of the certificate has recruited emigrants for purposes prejudicial to the 
interests of India or for purposes contrary to public pol icy; 
(c) that the holder of the certificate has, subsequent to the issue of the certificate, been convicted 
in India for any offence involving moral turpitude;  
(d) that the holder of the certificate has, subsequent to the issue of the certificate, been con victed 
by a court in India for any offence under this Act, the Emigration Act, 1922 (7 of 1922), or any other 
law relating to passports, foreign exchange, drugs, narcotics or smuggling and sentenced in respect 
thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months;  
(e) that the certificate has been issued or renewed on misrepresentation or suppression of any 
material fact;  
(f) that the holder of the certificate has violated any of the terms and conditions of the certificate;  
(g) that in the opinion of the Central Government it is necessary in the interests of friendly 
relations of India with any foreign country or in the interests of the general public to cancel the 
certificate.  
(2) Where the registering authority, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that pending     
the consideration of the question of cancelling any certificate on any of the grounds mentioned in         
sub-section ( 1) it is necessary so to do, the registering authority may, by order in writing, suspend the 
operation of the certificate for such period not exceeding thirty days as may be specified in the order and 
require the holder of the certificate to show cause, within fifteen days from the date o f receipt of such 
order, as to why the suspension of the certificate should not be extended till the determination of the 
question as to whether the registration should be cancelled.  
(3) A court convicting a holder of a certificate for an offence under thi s Act may also cancel the 
certificate:  
Provided that if the conviction is set aside in appeal or otherwise, the cancellation under                  
sub-section ( 3) shall become void.  
(4) An order of cancellation of a certificate may be made under sub -section (3) by an appellate court 
or by a court exercising its powers of revision.  
(5) Before passing an order cancelling or suspending a certificate the registering authority or the 
court, as the case may be, shall consider the question as to  the provisions an d arrangements which should 
be made for safeguarding the interests of emigrants and other persons with whom the holder of the 
certificate had any transactions in the course of his business as recruiting agent and may make such orders 
(including orders perm itting the holder of the certificate to continue to carry on his business with respect 
to all or any such emigrants and other persons) as it may consider necessary in this behalf.  8 (6) Where a certificate issued to any person has been cancelled under this s ection, such person shall 
not be eligible to make any application for another certificate under this Chapter until the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date of such cancellation.  
CHAPTER I V 
PERMITS FOR RECRUITMENT BY EMPLOYERS  
15. Competent authority .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint the Protector 
General of Emigrants or any other officer of that Government of a rank higher than that of a Protector of 
Emigrants to be the authority (hereinafter referred to as  the competent authority) for issuing permits under 
this Chapter.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, by 
notification, authorise any person who is employed under that Government in any country or place 
outside India to exercise the powers of the competent authority, and issue permits under this Chapter to 
employers who are not citizens of India for the purpose of recruiting any citizen of India for employment 
in such country or place and a person so authori sed shall endorse a duly certified copy of every permit 
issued by him under this Chapter to the Protector General of Emigrants.  
16. Recruitment by employers to be through recruiting agent or under permit .—Save as 
otherwise provided by or under this Act, no  employer shall recruit any citizen of India for employment in 
any country  or place outside India except — 
(a) through a recruiting agent competent under this Act to make such recruitment, or  
(b) in accordance with a valid permit issued in this behalf under  this Chapter.  
17. Procedure for obtaining permits .—(1) An employer desiring to obtain a permit under this 
Chapter may make an application in that behalf in the prescribed form to the competent authority.  
(2) On receipt of such application, the competent a uthority shall, subject to any rules made in this 
behalf, make such inquiry as he may deem necessary and grant the permit applied for or reject the 
application:  
Provided that before granting a permit the competent authority may require the applicant to com ply 
with such conditions as may be prescribed, including conditions as to furnishing of security and such 
other conditions as that authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, deem necessary in the 
interests of the citizens of India likely to be r ecruited by the applicant.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the competent authority may reject an application 
under sub -section ( 1) on any one or more of the following grounds a nd on no other ground, namely: — 
(a) that the application is not  complete in all respects or that any of the material particulars 
furnished in the application are not true;  
(b) that the terms and conditions of employment which the applicant proposes to offer to persons 
recruited or proposed to be recruited by him are d iscriminatory or exploitative;  
(c) that the employment which the applicant proposes to offer involves work of a nature which is 
unlawful according to the laws of India or offends against the public policy of India or is violative of 
norms of human dignity and decency;  
(d) that having regard to the antecedents of the applicant, his financial standing, the facilities at 
his disposal, the working and living conditions of persons employed by him in the past, it would not 
be in the public interest or in the interest s of the persons who may be recruited by him, to issue a 
permit to him;  
(e) that having regard to the prevailing circumstances in the country or in the place where the 
applicant proposes to employ the persons recruited by him, it would not be in th e interests of any 
citizen of India to emigrate for taking up such employment.  9 (4) Where the competent authority makes an order under sub -section ( 2) rejecting an application, he 
shall record in writing a brief statement of his reasons for making such o rder and furnish the applicant, on 
demand, a copy of the same:  
Provided that if the competent authority is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the 
interests of friendly relations with a foreign country or in the interests of the general public  so to do, he 
may refuse to provide such copy or, as the case may be, furnish a copy of only such parts of the statement 
as he may deem fit.  
18. Period of validity of permit .—A permit issued under section 17 shall be valid till the expiry of 
such period, n ot exceeding one year, as may be prescribed, from the date of issue the reof, or till the 
recruitment or  the persons for whose recruitment such permit is issued is completed, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that where the holder of the permit has been unable  for sufficient cause, to complete such 
recruitment before the expiry of the prescribed period, the prescribed authority may, subject to rules made 
in this behalf, extend the period of validity of the permit by such further period or periods, not exceeding  
three months at a time.  
19. Registration of certain permits .—Any permit obtained from a person authorised under          
sub-section ( 2) of section 15 shall not be valid unless a certified copy thereof is filed in the prescribed 
manner with the Protector General of Emigrants.  
20. Cancellation or suspension of a permit .—The provisions of section 14 relating to cancellation 
and suspension of a certificate referred to therein shall, subject to such modifications as may be necessary 
(including modifications fo r construing the references in that section to registering authority as references 
to competent authority under this Chapter), apply for the cancellation or suspension of a permit.  
21. Power to exempt .—The Central Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so 
to do in the public interest, by notification and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in 
the notification, exempt any class or classes of employers from the requirement of obtaining a permit 
under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER V 
EMIGRATION CLEARANCE  
22. Requirement, etc., as to emigration clearance .—(1) No citizen of India shall emigrate unless he 
obtains under this Chapter from the Protector of Emigrants authorisation in the prescribed manner and 
form (such authorisation being hereinafter referred to as emigration clearance) for emigration.  
(2) An application for emigration clearance shall be in the prescribed form, shall contain the 
prescribed particulars and shall be made by the emigrant concerned to the Pr otector of Emigrants:  
Provided that such application may be made through the recruiting agent, if any, through whom the 
emigrant has been recruited or through the employer concerned.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied by — 
(a) a true copy (verified and authenticated in the prescribed manner) of the agreement with 
respect to the employment for the taking up of which the applicant proposes to emigrate and where 
such agreement does not provide for all or any of the prescribed matte rs, also a statement (verified 
and authenticated in the prescribed manner) setting out the particulars with respect to such matters;  
(b) a statement (verified and authenticated in the prescribed manner) as to the provision by way 
of security for meeting th e expenses which may be incurred in case it becomes necessary to arrange 
for the repatriation to India of the applicant;  
(c) a receipt evidencing the payment of the prescribed fee;  
(d) such other relevant documents or copies of relevant documents as may be  prescribed.  10 (4) The Protector of Emigrants shall, after satisfying himself about the accuracy of the particulars 
mentioned in the application and in the other documents submitted along with the application, authorise 
in the prescribed manner and form, the  emigration of the applicant or intimate by order in writing the 
applicant or, as the case may be, the recruiting agent or employer through whom the applications have 
been made about the deficiencies and require d him to make good such deficiencies within s uch time as 
may be specified in the order or reject the application.  
(5) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Protector of Emigrants may reject an application 
for emigration clearance under this section on any one or more of the following groun ds and on no o ther 
ground, namely: — 
(a) that the terms and conditions of employment which the applicant proposes to take up are 
discriminatory or exploitative;  
(b) that the employment which the applicant proposes to take up involves work of a nature which 
is unlawful according to the laws of India or offends against the public policy of India or is violative 
of norms of human dignity and decency;  
(c) that the applicant will have to work or live in sub -standard working or living conditions;  
(d) that having r egard to the prevailing circumstances in the country or place where the applicant 
proposes to take up employment or the antecedents of the employer under whom the applicant 
proposes to take up employment or any other relevant circumstances, it would not be  in the interests 
of the applicant to emigrate;  
(e) that no provision or arrangement has been made for meeting the expenses which may be 
incurred in case it becomes necessary to arrange for the repatriation to India of the applicant, or that 
the provisions  or arrangements made in this behalf are not adequate for the purpose.  
(6) Every order rejecting an application for emigration clearance shall set out clearly the ground or 
grounds on which the order has been made and the facts or circumstances on which such ground or 
grounds are based.  
CHAPTER VI 
APPEALS  
23. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by — 
(a) an order of the registering authority rejecting his application for registration or requiring him 
to furnish any security or to comply with any term or condi tion (not being a prescribed term or 
condition) specified in the certificate issued to him or suspending or cancelling or refusing to renew 
the certificate issued to him; or  
(b) an order of the competent authority rejecting his application for a permit or requiring him to 
comply with any terms or conditions (not being a prescribed term or condition) specified in the permit 
issued to him, or suspending or cancelling or refusing to extend the period of the validity of the 
permit issued to him; or  
(c) an order  of the Protector of Emigrants rejecting his application for emigration clearance; or  
(d) an order of the registering authority or the competent authority or the Protector of Emigrants 
or the prescribed authority requiring him to furnish any security, additional security or fresh security 
under this Act, or forfeiting or rejecting his claim f or refund (whether wholly or partly in either case) 
of the security, the additional security or the fresh security furnished by him;  
may prefer an appeal against such order to the Central Government within such period as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) No appeal sh all be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of  the period prescribed therefor  if the 
appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause  for not preferring the appeal within 
that period.  11 (3) The period prescribed for an appeal shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of the 
Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), with respect to the computation of periods thereunder.  
(4) Every appeal  under this section shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall be 
accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fee as may be prescribed.  
(5) The procedure for disposing of an appeal (including remand of the matter for furt her consideration 
to the authority whose order has been appealed against) shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
representing his case.  
(6) Every order made on an appeal under this section confirming, modifying or reversing the order 
appealed against shall be final.  
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
24. Offences and penalties .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) except in conformity with the provisions of this Act emigrates; or  
(b) contravenes the provisions of section 10 or section 16; or  
(c) by intentionally furnishing any false information or suppressing any material information 
obtains a certificate or a permit or an emigration clearance under this Act; or  
(d) without lawful  authority makes or causes to be made any alteration in any certificate or permit 
or in any document or endorsement by way of emigration clearance issued or made under this Act; or  
(e) disobeys or neglects to comply with any order of the Protector of Emigr ants under this Act; or  
(f) collects from an emigrant any charges in excess of the limits prescribed under this Act; or  
(g) cheats any emigrant;  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees:  
Provided that in the absence of any special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such imprisonment shall not be less than six months and such fine shall not be 
less than one thousand rup ees. 
(2) Whoever attempts to commit any offence under sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with the 
punishment provided for such offence under that sub -section.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any term or condition subject to which any emigration clearance has been  
given under this Act, shall, if no other punishment is provided elsewhere in this Act for such 
contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine 
which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both.  
(4) Wh oever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall, if the act abetted is committed in 
consequence of the abetment, be punishable with the punishment provided for that offence.  
(5) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under any provision of th is Act is again convicted 
of an offence under the same provision, shall be punishable, for the second and for each subsequent 
offence, with double the penalty provided for that offence.  
25. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, a t the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he ha d exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  12 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence, and shall be l iable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partn er in the firm.  
26. Offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all offences under this Act shall be cognizable.  
27. Previous sanction of Central Government necessary .—No prosecution shall be instituted 
against any person in respect of any offence under this Act without the previous sanction of the Central 
Government or such officer or authority as may be authorised by that Government by order in writing in 
this behalf:  
Provided that n o sanction shall be required when an offence has been committed in respect of an 
emigrant or an intending emigrant and the complaint is filed by such emigrant or intending emigrant, or 
on behalf of such emigrant or intending emigrant, by the father, mother , husband, wife, son, daughter, 
brother, sister or guardian of such emigrant or intending emigrant , or if such emigrant or intending 
emigrant is a member of a joint Hindu family, by the manager of that family.  
28. Punishment to be without prejudice to any other action .—The award of punishment for an 
offence under this Act shall be without prejudice to any other action which has been or which may be 
taken under this Act with respect to such contravention.  
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Determination of question as to whether a person is an emigrant .—Where a question arises 
before a Protector of Emigrants as to whether a person intending to depart from India is or is not an 
emigrant, the Protector of Emigrants shall decide the question a fter holding an inquiry in such manner and 
upon considering such evidence as may be prescribed and such other evidence as may be relevant, and 
communicate the decision to such person in the prescribed manner.  
30. Power to prohibit emigration to any country  in the interests of the general public,                
etc.—(1) Where the Central Government has reason to believe that sufficient grounds exist for 
prohibiting emigration to any country, having regard to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the securi ty 
of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country or the interests of the general public, i t may, 
by notification, prohibit emigration to that country.  
(2) A notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect for such period not exceeding six 
months as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that if the Central Government has reason to believe that the grounds mentioned in          
sub-section ( 1) continue to exist, it may, from time to time, by notification, prohibit emigr ation to that 
country for such further period, not exceeding six months on each occasion, as may be specified in the 
notification.  
 31. Power to prohibit emigration due to outbreak of epidemics, civil disturbances, etc., in a           
country .—(1) Where t he Central Go vernment has reason to believe — 
(a) that intending emigrants if allowed to emigrate to any country would be exposed to serious 
risk to life  on arrival there by reason of — 
(i) outbreak of any disease or grave pollution of environment in such country, or  
(ii) outbreak of hostilities or civil war or civil commotion or political disturbances;  13 (b) that by reason of India not being in diplomatic relations with that country it is not possible to 
protect the emigrants from discrimination, maltreatmen t and exploitation,  
it may, by notification, prohibit emigration to that country.  
(2) A notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall  have effect for such period not exceeding six 
months as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that if the Centr al Government has reason to believe that any ground mentioned in                     
sub-section ( 1) continues to exist, it may, from time to time, by notification,  prohibit  emigration to that 
country for such further period, not exceeding six months on each occasion, as may be specified in the 
notification.  
 32. Power to prohibit emigration of any class or category of persons .—(1) Where the Central 
Government considers that in the interests of the general public, immigration of any class or category of 
persons, having regard to their age, sex or other relevant factors, to any country should be prohibited, it 
may, by notification, prohibit the emigration to such country of such class or category of persons as may 
be specified in the notification.  
(2) A not ification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect for such period not exceeding six 
months as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that if the Central Government has reason to believe that any of the grounds mentioned in 
sub-section ( 1) continues to exist, it may, from time to time, by notification, prohibit emigration of such 
class or category of persons to that country for such further period, not exceeding six months on each 
occasion, as may be specified in the notification.  
33. Provisio ns as to security .—(1) Any security or other financial provision which may be required 
to be made under this Act shall be reasonable having regard to the purpose for which such security or 
other financial provision is required to be made.  
(2) The prescribed authority may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to a person who has 
furnished any security for any purpose and after giving to such person an opportunity to represent his 
case, by order in writing, direct that the whole or any part o f such security may be forfeited for being 
utilised for such purpose and in such manner as may be specified in the order.  
(3) Where it appears to the prescribed authority that the security furnished by any person under this 
Act for any purpose has, for any  reason, become inadequate, or has ceased to be available for any reason 
whatsoever, the prescribed authority may, after giving him an opportunity to represent his case, by order 
in writing, require such person to f urnish such additional security  or, as th e case may be, such fresh 
security as may be specified in the order.  
34. Refund of security .—Any security furnished under this Act shall be refunded or, as the case may 
be, released, when no longer required for the purpose for which it has been furnished a nd the other 
circumstances in which and the manner in which any security furnished under this Act may be released or 
refunded shall be such as may be prescribed.  
35. Power to search, seize and detain persons, conveyance, etc. —All the powers for the time be ing 
conferred by the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), on officers of customs with regard to the searching and 
detention of persons, vessels or aircraft or any other conveyance, or seizure of any document or thing or 
arrest of any person or otherwise for the  purpose of prevention or detection of any offence under that Act 
or for apprehending a person suspected to have committed any offence under that Act may be exercised , 
for the purpose of prevention or detection of any offence under this Act or for apprehen ding a person 
suspected to have committed any offence under this Act, by — 
(a) any such officer of customs, or  
(b) the Protector General of Emigrants or a Protector of Emigrants, or  
(c) an officer in charge of an emigration check -post.  14 36. Returns and registers .—(1) Every recruiting agent shall maintain such registers and other 
records and shall submit to the prescribed authorities such periodical or other returns as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Protector General of Emigrants, the registering  authority, the competent authority or a 
Protector of Emigrants may, by order, call for any other return or information from a recruiting agent.  
(3) The Protector General of Emigrants, the registering authority, the competent authority or a 
Protector of Em igrants or an officer in charge of an emigration check -post may inspect any register or 
other record maintained by a recruiting agent under sub -section ( 1) and for the purpose of such 
inspection, enter, at any reasonable time, the business premises of a re cruiting agent.  
37. Authorities and officers to have certain powers of civil court .—(1) The Protector General of 
Emigrants, the registering authority, the competent authority and every Protector of Emigrants shall, for 
the purpose of discharging their func tions under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) Ever y proceeding before the Protector General of Emigrants, or the registering authority or the 
competent authority or a Protector of Emigrants shall be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Protector General of Emigrants, the 
registering authority, the competent authority, and every Protector of Emigrants shall be deemed to be a 
civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974 ). 
38. Power to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to the Protector 
General of Emigrants, the registering authority, the competent authority or any Protector of Emigrants as 
to the carrying into execution of any provision of this A ct. 
39. Effect of other laws .—(1) The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or 
in any agreement or other instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 1), the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in 
derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.  
40. Delegation .—The Central Government may, by  notification , direct that any power or function — 
(a) which may be exercised or performed by it under this Act, or  
(b) which may be exercised or performed by a registering authority,  a competent authority or a 
Protector of Emigrants under this Act,  
may, in relation to such matters, and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may specify in the 
notification, be also exercised or performed — 
(i) by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or  
(ii) by any State Government or by a ny officer or authority subordinate to such State 
Government, or  
(iii) in any foreign country in which there is no diplomatic mission of India, by such foreign 
consular office,  
as may be specified in the notification.  15 41. Power to exempt .—(1) Where the Central Government, on a reference made to it or otherwise, is 
satisfied that having regard  to— 
(a) the friendly relations with any foreign country; or  
(b) the known reputation of any foreign employer or class of foreign employers, for providing to 
emigran ts standard conditions of living and working, and their methods of recruitment and conditions 
of employment; or  
(c) the methods of recruitment followed and the conditions of employment provided by a public 
undertaking or an approved concern for the executi on of its projects abroad; or  
(d) the facilities and conditions of service provided by Government officers posted abroad to their 
domestic servants accompanying such Government officers, where the expenditure in respect of the 
passage of such domestic serv ants is borne by the Government; and  
(e) all other relevant considerations,  
it is necessary or expedient in the public interest so to do , the Central Government may, by notification, 
and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, exempt from the operation 
of all or any of the provisions of this Act, such foreign dignitary or class of foreign employers, publ ic 
undertaking, approved concern or Government officers.  
Explanation .—For th e purposes of this sub -section— 
(a) “public undertaking” means — 
(i) an undertaking owned and controlled by Government; or  
(ii) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act,                                 
1956 (1 of 1956); or  
(iii) a body corporate established by or under any Central, Provincial or State Act;  
(b) “approved concern ” means such company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956) or partnership firm registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) , or society 
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or any other law rel ating to 
societies for the time being in force in any State, or co -operative society registered under any Central, 
Provincial or State law, as the Central Government may, by notification, approve for the purposes of 
this section.  
(2) If the Central Governm ent is satisfied that it is necessary for implementing any treaty, agreement 
or convention between India and a foreign country or foreign countries so to do, it may, by notification, 
and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notifi cation, exempt from the operation 
of all or any of the provisions of this Act, recruitment by such authorities, agencies or persons as may be 
specified in the notification either generally or for such purposes as may be specified in the notification.  
42. Act not to apply to certain emigrants .—Nothing contained in this A ct shall be deemed to apply 
to— 
(a) the recruitment or emigration of any person who is not a citizen of India;  
(b) the control of recruiting in India for the service of foreign States to wh ich the Foreign 
Recruiting Act,  1874 (4 of 1874) applies.  
43. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the forego ing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the powers and duties of officers and employees appointed for the purposes of this Act and the 
terms and conditions of their service;  16 (b) the form of — 
(i) a certificate  to commence or carry on the business of recruitment, and of an application for 
the issue or renewal thereof;  
(ii) a permit for the recruitment of persons for employment outside India, and of an 
application for the issue thereof;  
(iii) an application for e migration clearance;  
(iv) an appeal to be preferred to the Central Government;  
(c) the manner and form in which an authorisation by way of emigration clearance may be given;  
(d) particulars to be contained in an application for a certificate or a permit or  for an emigration 
clearance;  
(e) the manner in which different inquiries required to be held under this Act may be held;  
(f) the manner in which the amount of security for securing the due performance of the terms and 
conditions of the certificate o r perm it or for compliance with the provisions of this Act shall be 
furnished;  
(g) the manner of verifying or authenticating documents and copies of documents for the 
purposes of this Act;  
(h) the procedure to be followed in hearing an appeal preferred to the Central Government;  
(i) the fees to be paid in respect of applications and other matters under this Act;  
(j) the charges which a recruiting agent may recover from an emigrant in respect of services 
rendered and the scales and limits of such charges;  
(k) the terms and conditions subject to which a certificate or a permit or an emigration clearance 
may be issued under this Act;  
(l) the period of the validity of a certificate or  a permit issued under this Act;  
(m) the authority competent to extend the period o f validity of a permit or to forfeit security or to 
require any additional security or fresh security under this Act;  
(n) the accommodation, the provisions, the medical stores and staff, the life saving and sanitary 
arrangements and other provisions and ar rangement for the well -being, security and protection of 
emigrants which shall be provided and the records which shall be maintained in any emigrant 
conveyance.  
(o) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
44. Notifications and rule s to be laid before Parliament .—Every notification issued under       
clause ( o) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, section 30, section 31 or section 32 and every rule made under 
section 43 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive se ssions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification or the 
rule or both Houses agree that the notification or the rule should not be issued or made, the notification or 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modif ied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that notification or rule.  
45. Repeal of Act 7 of 1922 .—The Emigration Act, 1922 is hereby repealed.  
--------------------------The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE ILLEGAL MIGRANTS (DETERMINATION BY TRIBUNALS) ACT, 1983  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Application . 
3. Definitions and construction of references . 
4. Overriding effect of  the Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNALS  
5. Establishment of Illegal Migrants (Determination) Tribunals . 
6. Filling of vacancies.  
7. Staff of the Tribunals.  
8. References or applications to Tribunals.  
8A. Application to the Central Government for reference . 
9. Powers of Tribunal.  
10. Procedure  with respect to references under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 . 
11. Procedure with respect to applications under sub -section ( 2) of section 8 . 
12. Determination of the question as to whether a person is an illegal migrant.  
13. Reference an d application to be disposed of within six months.  
14. Appeal.  
15. Appellate Tribunal.  
16. Order of the Appellate Tribunal . 
17. Revision . 
CHAPTER III  
PROVISIONS  APPLICABLE TO ALL TRIBUNALS  
18. Procedure.  
19. Proceeding before every Tri bunal to be judicial proceeding  for certain purposes.  
CHAPTER IV  
ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDERS MADE BY THE  TRIBUNALS  
20. Expulsion of illegal migrant s. 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Delegation of powers.  
21A.  Power to bind certain persons against whom complaint is made under the Act.  
22. Power to give effect to the orders , etc. 
23. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts.  
24. Transitory provision.  
25. Penalties.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
27. Power to remove difficulties.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Repeal and saving.  2 
  
THE ILLEGAL MIGRANTS (DETERMINATION BY TRIBUNALS) ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1983  
[25th December , 1983 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of Tribunals for the determination, in a fair manner, of 
the question whether a person is an illegal migrant to enable the Central Government to expel 
illegal migrants from India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  a good number of the foreigners who migrated into India across the borders of the eastern 
and north -eastern regions of the country on and after the 25th day of M arch, 1971, have, by taking 
advantage of the circumstances of such migration and their ethnic similarities and other connections with 
the people of India and without having in their possession any lawful authority so to do, illegally 
remained in India;  
AND WHEREAS  the continuance of such foreigners in India is detrimental to the interests of the public 
of India;  
AND WHEREA S on account of the number of such foreigners and the manner in which such foreigners 
have clandestinely been trying to pass off as citizens of India and all other relevant circumstances, it is 
necessary for the protection of the citizens of India to make special provisions for the detection of such 
foreigners in Assam and also in any other part of India in which such foreigners may be  found to have 
remained illegally ; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—This Act may be called t he Illegal Migrants 
(Determination by Tribunals) Act, 1983.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force in the State of Assam on the 15th day of October, 1983 
and in any other State on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazeette, appoint and different dates may be appointed fo r different States and references in this Act to 
the commencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to any State as references to the date of 
commencement of this Act in such State.  
2. Application .—Nothing in this Act sh all apply to or in relation  to— 
(a) any person who was in any State and who had been expelled from that State or India before 
the commencement of this Act in that State or in relation to whose expulsion from such State or India 
any order made before such commencement under any other  law is in force;  
(b) any person detected as a foreigner at the time of his entry across any border of India;  
(c) any foreigner who, having entered into India under a valid passport or travel document, 
continued to remain therein after the expiry of the period for which he was authorised to remain in 
India under such passport or travel document.  
3. Definitions and construction of references .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Tribunal ” means an Appellate Tribunal established by the Central Government 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(b) “foreigner ” has the same meaning as in the Foreigners Act, 1946  (31 of 1946) ; 
(c) “illegal migrant ” means a person in respect of whom each of the following con ditions is 
satisfied, namely: — 
(i) he has entered into India on or af ter the 25th day of March, 1971,  3 
 (ii) he is a foreigner,  
(iii) he has entered into India without being in possession of a valid passport or other travel 
document or any other lawful authority in that behalf;  
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by r ules made under this Act;  
(f) “Tribunal” means a Tribunal established by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
4. Overriding effect of the Act .—(1) The provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 
1920 (34 of 1920) or the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) or the Immigrants (Expulsion from A ssam) 
Act, 1950  (10 of 1950)  or the Passports Act, 1967  (15 of 1967)  or any rule or order made under any of the 
said Acts and in force for the time being.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section (1), nothing in 
the proviso to s ection 2 of the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950 (10 of 1950)  shall apply to 
or in relation to an illegal migrant as defined in Clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3.   
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNALS  
5. Establishment of Illegal Migrants (Determination) Tribunals .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, establish, for the purposes of this Act, as many Illegal Migrants (Determination) 
Tribunals as it may deem necessary and specify the principal pla ce of sitting of, and the territorial limits 
within which, each such Tribunal shall exercise its jurisdiction.  
(2) No person shall be appointed as a member of any such Tribunal unless he is or has been a District 
Judge or an Additional District Judge in an y State.  
(3) Each Tribunal shall consist of  1[two members].  
(4) On the establishment of a Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint one of the members 
thereof as the Chairman of such Tribunal.  
(5) Each Tribunal shall sit in its principal place of sitting and in such other place or places as its 
Chairman may, from time to time, appoint.  
6. Filling of vacancies .—If, for any reason, any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman or              
2[the member] of a Tribunal, the Central Government may fill the vacancy by appointing any person who 
fulfils the qualifications specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, as the Chairman, or, as the case may be, 
member of such Tribunal.  
7. Staff of the Tri bunals .—The Central Government shall make available to every Tribunal such 
staff as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
8. References or applications to Tribunals .—(1) If any question arises as to whether any person is 
or is not an illegal migrant, the Central Government may, whether such question has arisen on a 
representation made by such person against any order under the Foreigners Act, 1946                                     
(31 of 1946) requiring him not to remain in India or to any other effect or has arisen in any other manner 
whatsoever, refer such question to a Tribunal for decision.  
(2) 3*** any person may make an application to the Tribunal, for its decisio n, as to whether the 
person whose name and other particulars are given in the application, is or is not an illegal migrant : 
4[Provided that no such application shall be entertained by the Tribunal unless the person in relation 
to whom the application is made is found, or resides, within the jurisdiction of the same police station 
wherein the applicant has the place of residence.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1988, s. 2, for “three members” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “any other member” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
3. The words, brackets and figure “Without prejudice to the power conferred on the Central Government by sub -section ( 1)” 
omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  4 
 (3) Every application made under sub -section ( 2) shall be made in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescribed and shall b e accompanied by affidavits sworn by not less than 1[two persons residing 
within the jurisdiction of the same police station] in which the person referred to in the application is 
found, or residi ng, corroborating the averments made in the application, and shall also be accompanied by 
such fee, being not less than  2[ten] and not more than one hundred, rupees, as may be prescribed.  
3[(4) Every reference under su b-section ( 1) shall be made to the Tribunal within the territorial limits 
of whose jurisdiction the place of residence of the person named in such reference is, at the time of 
making such reference, situated : 
Provided that where such person has no place of  residence, the reference shall be made to the 
Tribunal within the territorial limits of whose jurisdiction such person , is at the time of making such 
reference, found.  
(5) Every application under sub -section ( 2) shall be made to the Tribunal within the te rritorial limits 
of whose jurisdiction the person named in such application is found or, as the case may be, has his place 
of residence, at the time of making such application.]  
4[8A. Application to the Central Government for reference. —(1) Any person may make an 
application to the Central Government, for decision by a Tribunal, as to whether the person whose name 
and other particula rs are given in the application , is or is not an illegal migrant, and where any such 
application is received by the Central Go vernment, it may, on the basis of any information in its 
possession or after making such inquiry as it deems fit, reject the application on the ground that the 
application is frivolous or vexatious or it does not comply with the requirements of this sectio n or refer 
such application to a Tribunal for decision.  
(2) Every application made under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a declaration by another person residing within the 
jurisdiction of the same revenue sub -division in which the applicant resides in such form as may be 
prescribed to the effect that the particulars mentioned in the application are true to his kn owledge, 
information and belief : 
Provided that no person shall make  more than ten such applications or more than ten such 
declarations.  
(3) Every reference under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the Tribunal within the territorial limits of 
whose jurisdiction the place of residence of the person named in such reference is , at the time of making 
such reference, situated : 
Provided that where such person has no place of residence, the reference shall be made to the 
Tribunal within the territorial limits of whose jurisdiction such person is, at the time of making such 
reference, found.]  
9. Powers of Tribunal .—Every Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of t he following 
matters,           namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath;  
(b) discovery and production of any document;  
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning of public records from any court or office;  
(e) issuing of any commiss ion for the examination of witnesses.  
10. Procedure  with respect to references under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 .—On receipt of a 
reference under sub -section ( 1) of 5[section  8 or sub -section ( 1) of section 8A] the Tribunal shall serve on 
the person named  in such reference, a notice, accompanied by a copy of such reference,  calling upon him 
to make, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such notice, such representation with 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 24 of 1988 , s. 4, for “two persons residing within three kilometres of the area” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “twenty -five” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f.  25-4-1988).  
5. Subs. s. 6,  ibid.,  for “section 8 ” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  5 
 regard to the averments made in the reference, and to produce such evidence as he may thin k fit in 
support of his defence : 
Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the person aforesaid was prevented by sufficient cause 
from making his representation and from producing evidence in support of his defence within the said 
period of thirty days, it may permit him to make his representation and to produce evidence in support of 
his defence, within such further period, not exceeding thirty days, as it may, by order, specify.  
11. Procedure with respect to applica tions under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 8 .—(1) On receipt of 
an application under sub -section ( 2) of section 8, the Tribunal shall issue a notice, accompanied by a copy 
of the application, to the prescribed authority calling upon it to furnish, after making such inquiry as that 
authority may deem fit , a report to the Tribunal with regard to the averments made in the application.  
(2) If, on a consideration of the report made by the prescribed authority , the Tribunal is satisfied 
that— 
(a) the person named in the application is not an illegal migrant or that the application is frivolous 
of vexatious, or has not been made in good faith, the Tribunal shall, after giving the applicant an 
opportunity to be heard, reject the application;  
(b) there are reasonable grounds  to believe that the person named in the application is an illegal 
migrant, the Tribunal shall issue a notice accompanied by a copy of the application, to the person 
named in the application, calling upon him to make , within thirty days from the date of re ceipt of the 
notice, such representation with regard to the averments made in the application and to produce such 
evidence as he may thin k fit in support of his defence : 
Provided that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the person aforesaid was prevented by sufficient 
cause from making his representation and from producing evidence in support of his defence within 
the said period of thirty days, it may permit him to make his representation and to produce evidence 
in support of his defence, within such further  period, not exceeding thirty days, as it may, by order, 
specify.  
12. Determination of the question as to whether a person is an illegal migrant .—(1) The Tribunal 
to which a reference has been made under  1[section 8 or section 8A, or to which an application has been 
made under section 8], shall, after taking such evidence as may be adduced before it and after making 
such inquiry as it may think fit and after hearing such persons as it may deem appropriate, by order, 
decide the question as to whether the person named in such reference or application, as the case may be, 
is or is not an illegal migrant : 
Provided that where for the determination of such question in any case the decision on any issue 
renders any  decision on any other issue or issues unnecessary, the Tribunal may not decide such other 
issue or issues.  
2[(2) Where the members of the Tribunal differ in their opinion on any point, the Chairman of the 
Tribunal shall state the point or points on which they differ and make a reference to the President of the 
Appellate Tribunal which exercises jurisdiction in relation to the Tribunal who shall refer the case for 
hearing on such point or points by a member of another Tribunal under its jurisdiction and suc h point or 
points shall be decided according to the opinion of that member and such decision shall be deemed to be 
the decision of the Tribunal.]  
(3) The Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed by it to the prescribed authority                            
3[or authorities] and to the parties to the reference, or the application, as the case may be.  
(4) Every order passed under sub -section ( 1) shall, subject to the decision of the Appellate Tribunal, 
be final and shall not be called in question in any court.  
13. Reference and application to be disposed of within six months .—Every reference made to a 
Tribunal under  4[section 8 or section 8A or application made to a Tribunal under section 8] shall be 
inquired into as expeditiousl y as possible and every endeavour shall be made to conclude such inquiry 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1988, s. 7, for “section 8 , or to which an application has been made under that section ” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f.  25-4-1988).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “section 8 or application made to a Tribunal under that section” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  6 
 within a period of six months from the date of the service, on the person concerned, of a copy of such 
reference or application.  
14. Appeal .—The Central Government, or any person, named in a reference or an application u nder 
section 8, or any applicant  under sub -section ( 2) of that section  1[or any person named in a reference 
under section 8A] may, if it or he is not satisfied with any order made by a Tribunal under section 12, 
prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order.  
15. Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, establish for each State 
in which this Act is in force an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Illegal Migrants (Determination) 
Appellate Tribunal for deciding appeals preferred under section 14 against orders made by Tribunals in 
the State and specify the principal place of sitting of such Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) No person shall be appointed as a member of an Appel late Tribunal  unless he is or has been a 
Judge of a High Court.  
(3) An Appellate Tribunal shall consist of as many members, not being   2[less than two] and mo re 
than six, as the Central Government may think fit.  
(4) The Central Government shall appoint one of the members of an Appellate Tribunal to be the 
President thereof.  
(5) An Appellate Tribunal shall sit in its principal place of sitting or any such other place or places as 
the President thereof may, from time to time, appoint.  
(6) The powers and functions of an Appellate Tribunal may be exercised and discharged by benches 
constituted by the President thereof from amongst the members thereof  3[which may either be single 
member  benches or benches consisting of not less than two members.]  
(7) The Central Government shall make available to every Appellate Tribunal such staff as may be 
necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(8) Every mem orandum of appeal to an Appellate Tribunal shall be made in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed, and , in the case of an appeal preferred by an applicant under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8, shall also be accompanied by such fee, not being less  than twenty -five and more than one 
hundred rupees, as may be prescribed.  
(9) Every appeal shall be preferred within thirty days from the date on which the order sought to be 
appealed against wa s communicated to the appellant : 
Provided that the Appellate T ribunal may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said period, admit an appeal after the expiry of the 
aforesaid period of thirty days.  
4[(10) Every Appellate Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in an appellate court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while hearing an appeal.]  
16. Order of the Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to 
the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it may think fit, 
confirming, modifying or annulling the order appealed against or may remand the case to the Tribunal 
which had passed such order with such direction s to that Tribunal as the Appellat e Tribunal may think fit, 
for fresh determination after taking additional evidence, if necessary.  
(2) Where an appeal had been heard by the Appellate Tribunal and the members thereof differ in their 
opinion on any point, the decision on such point shall, w here there is a majority, be according to the 
opinion of such majority, and where there is no majority and the members are equally divided in their 
opinion, they shall draw up a statement of the facts of the case and the point or points on which they diffe r 
in their opinion and make a reference of the point or points or of the appeal, as the case may be, to the 
President of such Tribunal , and on receipt of such reference, the President of the Tribunal shall arrange 
for the hearing of such  point or points, o r the appeal, by one or more of the members of the Appellate 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1988 , s. 9 (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid., for “less than three” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for  “and each bench shall consist of not less than two members” (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
4. Subs. by  s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 10) (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  7 
 Tribunal, and such point or points, or the appeal, as the case may be, shall be decided according to the 
opinion of the majority of the members of the Appellate Tribunal, who have heard the appea l, including 
those who had first heard it.  
1[(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed by it under sub -section ( 1) to the 
parties to the appeal, to the Tribunal concerned and to the prescribed authority or authorities.]  
(4) 2*** every order passed under sub -section ( 1), other than an order remanding the case, shall be 
final and no order passed under that sub -section shall be c alled in question in any court.  
3[17. Power of superintendence by Appellate Tribunal. —(1) Every Appellate Tribunal shall have 
superintendence over  all the Tribunals in the State.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisio ns, the Appellate Tribunal may — 
(a) call for returns from any Tribunal;  
(b) make  general rules and specify forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of    
Tribunals; and  
(c) specify the forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the officers of 
Tribunals.]  
CHAPTER III  
PROVISIONS  APPLICABLE TO ALL TRIBUNALS  
18. Procedure .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, every Tribunal 
and every Appellate Tribunal shall have the power to regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out 
of the exercise of its powers or for the discharge  of its functions.  
19. Proceeding before every Tribun al to be judicial proceeding  for certain purposes .—Every 
proceeding before a Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and  for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code                
(45 of 1860) ; and every such Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal , as the case may be, shall be deemed to a 
civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973              
(2 of 1974) .  
CHAPTER IV  
ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDERS MADE BY THE  TRIBUNALS  
20. Expulsion of illegal migrant s.—4[(1)] Where a person has been determined by a Tribunal, or, as 
the case may be, by the Appellate Tribunal, to be an illegal migrant, the Central Government shall, by 
order served on such person, direct such person to remove himself from India within such time and by 
such route as may be specified in the order and may give such further directions in regard  to his removal  
from India as it  may consider necessary or expedient.  
5[(2) Any police officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police shall have such powers as 
may be necessary, including the power to obtain a bond from any person for the due compliance of an 
order under sub -section ( 1) and to arrest such person in the event of his failure to furnish such bond to the 
satisfaction of such police officer.]  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers and 
duties conferred or imposed on it by this Act, other than the powers conferred by section 28, and the 
powers conferred by this section, may, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, 
be exercised o r discharged also by— 
(a) any officer subord inate to the Central Government;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1988 , s. 11, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f.  25 -4-1988).  
2. The words and figures “Subject to the provisions of section 17” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for section 17 (w.e.f. 24 -4-1988).  
4. S. 20 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by  s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -4-1988).  
5. Ins. by s. 1 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -4-1988).  8 
 (b) any State Government or any officer subordinate to that Government.  
1[21A. Power to bind certain persons against whom complaint is made under the                          
Act.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it shall be lawful 
for a police officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police, if he is satisfied that the 
circumstances so require and for reasons to be recorded in writing, to di rect any person against whom a 
reference or an application has been made under this Act to enter into a bond with or without sureties for 
making himself available for the inquiry and observance of such restrictions or conditions as may be 
specified by such  police officer:  
Provided that if such person fails to enter into such bond he may be arrested and detained in such 
manner as may be prescribed.]  
22. Power to give effect to the orders , etc.—Any authority empowered by or in pursuance of the 
provisions of this Act to exercise any power, may, in addition to any other action expressly provided for 
in this Act, take, or cause to be taken, such steps, and use, or cause to be used, such force, as may in its 
opinion be reasonably necessary for the effective exerc ise of such power.  
23. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts .—Where a Tribunal or Appellate Tribunal has been 
established for any area for the purpose of determining whether a person is or is not an illegal migrant, no 
civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any question relating to that matter in that area and no 
injunction or any other order in respect of any action taken by, or before, the Tribunal or Appellate 
Tribunal in respect of that matter shall be granted or made by any civil court.  
24. Transitory provision .—Where in any suit or other legal proceeding pending, whether in a civil 
court or in any Tribunal established under any other law for the time being in force, immediately before 
the commencement of this Act, a question arises as to whethe r a person is or is not an illegal migrant, 
such court or Tribunal shall, without deciding such question, make an order transferring such suit or other 
legal proceeding to the Tribunal under this Act within the territorial limits of whose jurisdiction such  
court or other Tribunal is situate and on such transfer such question shall be dealt with by such Tribunal 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
25. Penalties .—Any person who ,— 
(a) contravenes  or attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of, any order made under 
section 20; or  
(b) fails to comply with any direction given by any such order; or  
(c) harbours any person who has contravened any order made under section 20 or has failed to 
comply with any direction given by any such order,  
2[shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may 
extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees : 
Provided that the  court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year or a fine of less than two thousand 
rupees.]  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution  or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
27. Power to remove difficult ies.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Centr al Government may, by order to be published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedi ent for 
removing the difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made  after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Ever y order made under this section  shall , as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House or Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1988, s. 14  (w.e.f. 24 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by  s. 15, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 24 -4-1988).  9 
 28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government ma y, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  form and the manner in which an application may be made and the fee which shall 
accompany such application , as required by sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  
1[(aa) the form and the manner in which an application, and the form in which a declaration, may 
be ma de under sub -section ( 2) of section 8A;]  
2[(b) the authority or authorities to be prescribed under sections 11, 12 and 16;]  
(c) the form and the manner in which an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal may be preferred and 
the fee which shall accompany such app eal as required by sub -section ( 8) of section 15;  
1[(ca) the manner of arrest and detention under the proviso to section 21A;]  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act  shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or  be of no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
29. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Illegal Migrants (Determination by Tribunals) Ordinance, 1983               
(8 of 1983) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 24 of 1988, s. 16  (w.e.f. 24-4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 24 -4-1988).  
--------------------------The Indian Railways (Amendment) Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1983  
________ __ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. Validation.  
 
  2 
 THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 44 OF 1983  
[25th December , 1983.]  
An Act further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the India n Railways (Amendment) Act, 1983.  
1*   *   *   *  * 
5. Validation. —Any action or thing taken or done or purported to have been taken or done under the 
principal Act before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be, and to have always been, a s 
validly and effectively taken or done as if the amendments made in the principal Act by sections 3 and 4 
had been in force at all material times.  
 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 4 rep. by Act  19 of 1988, s. 2 and the First Schedule ( w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
--------------------------The Jute Manufactures Cess Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE JUTE MANUFACTURE S CESS ACT, 1983  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Levy and collection of cess on jute manufactures produced in India . 
4. Crediting proceeds of duties to the Consolidated  Fund of India . 
5. Power to call for information . 
6. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE JUTE MANUFACTURE S CESS ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1983  
[7th September , 1983 .] 
An Act to provide for the levy and collection, by way of cess, of a duty of excise on jute 
manufactures for the purpose of carrying out measures for the development of production of 
jute manufactures and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, ex tent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Jute Manufactures Cess 
Act, 1983.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “jute manufacture ” means any article specified in the Schedule which contains more than fifty 
per cent.  of the jute (includin g Bimlipatam jute or mestafibre  of any so rt) by weight of the  total fibre  
content and in the production of which any process is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power.  
Explanation .—“Power” means electrical energy or any other form of energy which is 
mechanically transmitted and is not generated by any human or animal agency;  
(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “producer”, in relation to a jute manufacture, means the producer of such jute manufacture.  
3. Levy and collection of cess on jute manufactures produced in India .—(1) There shall be levied 
and collected by way of cess for the purposes of the Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983, 
on every article of jute manufacture specified in column 2 of the Schedule and produced in India, a duty 
of excise at such rate not exceed ing the rate specified in the corresponding entry in column 3 thereof, as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify:  
Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central Government, the duty of excise shall be levied  
and collected at the rate specified in the corresponding entry in column 4 of the Schedule.  
(2) The duty of excise levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to the duty of excise leviable 
on jute manufactures under the Central Excises and Salt Act , 1944 (1 of 1944) or any other law for the 
time being in force.  
(3) The duty of excise levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be payable by the Producer of a jute 
manufacture.  
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944(1 of 1944), and the rules made 
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to the levy and collection of the duty of excise on jute manufactures under this Act.  
4. Crediting proceeds of duties to the Consolidated Fund of India .—The proceeds of the duty of 
excise levied under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India 
and the Central G overnment may, if Parliament, by appropriation made by law in this behalf, so provides, 
pay to the Jute Manufactures Development Council, from time to time, from out of such proceeds (after 
deducting the cost of collection which shall not exceed four per c ent. of such proceeds) such sums of 
money as it may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of the Jute Manufactures Development 
Council Act, 1983.  
                                                           
1. 1st May, 1984, vide notification No. S.O. 326(E), dated 28th April, 1984, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 5. Power to call for information. —The Central Government may require a producer of a jute 
manufacture to furnish for the purposes of this Act, such statistical and any other information in such 
form and within such period as may be prescribed.  
6. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for the form in which and the period within which statistical and other information may be 
furnished under section 5.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successi ve sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall the reafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  4 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( a) and 3 (1)] 
 
Sl. 
 No. Articles of jute manufacture  The maximum rate at 
which duty of excise may 
be collected  Actual rate at which duty  of 
excise is to be collected until a 
different rate is specified by the 
Central Government  
1 2 3 4 
1. Carpet Backing  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
2. Hessian  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
3. Sacking  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
4. Yarn and Twine  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
5. D.W. Tarpaulin  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
6. Decorative Fabrics  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
7. Cotton Bagging  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
8. Soil Saver  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
9. Japanese Rice Bags  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem  
10. Any other article of jute 
manufacture  Two per cent. ad valorem  One per cent. ad valorem .] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2002, s. 2, for “THE SCHEDULE” ( w.e.f. 1 -6-2002 ). 
--------------------------The Jute Manufactures Development Council Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL ACT, 1983  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE JUTE MANUFACTURES  DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL  
3. Establishment and constitution of the Council.  
4. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman and other members.  
5. Committees of the Council.  
6. Officers of the Council and other staff.  
7. Functions of the Council  
8. Dissolution of the Council.  
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE,  ACCOUNTS AND  AUDIT  
9. Grants and loans by  the Central Government Jute Fun d. 
10. Jute Fund.  
11. Borrowing powers of the Council.  
12. Accounts and audit  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
13. Directions by Central Government.  
14. Returns and reports of activities of the Council.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Power to call for reports and returns.  
16. Power of inspection.  
17. Penalties.  
18. Offences by companies.  
19. Cognizance of offences.  
20. Sanction for prosecutions  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
22. Members, officers and employees of the Council to be public servants . 
23. Suspension of operation of Act.  
24. Application of other laws not barred.  
25. Power to make rules.  
  2 
 THE JUTE MANUFACTURES DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1983  
[7th Septembe r, 1983.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Council for the development of production of jute 
manufactures by increasing the efficiency and productivity in the jute industry, the financing 
of activities for such development and for matters connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Jute Manufactures  
Development Council Act, 1983.  
(2) It extends to the w hole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Council;  
(b) “Council” means the Jute Manufactures Development Council established under section 3;  
(c) “jute manufacture ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Ju te Manufactures 
Cess Act, 1983  (27 of 1983) ; 
(d) “member” means a member of th e Cou ncil and includes the Chairman;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
2[(f) “year” means the year commencing on the 1st day of April  and ending on the 3 1st day of 
March next following.]  
CHAPTER II  
THE JUTE MANUFACTURES  DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL  
3. Establishment and constitution of the Council .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purposes of this Act, a Council to be called the Jute Ma nufactures Development Council.  
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,  and to 
contract, and shall by  the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Council shall be at Calcutta in the State of West Bengal, and the Council 
may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices or agencies at o ther places 
in or out side India.  
(4) The Council shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman to be appoi nted by the Central Government;  
(b) such number of members not exceeding eight as the Central Government may think fit to be 
appoint ed by it from among the Ministries of the Ce ntral Government dealing with — 
(i) agriculture;  
(ii) commerce (textiles);  
                                                           
1. 1st May , 1984, vide notification No. S.O. 325(E), dated 28th April, 1984, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 1994, s. 2, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1994).  3 
 (iii) finance;  
(iv) industry;  
(v) civil supplies;  
(vi) co-operation;  
(c) six members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical order 
to represent respectively the Governments of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
Meghalaya, Orissa, Tripura and West Bengal in which jute is cultivated on  a large scale:  
Provided that such appointment shall be made on the recommendation of the Gov ernment of the 
State concerned;  
(d) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the producers of jute 
manufactures;  
(e) two  members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the exporters of jute 
manufactures;  
(f) three members to be appointed by the Central Government to  represent the growers of jute;  
(g) three members to be appointed by the Central Government to  represent the interests of 
workmen employed in factori es producing jute manufactures;  
(h) five members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons who, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, are experts in jute technological research , jute marketing or 
agricultural economics.  
(5) The Council shall elect, fr om amongst its members, a Vice -Chairman who shall exercise such of 
the powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be 
delegated to him by  the Chairman.  
(6) The term of office and other conditions of service of the members and the manner of filling 
vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the members 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(7) Any  officer of the Central Government, not being a member of the Council, when deputed by that 
Government in this behalf, shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Council and take part in the 
proceedings thereof, but sh all not have the right to vote . 
(8) The Council may associate with itself, in such manner, subject to such conditions and for such 
purposes as may be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with 
any of the provisions of this Act and a person so asso ciated shall be entitled to receive such allowances or 
fees as may be fixed by the Central Government and shall have the right to take part in the proceedings of 
the Council relevant to the purpose for which he has been associated, but shall not have the r ight to vote.  
(9) No act or proceeding of the Council or any committee appointed by it under section 5 shall be 
invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, th e Council or such committee; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Council or such 
committee; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council or such committee not af fecting the merits of 
the case.  
(10) The Council shall meet at such times and places and shall  observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be 
prescribed.  
4. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman and other             
members. —(1) The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such 
conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may from time to 
time be f ixed by the Central Government.  4 
 (2) The other members of  the Council shall receive such allowances as may be fixed by the Central 
Government.  
5. Committees of the Council .—(1) The Council may appoint such committees as may be necessary 
for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its funct ions under this Act.  
(2) The Council shall have the power to co -opt as members of any committee appointed under               
sub-section ( 1) such number of persons who are not members of the Council as it may think fit and the 
persons so co -opted shall have the right to attend meetings of the committee and take part in its 
proceedings but sh all not have the right to vote.  
(3) The persons co -opted as me mbers of a committee under sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to receive 
such allowances or fees for attending  the meetings of the committee as may be fixed by the Central 
Government.  
6. Officers of the Council and other staff .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person 
employed by the Jute Manufactures Development Council established under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 
of the Industries (Development and Reg ulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951 ), immediately before the date of 
establishment of the Council under section 3 of this Act, shall, on and from such date, become an 
employee of the Council wit h such designation as the Council may determine and shall hold his office or 
service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions as 
he would have held on such date if the Council had not been established and shall continue to do so 
unless and until his employment in the Council is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms 
and conditions a re duly altered by the Council:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such person shall 
not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous appr oval of the Central Government.  
(2) Every employee holding any office under the Central Government immediately before the date of 
establishment of the Council solely or mainl y for or in connection with such matters as are relevant to the 
functions of the Council under this Act, shall, on and from such date, be treated as on deputation with the 
Council but shall hold his office in the Council by the same tenure and upon the sam e terms and 
conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits 
as he would have held such office, if the Council had not been established and shall continue to do so 
until the Central Government, ei ther on its own motion or at the request of the Council, recalls such 
employee to its service or until the Council, with the concurrence of the Central Government, duly 
absorbs such employee in its regular service, whichever is  earlier:  
Provided that durin g the period of deputation of any such employee with the Council, the Council 
shall pay to the Central Government, in respect of every such employee, such contribution towards his 
leave salary, pension and gratuity as the Central Gover nment may, by order, determine:  
Provided further that any such employee, who has, in respect of the proposal of the Council to absorb 
him in its regular service, intimated within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Council his 
intention of not becoming a regula r employee of the Council, shall not be absorbed by the Council in its 
regular service.  
(3) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of the employees serving under the Central Government 
are to be treated as on deputation with the Council under this sect ion, such dispute or doubt shall be 
decided by the Central Government in consultation with the Council and the decision of the Central 
Government thereon shall be final.  
(4) For the purposes of enabling it efficiently to discharge its functions under this  Act, the Council 
shall, subject to the other provisions of this section and to such rules as may be made in this behalf by the 
Central Government, appoint (whether on deputation or otherwise) such number of officers and other 
employee s as it may consider necessary:  
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers as may be specified in such rules, shall be 
subject to the appr oval of the Central Government.  5 
 (5) Subject to the other provisions of this section, every officer or other employee appoin ted by the 
Council shall be subject to such conditions of service and shall be entitled to such rem uneration as may be 
prescribed.  
7. Functions of the Council .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Council to promote, by such measures as 
it thinks fit, the development of production of jute manufactures by increasing the efficiency and 
productivity in the jute industry.  
(2) Without prejudice to the gener ality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures referred to 
therein may provide for —  
(a) evolving  an integrated approach to jute cultivation in the matter of formulation of schemes, 
extension work, implementation and evaluation of schemes aimed at increasing the yield of jute and 
improving the q uality thereof;  
(b) promoting arrangements for bet ter mar keting and sale of jute;  
(c) recommending targets for production for jute industry, co -ordinating production programmes 
and review ing progress from time to time;  
(d) suggesting norms of efficiency for jute industry with a view to eliminating waste, obtaini ng 
optimum production, improv ing quality and reducing costs;  
(e) promoting standa rdisation of jute manufactures;  
(f) maintenance and improvement of existing markets and development of new markets outside 
India for jute manufactures and devising marketing strategy in consonance with the demand for s uch 
manufactures outside India;  
(g) sponsoring, assisting, co -ordinating or encouraging scientific, technological and economic 
research into the matters relating to materials, equipment, methods of production, pr oduct 
development, including discovery and development of new materials, equipment and methods and of 
improvements in those alrea dy in use in the jute industry;  
(h) ensuring stabilisation of prices of jute man ufactures in and outside India;  
(i) promoting o r undertaking the collection and formulation of statistics regarding jute industry;  
(j) propagating information useful to the growers, dealers and exporters of jute and producers or 
manufacturers of j ute goods;  
(k) such othe r matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Council shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with and subject to such 
rules as may be made by the Central Government and such rules may be in particular make provisions for 
ensuring that the Council functions in close liaison with Union agencies, institutions and authorities 
concerned with the jute manufactures (including cultivation of jute) an d avoids duplication of effort.  
8. Dissolution of the Council .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and for reasons to be specified therein, direct that the Council shall be dissolved from such date 
and for such period as may be  specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Council to make representations against the proposed dissolution and shall consider the 
represent ations, if any, of the Council.  
(2) When the Council is dissolv ed under the provisions of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all the members, notwithstanding that their term of office has not expired, shall, from the date 
of dissolution, vacate  their offices as such members;  
(b) all the powers and duties of the Council shall, during the period of dissolution, be exercised 
and perfo rmed by such person or persons as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf and 
their remuneration shal l be such as may be prescribed;  
(c) all funds and other properties vested in the Council shall, during the period of dissolution, vest  
in the Cen tral Government; and  6 
 (d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Council shall be reconstituted in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE,  ACCOUNTS AND  AUDIT  
9. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Gov ernment may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Council by way of grants or loans such 
sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
10.  Jute Fund .—(1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Jute Fund and th ere shall be 
credited thereto —  
(a) any fees that may be levied and collected under this Act or the  rules made thereunder;  
(b) any  sums of money paid or any grants or loans granted by the Centra l Governmen t for the 
purposes of this Act;  
(c) any grants or loans that may be made by any perso n for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for meeting the cost of the mea sures referred to in section 7;  
(b) for  meeting the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the officers and other 
employees of the Council;  
(c) for meeting the other administ rative expenses of the Council;  
(d) for repayment of any loans.  
11. Borrowing powers of the Council .—Subject to s uch rules as may be made in this behalf by the 
Central Government, the Council shall have the power to borrow on the security of the Jute Fund or any 
other asset for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
12. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Council shall main tain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the profit and loss account, and the balance sheet, 
in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with 
the Comptroller  and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be p ayable by the Council to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Council shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has in connection with 
the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other doc uments and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Council.  
(4) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shal l be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
13. Directions by Central Government .—The Council shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
14. Returns and reports of activities of the Council .—(1) The Council shall furnish to the Central  
Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, such returns and statements 7 
 and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the development of jute 
manufactures, as the Central Government may, from time t o time, require.  
(2) The Council shall furnish a programme of its activities for each year to the Central Government 
for its info rmation and directions, if any.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Council shall, as soon as possible, after 
the end of each year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form, and before such date, as 
may be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes during the 
previous year.  
(4) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 3) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Power to call for reports and returns. —The Council may require a produ cer of a jute 
manufacture to furnish, for the purposes of this Act, such statistical or other information in such form and 
within such period as m ay be specified by the Council.  
16. Power of inspection .—Any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or by the 
Council or any officer of the Council authorised by the Chairman in writing, may enter, at all reasonable 
times, any place or premises where jute manufactures are stored, kept or expo sed for sale and may require 
the production for inspection of any book, register, record or other paper kept therein and ask for any 
information relating to the production, storage or keeping for sale of jute manufactures.  
17. Penalties. —Whoever fails to comply with any order or direction given under this Act, within 
such time as may be specified in the said order or direction, or contravene s or attempts to contravene or 
abets the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereun der, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both.  
18. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every per son who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due  diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
conniv ance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpo ses of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in  the firm.  
19. Cognizance of offences. —No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
20. Sanction for prosecutions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimi nal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ), no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act 
except with the previous san ction of the Central Government  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against t he Central Government, or the Council or any committee appointed by it, or any member of 8 
 the Council or such committee, or any officer or other employee of the Central Government or the 
Council or any other person authorised by the Central Government or th e Council or the Chairman for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
22. Members, officers and employees of the Council to be public servants. —All the members and 
all officers and other employees of the Council when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
23. Suspension of op eration of Act. —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances 
have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act should cease to be 
imposed and if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to a specified extent and for 
such period as may be specified in the notification, the operation of all or any of the provisions of this 
Act, in all or any of the territo ries to which this Act extends.  
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has, under sub -section ( 1), been suspended or 
relaxed, such suspension or relaxation may, at any time while this Act remains in force, be removed by 
the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(3) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification o r both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued, the 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice  to the validity of 
anything previousl y done under that notification.  
24. Application of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other l aw for the time being in force.  
25. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for  all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the powers and functions of the Vice -Chairman of the Council under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 3;  
(b) the term of office and other conditions of service of members, the manner of filling vacancies 
among, a nd the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, members, under                   
sub-section ( 6) of section 3;  
(c) the manner in which, the conditions subject to which and the purposes for which persons may 
be associated by the Coun cil under sub -section ( 8) of section 3;  
(d) the times and places at which the Council shall meet, the rules of procedure to be observed in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings and the number of members which shall form a 
quorum at a meetin g under sub -section ( 10) of section 3;  
(e) the conditions and limitations subject to which the Council may appoint officers  and other 
employees under sub -section ( 4) of section 6;  
(f) the conditions of service and the remuneration of officers and other emp loyees appo inted by 
the Council under sub -section ( 5) of section 6;  
(g) the matters in respect of which the Council may undertake measures in the discharge of its 
functions under clause ( k) of sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(h) the remuneration payable to the person or persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8;  9 
 (i) the conditions subject to which the Council shall borrow on the security of the Jute Fund or 
any other asset under section 11;  
(j) the form and ma nner in which the accounts of the Council shall be maintained under                           
sub-section ( 1) of section 12;  
(k) the time at which and the form and manner in which the Council shall furnish returns, 
statements and other particulars under s ub-section ( 1) of section 14;  
(l) the form in which and the date before which the Council shall furnish to the Central 
Government the report of its activities, policy and programmes under sub -section ( 3) of section 14;  
(m) any other matter which is to be o r may be prescribed or provid ed for by rules under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be compr ised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that t he rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done  under that rule.  
--------------------------The Mines (Amendment) Act, 1983--------------------------
1 THE MINES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1983  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. [Repealed .]  
8. [Repealed .] 
9. [Repealed .] 
10. [Repealed .] 
11. [Repealed .] 
12. [Repealed .] 
13. [Repealed .] 
14. [Repealed .] 
15. [Repealed .] 
16. [Repealed .] 
17. [Repealed .] 
18. [Repealed .] 
19. [Repealed .] 
20. [Repealed .] 
21. [Repealed .] 
22. [Repealed .] 
23. [Repealed .] 
24. [Repealed .] 
25. [Repealed .] 
26. [Repealed .] 
27. [Repealed .] 
28. [Repealed .] 
29. [Repealed .] 
30. [Repealed .] 
31. [Repealed .] 
32. [Repealed .] 
33. [Repealed .] 
34. [Repealed .] 
35. [Repealed .] 
36. [Repealed .] 
37. [Repealed .] 
38. [Repealed .] 
39. [Repealed .] 
40. [Repealed .] 
41. [Repealed .] 
42. [Repealed .] 
43. [Repealed .] 2 SECTIONS  
44. [Repealed .] 
45. [Repealed .] 
46. [Repealed .] 
47. [Repealed .] 
48. [Repealed .] 
49. Transitory provision.  
  3 THE MINES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1983  
[25th December , 1983.]  
An Act further to amend the Mines Act, 1952.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year o f the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Mines (Amendment) Act, 1983.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
49. Transitory provision. —(1) As from the date of constitution of the Committee under sub -section 
(1) of section 12 of the principal Act as amended by this Act — 
(i) any Mining Board constituted under section 12 of the principal Act and functioning as such on 
the aforesaid date shall stand dissolved;  
(ii) the Chairman and members of any such Board, who on the aforesaid date are members of that 
Mining Board shall cease to hold office as such;  
(iii) all proceedings pending on the aforesaid date in any Mining Board shall stand transferred to 
the said Committee which shall deal with them as if they had been pending  therein.  
(2) Anything done or any action taken before the aforesaid date by any Mining Board shall, so far as 
it is not inconsistent with any of the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, be as valid 
and effective as if it had been done o r taken by the Committee.  
 
 
                                                           
1. 31st May , 198 4, vide notification No. S.O. 411(E), dated 31stMay , 198 4, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part I I, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Sections  2 to 48  rep. Act 19 of 1988 , s. 2 and the First Schedule ( w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  
--------------------------The Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity and Secrecy) Act, 1983--------------------------
1 THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (OBLIGATION AS  TO FIDELITY AND 
SECRECY) ACT, 1983  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy . 
4. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy.  
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
 
 
  2 THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (OBLIGATION AS  TO FIDELITY AND 
SECRECY) ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 48 OF 1983  
[30th December , 1983 .] 
An Act to provide for the obligation of public financial institutions as to fidelity and secrecy.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Public Financial Institutions (Obligation as to Fidelity and 
Secrecy) Act, 1983.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, “public financial institution ” means— 
(a) the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited, a company formed and 
registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1913(7 of 1913);  
(b) the Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India Limited, a company formed and registered 
under the Companies Act, 1956(1 of 1956); or  
(c) any other institution, being a company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 
1956(1 of 1956) or a company to which the provisions of section 619 of that Act apply, which the 
Central Government may, having regard to the nature of the business carried on by such institution, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify to be a public financial institution for the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) Every notification issued under claus e (c) of sub -section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be, after it is 
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.  
3. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy .—(1) A public financial institution shall not, except as 
otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2) or in any other law for the time being in force, divulge any 
information relating to, or to the affairs of, its constituents except in circumstances in which it is, in 
accordance with the law or practice and usage, customary among bankers, necessary or appropria te for 
the public financial institution to divulge such information.  
(2) A public financial institution may, for the purpose of efficient discharge of its function s, collect 
from, or furnish to, — 
(a) the Central Government; or  
(b) the State Bank of India c onstituted under section 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955(23 of 
1955), any subsidiary bank within the meaning of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959(38 of 1959), any corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or under section 3 of the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 1980),  any other 
scheduled bank within the meaning of the Reserve Bank of India  Act, 1934(2 of 1934); or  
(c) any other public financial institution,  
such credit information or other information as it may consider useful for the purpose, in such manner and 
at such time as it may think fit.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “credit information ” shall have the 
same meaning as in clause ( c) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) subject 
to the modification that the banking company referred to therei n shall mean a bank referred to in clause 
(b) of this sub -section or a public financial institution . 
1[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the Credit 
Information Co mpanies (Regulation) Act, 2005  (30 of 2005) .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act  30 of 2005 , s. 34 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 14-12-2006 ). 3 4. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy .—Every director, member of any committee, auditor or 
officer or any other employee of a public financial institution to which th is Act applies, shall, — 
(a) before entering upon his duties; or  
(b) where  he has entered upon his duties as such before the date on which this Act became 
applicable to such institution, within thirty days from the date on which this Act became applicable to 
such institution,  
make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the for m set out in the Schedule to this Act.  
1*   *   *   *   *  
                                                           
1. Sections  5and 6 rep. by Act 1 9 of 1988 , s. 2 and the First Schedule ( w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  4 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 4)  
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I, _____________________________________________, do hereby declare that I will faithfully, 
truly and to the best of my skill and ability, execute and perform the duties required of me as director, 
member of any Committee, auditor, officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the 
____________________ ____ * and which properly relate to the office or position held by me in, or in 
relation to, the  
* 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs o f the  _____________________________  * or to 
the affairs of any person having any dealing with the _______________________ *nor will I allow any 
such person to inspect, or have access to, any books or documents belonging to, or in the possession of, 
the __________________ *and relating to the business of the ____________________ *or the business of 
any per son having any dealing with the ___________  
 
Signed before me.  
 
Signature . 
 
 
*Here insert the name of the public financial institution concerned.  
 
--------------------------The Punjab Disturbed Areas Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE PUNJAB DISTURBED AREAS ACT, 1983  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definition . 
3. Powers to declare areas to be disturbed areas . 
4. Power to fire upon persons contravening certain orders . 
5. Powers to destroy arms dump, fortified positions, etc . 
6. Protection of persons acting under sections 4 and 5 . 
7. Repeal and saving . 
 
 
  2 
 THE PUNJAB DISTURBED AREAS ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1983  
[8th December, 1983 .] 
An Act to make better provision for the suppression of disorder and for the restoration and 
maintenance of public order in disturbed areas in Punjab.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fourth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The Punjab Disturbed Areas 
Act, 1983.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Punjab.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7th day of October, 1983.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “disturbed area ” means an area which is for the time being  declared by 
notification under s ection 3 to be a disturbed area.  
3. Powers to declare areas to be disturbed areas .—The State Government may, by notifica tion in 
the Official Gazette, declare that the whole or any part of any district of Punjab as may be specified in the 
notification, is a disturbed area.  
4. Power to f ire upon persons contravening certain orders .—Any Magistrate or Police Of ficer not 
below t he rank of Sub -Inspector or Havi ldar in case of the Armed Branch of the Police may, if he is of 
opinion that it is necessary so to do for the maintenance of public order, after giving such due warning, as 
he may consider necessary, fire upon, or otherwise use force, even to the causing of death, against any 
person who is acting in contravention of any la w or order for the time being in force in the disturbed area, 
prohibiting the assembly of five or more persons or the carrying of weapons or of things capable of being 
used as weapons or of fire -arms, ammunition or explosive substances.  
5. Powers to destro y arms dump, fortified position s, etc.—Any Magistrate or Police Officer not 
below the rank of a Sub -Inspector may, if he is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do, destroy any 
arms dump, prepared or fortified position or shelter from which armed atta cks arc made or are likely to be 
made or are attempted to be made or any structure used as training camp for armed volun teers or utilized 
as a hide -out by armed gangs or absconders wanted for any offence.  
6. Prot ection of persons acting under s ections 4 and 5 .—No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the1[Central Government] against any 
person in respect of anything done or purporting to be done in exerc ise of the powers conferred by 
sections  4 and 5.  
7. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Punjab Disturbed Areas Ordinance, 1983  (5 of 1983) , is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the  corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by President Act 2 of 1989, s. 2 , for “State  Government ” (w.e.f. 3 -4-1989).  
--------------------------The Transformer and Switchgear Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1983--------------------------
1 
 THE TRANSFORMER AND SWITCHGEAR  
LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1983  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUI SITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Central Government or Andrew Yule not to be liable for prior liabilities.  
6. Power of the Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in 
Andrew Yule.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount.  
8. Payment of further amount.  
 
 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  COMPANY  
9. Management , etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYE ES OF THE  COMPANY  
12. Continuance  of employees.  
13. Provident fund and other funds.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF  PAYMENTS  
SECTION S 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments . 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner . 
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Andrew Yule . 
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
18. Priority of claims . 
19. Examination of claims . 
20. Admission or rejection of claims . 
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants . 
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company . 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect . 
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Andrew Yule.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
27. Delegation of powers . 
28. Penalties . 
29. Offences by companies . 
30. Power to make rules . 
31. Power to remove difficulties . 
32. Repeal and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE TRANSFORMER AND SWITCHGEAR LIMITED  
(ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1983  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1983  
[25th December , 1983 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Transformer and 
Switchgear Limited with a view to securing the better utilisation of the available infra -
structure thereof and to modernise and augment the production of transfor mers, switchgears 
and other allied electrical equipments by the said undertakings so as to subserve the interests 
of the general public be ensuring the continued supply of the aforesaid articles which are 
essential to the needs of the economy of the countr y and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Transformer and Switchgear Limited are engaged in the production of certain articles 
mentioned in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  
(65 of 19 51), under the heading “ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT ”; 
AND WHEREAS  the Company had been suffering heavy losses for a number of years with the result 
that a majority of the workers of the Company had been laid off and the affairs of the Company are being 
managed in  a manner prejudicial to the interests of the Company and the public interest;  
AND WHEREAS  for the purpose of securing the better utilisation of the available infra -structure of the 
undertakings of the Company and for modernising and augmenting the product ion of transformers, 
switchgears and other allied electrical equipments by the said undertakings, investment of a large amount 
is necessary;  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Transformer and Switchgear Limited 
to enable the Central Government to have such investments made so as to subserve the interests of the 
general public by the continuance by the undertakings of the Compan y of the production and supply of 
the aforesaid articles which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament, in the Thirty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and c ommencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Transformer and Switchgear 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1983.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 8th day of November, 1983.  
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Andrew Yule ” means Andrew Yule and Company Limited, Calcutta, a company 
formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956);  
(b) “appointed day ” means the 8th day of November, 1983;  
(c) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 14;  
(d) “Company ” means the Transformer and Switchgear Limited, being a company as 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), and having its registered office at 21, 
Guindy Road, Adyar, Madra s-6000020;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “specified date ” in relation to any provision of this Act, means such date as the 
Central Government m ay, by notification, specify for the purposes of that provision and 
different dates may be specified for different provisions of this Act;   4 
 (h) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act, 
1956  (1 of 1956), shall have  the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE  COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the 
Company .—On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and 
interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand 
transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of th e Company shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, 
movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery 
and equipment, cash balances, cash on h and, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other 
rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed 
day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the Company, whether within or outside 
India,  and all books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating 
thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 
shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, 
charge, lien and all other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or 
order of any court, tribunal or other authority restricting the use of such properties in any manner 
shall be deemed to have been  withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgage e of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central 
Government and every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any 
such property shall give, within such time and in such manner a s may be prescribed, an 
intimation to the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property 
referred to in sub -section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or 
in relation to, any such property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
interests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount 
specified in section 7 and also out of the amount determined under section 8, but no such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property which has 
vested in the Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Company in rela tion to any undertaking 
which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, at any time before the appointed 
day and in force immediately before that day, shall continue to be in force on and after such day 
in accordance with its tenor in relation to, and for the purposes of, such undertaking and on and 
from the date of vesting of such undertaking under section 6 in Andrew Yule, that company shall 
be deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other 
instrument had been granted to Andrew Yule and that company shall hold it for the remainder of 
the period for which the Company would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in 
relati on to any property which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted 
or preferred by or against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or 
be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of th e undertakings of the 
Company or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be 
continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the Central Government, or where the 
undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6, to vest in Andrew Yule, by or against 
Andrew Yule.   5 
 5. Central Government or Andrew Yule not to be liable for prior liabilities .—(1) Every 
liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability 
of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and not against the Central Government, or, 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest in Andrew Yule, 
against Andrew Yule.  
(2) For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared tha t,— 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other provision of this 
Act, no liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be 
enforceable against the Central Government, or where the undertaki ngs of the Company are 
directed under section 6 to vest in Andrew Yule, against Andrew Yule;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim 
or dispute which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, 
or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest in Andrew 
Yule, against Andrew Yule;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention 
of a provision of any law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed under section 6 to vest 
in And rew Yule, against Andrew Yule.  
6. Power of the Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the 
Company in Andrew Yule .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the 
Central Government may, subject to such terms and conditions as it may think fit to impose, 
direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of 
the Company in relation to its undertakings, which have vested in the Central Government under 
section 3, shall, i nstead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in Andrew Yule 
either on the date of the notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than 
the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the rig ht, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings vest in 
Andrew Yule under sub -section ( 1), Andrew Yule shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
deemed to have become the owner in relation to such undertakings, and all the right s and 
liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date 
of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of Andrew Yule.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under 
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings, there shall be paid by the Central Government to the Company, in 
cash, and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees seventy -eight lakhs and 
twenty -six thousand.  
8. Payment of further amount .—(1) The amount specified in section 7 shall carry simple 
interest at the rate of four per cent.  per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day 
and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is made by the Central Government to 
the Commissioner.  
(2) The amount determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be paid  
by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 7.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company, in 
relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Governmen t under section 3, shall 6 
 be discharged from the amount referred to in section 7, and also from the amount determined 
under sub -section ( 1) in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDE RTAKINGS OF THE  COMPANY  
9. Management , etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the 
Company, the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Government 
under section 3, shall, where a directio n has been made by the Central Government under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 6, vest in Andrew Yule and thereupon Andrew Yule shall be entitled to 
exercise, to the exclusion of all other persons, all such powers and do all such things as the 
Company was aut horised to exercise and do in relation to its undertakings.  
10. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Com pany to 
deliver all assets, etc .—(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company in Andrew Yule, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company immediately before such vesting, shall be bound to deliver to Andrew Yule, all assets, 
books of account, registers and other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of 
the Company.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the 
circumstances of the case to Andrew Yule and that company may also, if it is considered 
necessary so to do, apply to the Central Government at any time for  instructions as to the manner 
in which the management of the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted or in relation 
to any other matter arising in the course of such management.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession .—(1) Any person who 
has, on the appointed day, in his possession or under his control, any assets, books, documents or 
other papers relating to any of the undertakings owned by the Company, which have vested in 
the Central Government or in Andrew Yule under  this Act, and which belong to the Company or 
would have so belonged, if the undertakings owned by the Company had not vested in the 
Central Government or Andrew Yule, shall be liable to account for the said assets, books, 
documents and other papers to the  Central Government or Andrew Yule and shall deliver them 
up to the Central Government or Andrew Yule or to such person or persons as the Central 
Government or Andrew Yule may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule may take or ca use to be taken all necessary 
steps for securing possession of the undertakings of the Company which have vested in the 
Central Governmen t or Andrew Yule under this Act.  
(3) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this 
behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all its properties and assets, as on the 
appointed day, pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government 
under section 3, and, for this purpose, the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall afford to 
the Company all reasonable facilities.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE  COMPANY  
12. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every  person who has been, immediately before the 
appointed day, employed in any of the undertakin gs of the Company shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government; and  
(b) where  the undertakings of the Company are directed under sub -section ( 1) or section 
6 to vest in Andrew Yule, an employee of Andrew Yule on and from the date of such vesting,  7 
 and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the c ase may be, with 
the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to 
him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under 
the Central Government or And rew Yule, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration 
and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case 
may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking of the Company to the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall not entitle such 
officer or other emp loyee to any compensation under this Act or under any order law for the time being in 
force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
13. Providen t fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of the 
undertakings of the Company, the monies relatable to the officers or other employees, whose services 
have become transferred, by or un der this Act, to the Central Government or Andrew Yule, shall, out of 
the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund, 
welfare fund or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Governmen t or Andrew Yule, as 
the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or Andrew 
Yule, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or that company in such manner as may 
be prescribed.  
CHA PTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF  PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the Company under sections 7 and 8, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they h ave 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay in cas h to the Commissio ner, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 7, and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company under section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shal l be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of the Company 
in relation to which payme nt has been made to him under this Act.  
(4) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the Company.  8 
 16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Andrew Yule .—(1) The Central Government or 
Andrew Yule, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion of 
all other persons, any money due to the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 
Central Govern ment or Andrew Yule, and realised after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the 
realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, may make a claim to the 
Commissioner with regard  to every payment made by it after the appointed day for discharging any 
liability of the Company in relation to any period prior to the appointed day; and every such claim shall 
have priority in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to  the matter in relation to which 
such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or Andrew Yule.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day, which have no t been discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the 
liabilities of the Company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
with regard to any of the matters specified in the Schedule pertaining to  the undertakings of the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within  the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
18. Priority of claims .—The claims made under section 17 shall have priorities in accordance with 
the following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims speci fied in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly; and  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the lia bilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
19. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 17, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is no sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category , he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which every 
claimant  shall file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the country 
and one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commissioner may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time spe cified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and af ter giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil   9 
 court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), whil e trying a suit, in respect of  the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of e vidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973(2 of 1974).  
(7) A claimant, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner,  may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to b e the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court of Madras and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of the High Court.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due, and on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of 
such claim shall stand discharged.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company .—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to 
the undertakings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance t o the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property has vested in the Central 
Government or Andrew Yule under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property does not 
belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for  the Central Government or Andrew Yule to continue to 
possess such machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which 
they were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed a mount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order, if any, for payment of the claim, being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Andrew 
Yule .—Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its undertakings, which has vested in 
the Central Government under section 3, for any service, sale or supply  and in force immediately before 
the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from the appointed day, 
cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, in writing, by the 
Central Go vernment or Andrew Yule, in which such undertakings have been vested under this Act, and in 
ratifying such contract, the Central Government or Andrew Yule may make such alteration or 
modificat ion therein as it may think fit:  10 
 Provided that the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall not omit to ratify a contract and shall not 
make any alteratio n or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government or Andrew Yule; and  
(b) except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other employee of that Government or Andrew 
Yule or other person authorised by the Central Government or Andrew Yule for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or 
other employees or Andrew Yule or other person authorised by the Central Government or Andrew Yule 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act.  
27. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government  may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section, section 30 
and section 31, may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notificatio n. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
 28. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having  in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or Andrew Yule; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming pa rt of the undertakings of 
the Company; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or Andrew Yule or any person 
or body of persons specified by that Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, any document 
relating to the und ertakings of the Company, which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or Andrew Yule or to any person or body of 
persons specified by that Government or Andrew Yule, any assets, books of account, re gisters or 
other documents in his possession, custody or control, relating to the undertakings of the Company; 
or 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the undertakings of the 
Company; or  
(f) prefers  any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false 
or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with bot h. 
29. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if  he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.   11 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
comm itted by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary  or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm , means a partner in the firm.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions  of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation shall be given to th e 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other fund under section 13 shall be 
dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and  if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have eff ect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
31. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
32. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Transformer and Switchgear Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Ordinance, 1983  (Ord. 11 of 1983) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  12 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 17, 19, 20 and 22)  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE  COMPANY  
Category I — 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the Company.  
(b) Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the employees for provident fund, 
Employees ’ State Insurance contribution, premium relating to Life Insurance Corporation of India 
or for any other purposes.  
(c) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company to the provident fund, 
Employees ’ State Insurance Fund, Life Insurance Corporation premium and any other arrear 
under any law for the time being in force (excluding  gratuity).  
Category II — 
Principal amou nt of secured loans advanced by — 
(i) Central Government;  
(ii) State Government;  
(iii) Banks;  
(iv) Public financial institutions;  
(v) Others.  
Category  III— 
Principal amount of unsecured loans advanced by — 
(i) Central Government;  
(ii) State Government ; 
(iii) Banks;  
(iv) Public financial institutions.  
Category IV — 
(a) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any dues payable to the State Electricity Boards or other Government or semi -
Government institutions for supply of goods or services.  
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances.  
Category V — 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to Central Government, State Government and 
local authorities.  
(b) Any other loans or dues.  
 
