--------------------------The Aluminium Corporation of India Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Aluminium Undertaking) Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE ALUMINIUM CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING) ACT, 1984  
_________  
  ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definition s. 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the Aluminium undertaking of the 
Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company not to be liable for prior liabilities.  
6. Vesting of the Aluminium undertaking in Bharat Aluminium Company.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amounts.  
8. Payment of further amounts.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING  
 
9. Management, etc., of the Aluminium undertaking.  
10. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
 
12. Continuance of employees.  
13. Provident fund and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
 
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments . 
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Bharat Aluminium Company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
18. Priority of claims.  
19. Examin ation of claims . 
20. Admission or rejection of claims.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants . 
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company . 
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be transferred to the general revenue account.  2 
 SECTIONS  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect.  
25. Contracts in relation to the Aluminium undertaking to cease to have effect unless ratified by the 
Central Government or Bharat Aluminium Company . 
26. Penalties . 
27. Offences by companies . 
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29. Delegation of powers . 
30. Power to make rules . 
31. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE ALUMINIUM CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING) ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1984  
[2nd June, 1984 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest of the Aluminium 
Corporation of India Limited in relation to its under taking as Jaykay Nagar, near As ansol 
(West Bengal) for the purpose of ensuring the continuity of produ ction of aluminium and 
aluminium fabricated products which are essential to the needs of the community and thereby 
to give effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (b) 
of Article 39 of the Constitution.  
WHERE AS the undertaking of the A luminium  Corporation of India Limited, a company within the 
meaning of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  at Jaykay Nagar, near As ansol (West Bengal) was 
engaged in the production of aluminium and aluminium fabricated products falling under the First 
Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951;  
AND WHEREAS as result of deterioration of operating efficiency, grave financial improprieties, failure 
to maintain harmonious industrial relations and other reasons,  the Company had to resort to the closure of 
the said undertaking in1973;  
AND WHEREAS efforts were made from 1975 onwards by the Central Government and the 
Government of West Bengal to secure the revival of the said undertaking with a view to the rehabilitation 
of the workmen adversely affected by the closure of the undertaking and also for  augmenting the supply 
of aluminium and aluminium fabricated products and the efforts did not succeed as the entire capital of 
the Company had been eroded by outstanding liabilities and the management was unwilling to invest any 
funds;  
AND WHERE AS with a view to re -starting the said undertaking , the management of the said 
undertaking was taken over by the Central Government on the 1st day of May,1978 under the provisions 
of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act,1951;  
AND WHERE AS owing to the cond ition of the plant and machinery and other equipment and the grave 
deterioration which had already taken place in the operating efficiency thereof, the undertaking has not 
been able, in spite of financial and other assistance provided by the Central Govern ment and the 
Government of West Bengal, to become viable or generate the funds needed for the proper utilisation of 
its capacity;  
AND WHERE AS further investment of substantial sums of money is needed for the rehabilitation and 
replacement of the capital eq uipment and in view of the serious adverse financial condition of the 
Company and the state of the undertaking, the Company is not in a position to secure the funds necessary 
for such investment;  
AND WHERE AS it is necessary to make such investment for securing proper utilisation of available 
facilities for production of aluminium and aluminium fabricated products which are essential to the needs 
of the community, particularly in the industrial and power sector s; 
AND WHERE AS such investment is also necessary for securing the continued employment of the 
workmen employed in the said undertaking;  
AND WHERE AS it is necessary in the public interest to acquire the said undertaking to enable the 
Central Government to h ave such investment made and to ensure that the interests of the general public 
are served by the continuance of the said undertaking of the production of aluminium and aluminium 
fabricated products  
AND WHERE AS such acquisition is for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the 
principles specified in clause ( b) of article 39 of the Constitution;  4 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
  CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Aluminium Corporation of India Limited (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Aluminium Undertaking) Act, 1984.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Aluminium undertaking ”, in relation to the Company, means the undertaking of the 
Company located at Jaykay Nagar, near Asansol (West Bengal), being the industrial undertaking 
referred to in the order of the Government of India in the Ministry of Industry (Department of 
Industrial Development) No. S.O. 293 ( E)/ 18AA/ IDRA/ 78, dated the 1st day of May, 1978;  
(b) “appointed day ” means the date of commencement of this Act;  
(c) “Bharat Aluminium Company ” means the Bharat Aluminium Company Limited, a 
Government company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its 
registered office at New Delhi;  
(d) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 14;  
(e) “company ” means the Aluminium Corporation of India Limited, being a company within the 
meaning of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at 7, Council House 
Street, Calcutta;  
(f) “notification ” means a notification publishe d in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of that provision and different dates may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the Companies Act,                      
1956 ( 1 of 1956), shall have the meanings, respectively, assi gned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the Aluminium undertaking of the 
Company .—On the appointed day, the Aluminium  undertaking of the Company and the right, title and 
interest of the Company in relation to that undertaking, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, 
and shall vest in, the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The Aluminium  undertaking of the Company shall be deemed to 
include all properties and assets (including lands, quarries, mines, buildings, offices, factories, workshops, 
stores, plants, machinery and equipment, installations, instruments, laboratories, office furniture, 
stationery and equipment, ve hicles, staff quarters, workers’  colonies together with amenities and 
installations pertainin g thereto, cash balances, cash i n hand, reserve funds, investments, books, book 
debts, rights, leaseholds, powers, authorities and priv ileges) pertaining to the undertaking and all other 
rights and interests in, or arising out of, such properties and assets as were immediately before the 
appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the Company and all books of account, 
registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties and assets as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 
3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, 
lien and all other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, inju nction, decree or order of any 
court or other authority restricting the use of such properties or assets in any manner or appointing any 
receiver in respe ct of the whole or any part of such properties or assets shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  5 
 (3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in , or in relation to, any such property, shall give 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort gagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues in whole or in part, out of the amounts referred to in sections 7 and 8 but no such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property which has vested in the 
Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or other in strument granted to the Company in relation to the Aluminium  
undertaking which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed 
day and in force immediately before that day shall continue to be in force on and after su ch day in 
accordance with its tenor in relation to, and for the purposes of the said undertaking, and, on and from the 
date of vesting of such undertaking under section 6 , in the Bharat Aluminium  Company, that company 
shall be deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument 
had been granted to it and shall hold such licence or other instrument for the remainder of the period for 
which the Company would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in re lation to any 
property or asset  which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by 
or against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the Aluminium  undertaking or of anything contained in 
this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against 
the Central Government or where the Aluminium  undertaking is directed under section 6, to vest in the 
Bharat  Aluminium  Company , by or against that company.  
5. Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Com pany not to be liable for prior 
liabilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company in relation to the Aluminium  undertaking1in respect of 
any period prior to the appointed day shall be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable 
against it and not against the Central Government or where the Aluminium  undertaking is directed under 
section 6, to vest in the Bharat Aluminium  Company, against that company.  
(2) For the removal of doubt s, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability of the Company in relat ion to the 
Aluminium  undertaking in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable 
against the Central Government or where the Aluminium  undertaking is directed under section 6 to 
vest in the Bharat Aluminium  Company, against tha t company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any c ourt, Tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
Aluminium  undertaking, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute 
which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or where the 
Aluminium  undertaking is directed under section 6 to vest in the Bharat Aluminium  Company, 
against that company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day, for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force shall be enforceable against the Central Government or 
where the Aluminium  undertaking is directed under section 6 to vest in the Bharat Aluminium  
Company, against that company.  
6. Vesting of the Aluminium undertaking in Bharat Aluminium Company .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in sections 3 and 4, the Central Government  shall, as soon as may be, after                 
the appointed day, direct, by notification, that the Aluminium undertaking and the right, title and interest 
of the Company in relation to that undertaking which have vested in the Central Government under 
section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in the Bharat Aluminium 
Company either on the date of notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the 
appointed day) as may be specified in the n otification.  6 
 (2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to the Aluminium undertaking vest 
in the Bharat Aluminium Company under sub -section ( 1), the Bharat Aluminium Company shall, on and 
from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to the Aluminium 
undertaking, and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to the Aluminium 
undertaking shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and 
liabilities, respectively, of the Bharat Aluminium Company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT  OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amounts .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under section 
3, of the Aluminium undertaking and the right, title and interest of the  Company in relation to that 
undertaking, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, and in the manner 
specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees four crores and twenty -four lakhs.  
8. Payment of further amounts .—(1) For the d eprivation of the Company of the management of the 
Aluminium  undertaking, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, an 
amount calculated at the rate of rupees two thousand five hundred per mensem for the period 
commencing on the date on which the management of the Aluminium  was taken over in pursuance of the 
orders made by the Central Government under the provision of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) and ending on the appointed day.  
(2) The amount specified in section 7 and the amount calculated in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum for the period 
commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is made by 
the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(3) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specifi ed in section 7.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company in relation to 
the Aluminium undertaking which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall be 
discharged from the amount referred to in  section 7 and also from the amounts determined under sub -
sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE ALUMINIUM UNDERTAKING  
9. Management, etc., of the Aluminium  undertaking .—The general superintendence, direction, 
control and management of the affairs and business of the Aluminium undertaking shall, where a 
direction has been issued by the Central Government under section 6, vest in the Bharat Aluminium 
Company and thereupon the Bharat Aluminium Company shall be entitled to exercise to the exclusion of 
all other persons, all such powers and do all such things as the Company is authorised to exercise and do 
in relation to such undertaking.  
10. Power of Central Gov ernment to issue directions .—The Central Government may issue such 
directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Bharat Aluminium  Company 
and the Bharat Aluminium  Company may also, if it so desires, apply to the Central Gove rnment at any 
time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the Aluminium  undertaking shall be 
conducted by it or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such management.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc. , in their possession .—(1) Any person who has, on 
the appointed day , in his possession or under his control, any assets, books, documents or other papers 
relating to the Aluminium  undertaking which has vested in the Central Government or the Bharat 
Aluminium  Company under this Act shall be liable to account for the said assets, books, documents and 
other papers to the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Company and shall deliver them up to 
the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Compa ny or to such person or persons as the Central 
Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Company may specify in this behalf.  7 
 (2) The Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Company may take or cause to be taken all 
necessary steps for securing possession of the Aluminium  undertaking which has vested in the Central 
Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Company under this Act.  
(3) The Company shall, within such period as the Ce ntral Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all its properties and assets, as on the appointed day, 
pertaining to the Aluminium  undertaking which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, 
and f or this purpose the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Company shall afford to the 
Company all reasonable facilities.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS  RELATING TO CERTAIN EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately, before the appointed 
day, employed in the Aluminium  undertaking shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government; and  
(b) where the Aluminium  undertaking is directed under s ection 6, to vest in the Bharat 
Aluminium  Company, an employee of that company on and  from the date of such vesting,  
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Company, as the 
case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have 
been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment under the Central  Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Company, as the case may be, is 
duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central 
Government or the Bharat Aluminium  Company, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstand ing anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force , the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in the Aluminium  undertaking to the Central Government or the Bh arat Aluminium  Company shall not 
entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the 
time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
13. Provident fu nd and other funds .—(1)Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the persons employed by it, the 
monies relatable to the officers or other employees, whose services have becom e transferred, by or under 
this Act to the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company, shall, out, of the monies standing 
on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare fund or other 
fund, stand transferred  to, and vest in , the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company, as the 
case may be.  
(2)The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the Bharat 
Aluminium Company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or that company in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to t he Company under section 7 and s ection 8, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner ma y exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  8 
 (4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under th is section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash to the Commissioner, for payment to th e 
Company an amount equal to the amount specified in section 7 and the amounts payable to the Company 
under section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the Aluminium undertaking in 
relation to which payments have been made to him under this Act.  
(4) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) shall ensure to the benefit of the Company.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Government or Bharat Aluminium Company .—(1) The 
Central Government of the Bharat Aluminium Company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive 
up to the specified date, in the exclusion of all other persons, any money d ue to the Company, in relation 
to the Aluminium undertaking, realised after the app ointed day, notwithstanding that  the realisation 
pertains to a period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company, as the case may  be, may make a 
claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for 
discharging any liability of the Company pertaining to the Aluminium undertaking in relation to any 
period prior to the appointed day; and every s uch claim shall have priority in accordance with the 
priorities attaching under this Act, to the matter in relation to which such liability has been discharged by 
the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company, as the case may be.  
(3) Save as other wise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in relation to the Aluminium 
undertaking in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged on 
or before the specified date,  shall be the liabilities of the Com pany.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
in relation to the Aluminium  undertaking shall prefer  such claim before the Commissioner within thir ty 
days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
18. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with the following principles, n amely:— 
(a) Category I shall have precedence  over all other Categories and C ategory II shall have 
precedence over Category III,  and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly;  
(c) the question of discha rging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
19. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims to add under section 17, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of priorities.  9 
 (2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the  amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before which every claimant 
shall file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of a daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the country and 
in one issue of such daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commissione r may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time spe cified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and af ter giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, admit or reject, by order in writing, the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his  functions, including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of t he following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Pena l Code  (45 of 1860)  and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered of fice of the Company is situated : 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appoi nted to be the Commissioner, 
the appeal shall lie to the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such registered office is 
situated, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court.  
21. Disburs ement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due, and, on such payment, the liability of t he Company in respect of 
such claim shall stand discharged.  
22. Disbursement of amou nts to the c ompany .—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him under section 
15, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the Schedule, the Commissi oner shall 
disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property , has vested in the Central 
Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company under this Act, but such machinery, equipment, or other 
property d oes not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the Bharat 
Aluminium Company to continue to possess such machinery or equipment or other property on the same 
terms and conditions under which it was possessed by the Company i mmediately before the appointed 
day. 10 
 23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be transferred to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the off ice of the Commissioner is wound up, shall be transferred by the 
Commissioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Governme nt by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order, if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act , or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Contracts in relation to the Aluminium undertaking to cease to have effect unless ratified by 
the Central Government or Bharat Aluminium Company .—Every contract entered into by the 
Company in relation to the Aluminium undertaking for any service, sale or supply, and in force 
immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from 
such day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, b efore the expiry of that period, ratified, in writing, 
by the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company and, in ratifying such contract, the Central 
Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company may make such alterations or modificati ons therein as i t 
may think fit : 
Provided that the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company shall not omit to ratify a 
contract, and shall not make any alteration or modification in a cont ract,— 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered  into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company; and  
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in w riting its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
26. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property or assets forming part of the 
Aluminium undertaking, w rongfully withholds such property or assets from the Central Government 
or the Bharat Aluminium Company; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property or assets forming part of the 
Aluminium undertaking; or  
(c) wil fully withholds or fai ls to furnish to the Central Government, or the Bharat Aluminium 
Company or to any person or body of persons specified by that Government or company, any 
document or inventory relating to that undertaking which may be in his possession, custody or 
control;  or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government, or the Bharat Aluminium Company or to any 
person or body of persons specified by that Government or company, any property, assets, books of 
account, registers or other documents in his possession, custody  or control, relating to the Aluminium 
undertaking; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property or asset forming part of the Aluminium 
undertaking or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to 
be false or g rossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  11 
 27. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to  be proceeded a gainst and punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that th e offence was committed without  his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due di ligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivan ce of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or the Bharat Aluminium Company or any officer or other 
employee of that Government, or that company, or any person authorised by that Government or that 
company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the Bharat 
Aluminium  Company or any officer or o ther employee of that Government or that company or any person 
authorised by that Government or that company for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
29. Delegation of power s.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the power conferred by this section, section 30  
or section 31 may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be sp ecified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) The time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation  shall be given to the 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(b) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or other fund referred to in section 13 
shall be dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total perio d of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in t he rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the v alidity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  12 
 31. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day.  13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 18, 19  (1), 20 (1) and 22  (1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE ALUMINIUM  UNDERTAKING  
Category  I— 
Employees ’ dues on account of unpaid salaries and wages, contributions to be made by the Co mpany 
and the employees to the provident f und and Employees ’ State Insurance, premium relating to Life 
Insurance Corporation of India and an y other amounts due to employees, in respect of any period whether 
before or after the management of the Aluminium  undertaking had been taken over by the Central 
Government.  
Category II — 
Loans advanced by banks and financial institutions during the post-take over management period.  
Category III — 
Loans advanced by the Central Government and State Government during the post -take over 
management period.  
Category IV — 
Any credit availed of for the purpose of carrying on any trading or manufacturing operat ions during 
the post -take over management period.  
Category V — 
Any other loans obtained during the post -take over management period.  
Category VI — 
Secured loa ns obtained during the pre -take over management period.  
Category VII — 
Unsecured loans or other dues to creditors in relation to any transaction which took place during the 
pre-take over management period.  
Category VIII — 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues for the Central Government, State Government and local 
authorities or State Electricity Boar d in respect of any period whether before or after the management of 
the Aluminium  undertaking had been taken over by the Central Government.  
--------------------------The Asiatic Society Act, 1984--------------------------
1 THE ASIATIC SOCIETY ACT, 1984  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration of Asiatic Society as an institution of national importance . 
3. Definitions . 
4. Grants, loans, etc., by Central Government to Society . 
5. Audit of accounts of Society . 
6. Annual report . 
7. Prior approval of Central Government necessary for certain action by Society . 
8. Planning Board.  
9. Committees.  
10. Review of work done, inspection of assets, etc . 
11. Society to afford facilities to Committees.  
12. Power to issue directions to Society . 
13. Power of Central Government to assume functions of control . 
14. Act to have overriding effect . 
15. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 THE ASIATIC SOCIETY ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 5 OF 1984  
[23rd March, 1984 .] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the Asiatic Society having at present its registered 
office in Calcutta to be an institution of national importance and to provide for certain 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of t he Republic of India as fol lows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Asiatic Society Act, 1984 . 
(2) It shall come into force o n such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
 2. Declaration of Asiatic Society as an institution of national importance .—Whereas the late 
William Jones founded on the 15th day of January, 1784, an institution in Calcutta which is now known 
as the Asiatic Society and the objects of which are such as to make the institution one of national 
importance, it is hereby declared that the said Asiatic Society is an institution of national importance . 
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “memorandum ” means the memorandum of association of the Society;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “regulations ” includes any rule or regulation (by whatever name called) which the Society  is 
competent to make in the exercise of the powers conferred on it under the West Bengal Societies 
Registration Act, 1961  (West Bengal Act XXVI,1961) , but shall not include any bye -laws or standing 
orders made under the regulations for the conduct of its day -to-day administration  ; 
(d) “Society” means the Asiatic Society being a society within the meaning of the West Bengal 
Societies Registration Act, 1961 (West Bengal Act XXVI, 1961) , and having its registered office in 
Calcutta . 
 4. Grants, loans, etc. , by Central Government to Society .—For the purpose of enabling the 
Society to discharge efficiently its functions, including in particular those relating to research, literary, 
library, scientific and museological activities, collection of manuscripts, coins and art objects, and the 
publication of periodicals, books and other literature, the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Society in each financial year such 
sums of money as that Government considers necessary by way of grants, loa ns or otherwise . 
 5. Audit of accounts of Society .—(1) The Society shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such form as may be 
approved by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India . 
(2) The accounts of the Society shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Society to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -Gene ral of India . 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Society shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller  and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers an d to inspect the office of the 
Society . 
                                                           
1. 25th June , 1984 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 470(E), dated 25th June , 1984 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,         
sec. ( i). 3 (4) The accounts of the Society as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereof shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government and that Go vernment shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament . 
 6. Annual report .—The Society shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time each year as 
may be directed, its annual report giving full account of its activities, policies and programmes during the 
previous year and that Government shall cause the same to be laid be fore each House of Parliament . 
7. Prior approval of Central Government necessary for certain action by Society .—The Society 
shall not, except with the previous approval of the Central Government, — 
(a) alter, extend or abridge any of the purposes for which it has been established or for which it is 
being used immediately before the commencement of this Act, or amalgamate itself either wholly or 
partially with any other institution or society; or  
(b) alter or amend in any manner the memorandum or regulations;  or 
(c) sell or otherwise dispose of any property acquired by the Society with money specifically 
provided for such acquisition by the Central Government : 
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary in the case of any such movable property or 
class of movable property as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf by general or 
special order; or  
(d) be dissolved . 
 8. Planning Board .—(1) For the purpose of advising it with respect to the planning and 
implementation of the d evelopmental programmes of the S ociety and other matters concerning the 
Society, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a board to  be 
called the Planning Board (Asiatic Society ). 
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such  other members as may be appointed by the 
Central Government . 
(3) Subject to any rules which the Central Government may make in this behalf, the Board shall have 
the power to regulate its own procedure . 
(4) The term of office of, the procedure to be follow ed in the discharge of their functions by, the 
manner of filling casual vacancies among, the allowances, if any, payable to, and other matters 
concerning, the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed . 
9. Committees .—(1) The Central Government may, by notifications in the Official Gazette, 
constitute as many committees, as and when it considers it necessary, consisting of such number of 
person s as it thinks fit to appoint thereto and assign to each such committee all or any of the fol lowing 
duties, namely :— 
(a) the preparation and submission to the Central Government, as far as possible before the 
commencement of each financial year, of statements showing programmes of work agreed to be 
undertaken by the Society during that year for wh ich the Central Government may provide funds as 
well as general financial estimates in respect of such work;  
(b) the settlement on broad line of the programmes of such work . 
(2) A committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall, in discharging its duties  with respect to any 
matter under this section, have due regard to the advice, if any, tendered in respect of such matter under 
section 8 by the Board to the Central Government . 
(3) Where the Society does not agree to undertake any work suggested by an y committee referred to 
in sub -section ( 1), it shall give to the Central Government its reasons for not so agreeing . 
(4) The procedure to be followed by a committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) in the discharge of 
its functions, the allowances, if any, pa yable to the members of such committee and other matters relating 
to such committee shall be such as may be prescribed . 4 10. Review of work done , inspection of assets, etc. —(1) the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Committee consisting of such number of persons as it 
thinks fit to app oint thereto for the purpose of — 
(a) reviewing the work done by the Society and the progress made by it;  
(b) inspecting its buildings, equipment and other assets;  
(c) evaluating the wo rk done  by the Society; and  
(d) advising Government generally on any matter which in the  
opinion of the Central Government is of importance in connection with the work of the Society;  
and the Committee shall submit its report thereon in such manner as the Central Government may direct . 
(2) The procedure to be followed by, the allowances, if any, payable to, the members of the 
Committee and other matters concerning the Committee shall be such as may be prescribed . 
(3) The Committee shall, subject to the prov isions of sub -section ( 4) and of any rules which the 
Central Government may make in this behalf, have power to regulate its own procedure . 
(4) Notice shall be given in every case to the Society of the intention to cause a review, inspection or 
evaluation t o be made, and the Society shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall ha ve the 
right to be present and b e heard at such review, inspection or evaluation . 
(5) The Central Government may address the President of the Society with reference to the  result of 
such review, inspection or evaluation as disclosed in any report of the Committee referred to in sub -
section ( 1), and the President shall communicate to the Central Government the action, if any, taken 
thereon . 
(6) When the Central Government has in pursuance of sub -section ( 5), addressed the President of the 
Society in connection with any matter, and the President does not within a reasonable time take action to 
the satisfaction of the Central Government in respect thereof, the Central Governm ent may, after 
considering any explanations furnished or representations made on behalf of the Society, issue such 
directions as it considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report . 
11. Society to afford facilities to Committee s.—The Society shall be bound to afford all necessary 
facilities to the Board constituted under section 8 and to every committee constituted under section 9 or 
section 10 for the purpose of enabling them to carry out their duties . 
12. Power to issue direct ions to Society .—(1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it 
is necessary so to do in the public interest issue, for reasons to be recorded and communicated to the 
Society, such directions as it thinks to the Society, and such directions may  include d irections requiring 
the Society — 
(a) to amend the memorandum or to make or amend any regulation within such period as may be 
specified in the directions;  
(b) to give priorities to the work undertaken or to be undertaken by the Society in such manner as 
the Central Government may think fit to specify in this behalf . 
(2) Any directions issued under this section shall have effect, notwithstanding anything contained in 
any law for the time being in force or in the memorandum or regulations of the S ociety . 
13. Power of Central Government to assume functions of control .—(1) If, in the opi nion of the 
Central Government, — 
(i) the Society without just or reasonable cause has made default in giving effect to any direction 
issued under sub -section ( 6) of section 10 or section 12; or  
(ii) the Council of the Society has exceeded or abused the powers in relation to the Society or any 
part thereof;  
the Central Government may, by written order, direct the Society within a period to be specified in the 
order to show cause to the satisfaction of the Central Government against the making of any appointment 
referred to in sub -section ( 2). 5 (2) If, within the period fixed by any order issued under sub -section ( 1), cause is not shown to the 
satisfaction of the Central Government, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette and stating the reasons therefor, appoint one or more persons to take over the management of the 
Society or of any of the activities of the Society for such period not excee ding two years as may be 
specified in the order . 
(3) During the period specified in the order issued under sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) where the order provides for any person or persons taking over the management of the 
Society— 
(i) all persons holding office as  Members of the Council, including the President, shall be 
deemed to have vacated their offices as such;  
(ii) the person or persons appointed under sub -section ( 2) to take over the management of the 
Society shall exercise all the powers and perform all the  duties of the President or Council of the 
Society, whether at a meeting or otherwise, in respect of the Society;  
(b) where the order provides for any person or persons taking over the management of any 
activities of the Society, the person or persons so a ppointed shall alone be entitled to exercise all the 
powers and perform all the duties of the President or Council in relation to those activities . 
14. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in the memorandum or regulations or the West Bengal 
Societies Registration Act, 1961 (West Bengal Act XXVI, 1961)  or any other law for the time being in 
force . 
15. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act . 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(i) matters with respect to the procedure to be followed by the Board under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 8;  
(ii) the term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions  by, the 
manner of filling casual vacancies among, the allowances, if any, payable to, and other matters 
concerning, the members of the Board under sub -section ( 4) of section 8;  
(iii) the procedure to be followed by a committee in the discharge of its func tions, the allowances, 
if any, payable to the members of the committee and other matters relating to the committee under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 9;  
(iv) the procedure to be followed by, the allowances, if any, payable to, the members of the 
Committee an d other matte rs concerning the Committee under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(v) any other matter which is required to be or in respect of which rules may be made under this 
Act. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so , however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule . 
--------------------------The Bengal Immunity Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE  BENGAL IMMUNITY COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND  
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1984  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2.  Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in , Central Government of the undertakings of the Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Central Government or existing, or new, Government company, not to be liable for certain 
prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in an 
existing Government company.  
7. Transfer of the undertakings of the Company from an existing Government company to a new 
Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount.  
9. Payment of further amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
12. Accounts to be rendered by the Company or any other person.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
13. Employment of certain employees to continue.  
14. Provide nt fund and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner.  2 
 17. Certain powers of Central Government or existing, or new, Government company.  
18. Claims to  be made to the Commissioner.  
19. Priority of claims.  
20. Examination of claims.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims.  
22. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company and possession of certain machinery, e quipment, 
etc. 
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or existing, or 
new, Government company.  
27. Penalties.  
28. Offences by companies.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Delegation of powers.  
31. Power to make rul es. 
32. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE BENGAL IMMUNITY COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF 
UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1984  
ACT, NO. 57 OF 1984  
[29th August, 1984 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer, in the public interest, of the undertakings of 
Messrs. Bengal Immunity Company Limited, and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Messrs. Bengal Immunity Company Limited were engaged in the production and 
distribution of articles specified in th e First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation)  
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951),  namely, chemicals (other than fertilizers), drugs and pharmaceuticals which are 
essential to the needs of the general public;  
AND WHEREAS the Central Government, being  of opinion, after an investigation into the affairs of the 
Company, that the affairs of the Company have been managed in a manner highly detrimental to the 
public interest, had authorised, under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation)       
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , a body of persons to take ove r the management of the Company;  
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of reconstructing and rehabilitating the undertakings ow ned by the 
Company so as to sub serve  the interests of the general public by the augmentation of production and 
distribution of different varieties of chemicals (other than fertilizers), drugs and pharmaceuticals, which 
are essential to the needs of the general public and to secure the contin ued supply thereof, it is necessary 
to acquire the undertakings of the Company;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The  Bengal Immunity Company 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1984.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2.  Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date of commencement of this Act;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 15;  
(c) “Company ” means the Bengal Immunity Company Limited, being a company as defined in 
the Companies Act, 195 6 (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at 153, Lenin Saranee, 
Calcutta -700013;  
(d) “existing Government company ” means a Government company which is carrying on 
business on the appointed day;  
(e) “new Government company ” means a Government company formed and registered on or after 
the appointed day;  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “specified date ” means such date  as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any of 
the provisions of this Act, by notification, specify, and different dates may be specified for different 
provisions of this Act;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 1984, vide notification No. S. O. 732(E), dated 22nd  September , 1984, see Gazett e of India, Extraordinary,  
 Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (i) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in  the Companies                
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in , Central Government of the undertaking s of the Company .—On 
the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central 
Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, leaseholds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including lands, buildings, offices, factories, workshops, stores , instruments, plants, machinery and 
equipment, installations, laboratories, office furniture, stationery and equi pment, vehicles, patents, trade 
marks, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments, book debts and all other rights and 
interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the 
ownership, possession, power or control of the Company, whether within or outside India, and all books 
of account, registers and all other documents of whatever nature  relating thereto.  
(2) All properties and assets as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under     
section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, 
charge, lien and all other incumbra nces affecting them, and any attachment, inju nction, decree or order of 
any c ourt, tribunal or other authority restricting the use of such properties or assets in any manner or 
appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such properties or assets shall be deemed to 
have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested, under this Act, in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall giv e, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an  intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section (3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out o f the amount specified in section 8, and also out of the 
amounts determined under section 9, but, no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or othe r instrument granted to the Company in relation to any undertaking which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be in force on and after such day in accordance 
with its tenor in relation to and for the purposes of such undertaking, and, on and from the date of vesting 
of such undertaking, under section 6, in an existing Government company, or under section 7, in a new 
Government company, th e existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, shall be deemed 
to be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been 
granted to such existing, or new, Government company and such existing, or new , Government company 
shall hold it for the remainder of the period for which the Company would have held it under the terms 
thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding, of whatever nature, in relation to 
any property or asse t which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred 
by or against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of  the Company or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced 
by or against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed under 
section 6 to vest in an e xisting Government company, or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of 
section 7 to a new Government company, by or against such Government company.  5 
 5. Central Government or existing, or new, Government company, not to be liable for certain 
prior  liabilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company in respect of any period prior to the 1st day of 
April, 1983, shall be the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and not against the 
Central Government, or, where the undertakings of t he Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in 
an existing Government company, or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of section 7, to a new 
Government company, against such Government company.  
(2) Any liability incurred by, or arising aga inst, the Company  on or after the 1st day of April, 1983, 
including the liability to repay loans advanced to the Company by the Central Government on or after that 
day, together with the interest due th ereon, shall be the liability, — 
(a) where the undertak ings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in an existing 
Government company, of that existing Government company; or  
(b) where the undertakings of the Company become transferred by virtue of the provisions of 
section 7, to a new Government  company, of that new Government company,  
and shall be discharged by such Government company as and when the discharge of such liability 
becomes due.  
(3) For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in th is Act, no liability of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings in respect of any period prior to the 1st day of April, 1983, shall be enforceable against 
the Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to 
vest in an existing Government company, or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of   
section 7, to a new Government company, against such Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any Court, tribunal or other authority in relation t o the 
undertakings of the company, passed on or after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute, which arose before the 1st day of April, 1983, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government, or, where the undertakings of the Compa ny are directed, under section 6, to vest in an 
existing Government company, or become transferred, by virtue of the provisions of section 7, to a 
new Government company, against such Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the 1st day of April, 1983, for the contravention 
of any provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government, or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in an 
existing Governme nt company, or become transferred, by virtue of the provisions of section 7, to a 
new Government company, against such Government company.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in an 
existing Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, and 
subject to the provisions of section 7, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that an existing 
Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditio ns as that 
Government may think fit to impose, direct by notification, that the undertakings of the Company, and the 
right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3, shall , instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in that 
existing Government company either on the date of publication of the notification or on such earlier or 
later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified  in the notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings vest, under      
sub-section ( 1), in an existing Government company, that Government company shall, on and from the 
date of such vesting be deemed to have become, and until the transfer of the undertakings by virtue of the 
provisions of section 7 to a new Government company, be deemed to be, the owner in relation to such 
undertakings and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relatio n to such undertakings 
shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become, and until the date of such transfer, 
be deemed to be, the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that existing Government company.  6 
 7. Transfer of the undertakin gs of the Company from an existing Government company to a 
new Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, where the 
undertakings of the Company have been directed, under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, to vest in an exist ing 
Government company, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a new Government company is 
willing to comply , or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to 
impose, declare, by notification, that the undert akings of the Company be transferred to that new 
Government company, and on the issue of such declaration, the rights, title and interest of the Company 
in relation to its undertakings which had been directed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 to vest in t hat 
existing Government company, shall, instead of continuing to vest in that existing Government company, 
vest in that new Government company with effect from the date on which such declaration is made.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the exist ing Government company in relation to the 
undertakings of the C ompany vest under sub -section ( 1) in a new Government company, that new 
Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner 
in relation to such un dertakings and all the rights and liabilities of the existing Government company in 
relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of that new Government company . 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under      
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees seven hundred and sixty -six lakhs and ninety 
thousand.  
9. Payment of further amount .—(1) For the deprivation of the Compa ny of the management of its 
undertakings, there shall be given to the Company by the Central Government an amount calculated at the 
rate of two thousand rupees per month for the period commencing on the date on which the management 
of the undertakings of t he Company was taken over by the persons authorised by the Central Government 
under section 18 A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , and ending 
on the appointed day.  
(2) The amount specified in section 8, and the amount d etermined under sub -section ( 1) shall carry 
simple interest at the rate of four per cent per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and 
ending on the date on which payment of such amounts is made by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner.  
(3) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to th e amount specified in section 8 . 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that th e liabilities of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall be discharged from the 
amount referred to in section 8; and also from the amounts determined under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), in 
accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the 
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Gov ernment under section 3, 
shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been given by the Central Government unde r sub -section (1) of     
section 6, vest, on and from the date specified in such direction, in the existing Government company 
specified therein; or  7 
 (b) where a declaration has been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, vest, on and from the 
date of suc h declaration, in the new Government company specified therein,  
and thereupon the existing, or new, Government company so specified, shall be entitled to exercise, to the 
exclusion of all other persons, all such powers and do all such things as the Company  is authorised to 
exercise and do in relation to its undertakings.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc. —(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in an existing, or 
a new, Government company, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings of the 
Company immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to such Government company, all 
assets, books of account, registers and other docum ents in their custody relating to the undertakings.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the existing or new, Government company and such Government company may also, if it is 
considered necessary so to do, apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the 
manner in which the management of the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted or in relation to 
any other matter arising in the course of such managem ent. 
(3) Any person, who on the appointed day has in his possession or under his control any books, 
documents or other papers relating to the undertakings of the Company which have vested in the Central 
Government or in any existing, or new, Government com pany and which belong to the Company, or 
would have so belonged if the undertakings of the Company had not vested in the Central Government or 
the existing, or new, Government company, shall be liable to account for the said books, documents or 
other paper s to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Gover nment company, as the case may 
be, and shall deliver them up to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company or 
to such person or body of persons as the Central Government or s uch Government company may specify 
in this behalf.  
(4) The Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company may take , or cause to be 
taken, all necessary steps for securing possession of all undertakings which have vested in the Central 
Gover nment or the existing, or new, Government company under this Act.  
(5) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all its properties and assets, as on the appo inted day, 
pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, and, for this 
purpose, the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company shall afford to the 
Company all reasonable facilities.  
12. Acco unts to be rendered by the Company or any other person .—(1) Where, in pursuance of 
any decr ee, order or injunction of any c ourt or otherwise — 
(a) the authorised persons were, after the date on which the management of the undertakings of 
the Company was tak en over by them under section 18A of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of  1951)  and before the appointed day; or  
(b) the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, is, 
on or after the appointed day,  
prevented from taking over the management of any part of the undertakings of the Company, the 
Company, or any other person in possession , custody or control of such part, shall, in relation to the 
period commencing on the date of such taking over and ending on the dat e on which such part was or is 
handed over to the authorised persons or, as the case may be, the Central Government or the e xisting, or 
new, Government company, render, within a period of sixty days from the appointed day or where such 
part was so handed over after the appointed day, within a period of sixty days from the date of such 
handing ov er, accounts with regard to the — 
(i) assets and stores of the undertakings or any part thereof, acquired, utilised or sold during the 
said period; and  8 
 (ii) income derived by the Company or any other persons from the undertakings or any part  
thereof during the said period,  
to the Central G overnment or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) If, on examination of the accounts referred to in sub -section ( 1), any income or other monies is or 
are found to have been derived by the Company or any other person from such u ndertakings or any part 
thereof during the period referred to in that sub -section, or any other monies are found to be payable to 
the Company, such income or other monies shall be recoverable by the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government co mpany from the Company or such other person, as the case may be, and 
from the amount payable under this Act to the  Company and the debt due to the Central Government or 
the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, on this account shall ran k as an unsecured 
debt.  
(3) If no account is rendered by the Company or such other person in respect of the undertakings or 
any part thereof within the period referred to in sub -section ( 1) or if the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government c ompany, as the case may be, has any reason to believe that the account 
rendered by the Company or such other person is incorrect or false in any material particular, the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, ma y refer the matter to 
the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner shall determine the income derived by the Company 
or such other person from such undertakings or any part thereof during the period referred to in           
sub-section ( 1) and take step s to recover the said income or other monies from the Company or such other 
person and from the amount payable to the Company under this Act, as if the debt due to the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, on t his account were an 
unsecured debt.  
(4) No mortgage, charge, lien or other incumbrance in relation to the undertakings of the Company or 
any part thereof shall be binding on the Central Gov ernment or the existing, or new,  Government 
company, as the case ma y be, if such mortgage, charge, lien or other incumbrance was created, at any 
time during the period in which the authorised persons were and the Central Government or the existing, 
or new, Government company, as the case may be, is prevented, by any decre e, order or injunction of any 
court or otherwise, from taking over the management of such undertakings or any part thereof.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
13. Employment of certain employees to continue .—(1) Every  person who has been, immediately 
before the appointed day, employed in any of the undertakin gs of the Company shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government; and  
(b) where the undertakings of the Company are direct ed, under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 to vest 
in an existing Government company, or are transferred by virtue of the provisions of section 7, to a 
new Government company, an employee of such Government company on and from the date of such 
vesting or trans fer, 
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the existing , or new , Government 
company, as the case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters 
as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting or transfer and shall continue to 
do so unless and until his employment under the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government 
company, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions  of service 
are duly altered by the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case 
may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in the undertakings of the Company to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government 
company, as the case may be, shall not entitle such officer or other employee to an y compensation under 
this Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no such cla im shall be entertained by any 
court, tribunal or other authority.  9 
 14. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in the 
undertakings of the Company, the monies relatable to the employees, whose services have become 
transferred by or under this Act to the Central Government or the e xisting, or new, Government company, 
as the case may be, shall , out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such 
provident, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central 
Government or the  existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or the  
existing, or new, Government company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments . (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose 
of disbursing the amounts payable under sections 8  and 9, by notification, appoint a Commissioner of 
Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government shall, 
within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commission er, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an am ount equal to the amount specified in section 8; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amounts payable to the Company under section 9.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, a nd every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of t he deposit account referred to in       
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the said account.  
17. Certain powers of Central Government or existing, or new, Government company .—(1) The 
Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case m ay be, shall be entitled 
to receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to the Company, 
in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Government company, as t he case may be, and realised after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the 
realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or the existing, or new Government company, as the case may be, may 
make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day for 
discharging any liability of the Company, in relation to any period prior to the 1st day of April, 1983; and 
every such claim shall have priority in accordance with the priori ties attaching, under this Act, to the 
matter in relation to which such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the existing 
or new, Government company, as the case may be.  10 
 (3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the 1st day of April, 1983, which have not been discharged on or before the specified date, shall 
be the liabilities of the Company.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim a gainst the Company 
shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said peri od of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
19. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with the following principl es:— 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but if the 
amount is insuffic ient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly;  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the  liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
20. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in  
accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of the opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
requir ed to examine any claim in respect of such lower category.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before which every claimant 
shall file the proof of his claims, failing which he shall be excluded from the benefit of the disbursements 
made by the Commissioner.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in such 
issue of any daily n ewspaper in the English language and in such issue of daily newspaper in such 
regional language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the 
claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the ti me specified in the 
advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investiga tion as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The C ommissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect o f the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him  on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
  11 
 (c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of  1860 ) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 19 5 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ). 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the loca l limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered of fice of the Company is situated : 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
the appeal shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta and such appeal shall be he ard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of that High Court.  
22. Disbursement of money by Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under this 
Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or p ersons 
to whom such amount is due, and, on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of such claim 
shall stand discharged.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company and possession of certain machinery, equipment, 
etc.—(1) If, out of the monies  paid to him in relation to the undertakings of the Company, there is a 
balance left after meeting the liabilities in accordance with the priorities specified in the Schedule, the 
Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the posse ssion of any machinery, equipment or other property has vested in the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company under this Act, but such machinery, 
equipment or other property does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government or the existing, or new Government company, as the case may be, to continue to possess 
such machinery, equipment and other property on the same terms and conditions under which they were 
possessed by the Company immediately before the ap pointed day.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is  finally wound up shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner to the general revenue account of the Central Government; but a claim to any money 
so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the persons entitled to such payment and 
shall be dea lt with as if such transfer had not been made and the order, if any, for payment of the claim 
being treated as an order for the refund of the revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect  notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or existing, or 
new, Government company .—Every contract  entered into by the Company in relation to its 
undertakings for any service, sale or supply, and in force immediately before t he appointed day, shall, on 
and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from that day, cease to have effect unless such 
contract is, before the expiry of the said period, ratified in writing by the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the exis ting, or new, Government company, and in ratifying such contract, the Central 
Government or, as the case may be, the existing, or new, Government company may make such 
alterations or modifications therein as it may think fit:  
  12 
 Provided that the Central Government or, as the case may be, the existing, or new, Government 
company  shall not omit to ratify a contract and shall not make any alt eration or modification therein — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered i nto in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government or, as the case may be, such Government 
company; and  
(b) except  after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for its refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein . 
27. Penalties .—A person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the existing, or 
new, Government company, as the case may be, or any person or b ody of persons authorised by that 
Government or existing, or new, Government company; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Company; or  
(c) wil fully withholds or fails to furnish to the Cen tral Government or, as the case may be, the 
existing, or new, Government company or any person or body of persons authorised by that 
Government or Government company, any document relating to such undertakings which may be in 
his possession, custody or con trol; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or, as the case may be, the existing, or new, 
Government company or any person or body of persons authorised by that Government or existing, or 
new, Government company, any assets, books of account, r egisters or other documents in his 
possession, custody or control relating to the undertakings of the Company; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the undertakings of the 
Company or prefers any claim under this Act which he k nows or has reasonable cause to believe to be 
false or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
28. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed  without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be g uilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
  13 
 29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company or any officer or 
other employee of that Government or Government company or any officer or other person authorised by 
that Government or Government company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Government company or any officer or other employee of that Government or Government company or 
any officer or other person authorised by that Government or Government company for any damage 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under thi s 
Act. 
30. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the power conferred by this section or section 31 
or section 32, may also be exercised by su ch person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Governm ent. 
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the manner in which monies in any provident fund or other fund referred to in section 14 sh all 
be dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,  for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any  modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
 
 
  
  14 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 19, 20, 21 and 23]  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF THE LIABILITIES OF THE  COMPANY  
Part A.—Post-take-over and pre -take-over periods  
Category I — 
Wages, salaries and other dues of the employees of the Company for the post -take-over period as well 
as arrears in relation to wages, salaries, provident fund and other dues of the emplo yees for the              
pre-take-over period, including the contribut ion to be made to the Employees’  State Insurance Fund and 
additional dearness allowance payable to employees.  
Part B.—Post-take-over period  
Category II — 
(a) Loans advanced by the Central Government and interest due thereon.  
(b) Loans advanced by banks and financial institutions, guaranteed by the Central Government 
and interest duo thereon.  
(c) Other loans.  
Category III — 
Credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing operations.  
Category IV — 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central Government or a State Government.  
(b) Any other dues.  
Part C.—Pre-take-over period  
Category V — 
Principal amount of loans advanced by banks and financial institutions and interest due thereon 
up to and including 18th May, 1978, that is to say, the date on which the notified order under section 
18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , was published in the 
Official Gazette.  
Category VI — 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues payable t o the Central Government or a St ate 
Government or a local authority.  
Category VII — 
Amounts due by way of interest on loans referred to in category V after 18th May, 1978 up to the 
date preceding the appointed day.  
Category VIII — 
(a) Any other credit availed of for purposes of trade or manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any other dues.  
 
--------------------------The Family Courts Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE FAMILY COURTS ACT, 1984  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
FAMILY  COURTS  
3. Establishment of Family Courts . 
4. Appointment of Judges . 
5. Association of social welfare agencies, etc . 
6. Counsellors, officers and other employees of Family Courts . 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION  
7. Jurisdiction . 
8. Exclusion of jurisdiction and pending proceedings . 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
9. Duty of Family Court to make efforts for settlement . 
10. Procedure  generally . 
11. Proceedings to be held in camera . 
12. Assistance of medical and welfare experts . 
13. Right to legal representation . 
14. Application of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 . 
15. Record of oral evidence.  
16. Evidence of formal character on affidavit . 
17. Judgment . 
18. Execution of decrees and orders . 
CHAPTER V  
APPEALS AND REVISIONS  
19. Appeal . 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Act to have overriding effect . 
21. Power of High Court to make rules . 
22. Power of the Central Government to make rules . 
23. Power of the State Government to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE FAMILY  COURTS ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1984  
[14th September , 1984 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of Family Courts with a view to promote conciliation in, 
and secure speedy settlement of , disputes relating to marriage and family affairs and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Family Courts Act, 
1984.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States.  
                                                           
1. Th is Act shall come into force in — 
(i)Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands  on 19th November , 1986, vide notification  No. 79/22/86, dated 19th 
November, 1986, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Section 1.  
(ii) Madhya Pradesh  on 19 thNovember , 1986, vide notification No. 79/6/86, dated 14th November, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 1.  
(iii) Uttar Pradesh  on 2ndOctober , 1986, vide notification No. 79/11/86 -Jus., dated 4th September, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Pt. II, Section 1.  
(iv)Delhi on 19th November, 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 863(E), dater 18th November, 1986, Gazette of India, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(v)Maharashtra  on 1 stDecember , 1986, vide notification No. S.O. 944 (E), dated 5th December, 1986, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 3( ii). 
(vi)Karnataka  on 25 thMay , 1987, vide notification  No. G.S.R. 68 5(E), dated 15th May, 1987, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3( i). 
(vii)Orissa  on 1 st May, 1989, vide notification No. S.O. 321 (E), dated 27th April, 1989, Gazette of India, Extra, Pt.  II, 
Section 3( ii). 
(viii)Kerala  on 21st October , 1989, vide notification No. 79/5/86, dated 17th October, 1989, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 1 . 
(ix)Goa on 16 thApril , 1990, vide notification No. S.O. 328(E), dated 12th April, 1990, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, 
Section 3( ii). 
(x)Union t erritory of Pondicherry  on 1st May, 1987, vide notification No. G.S.R. 459 (E), dated 29th April , 1987, Gazette of 
India, Extra , Pt. II, Section 3( i). 
(xi)West Bengal  on 1stNovember , 1991, vide notification No. 79/12/86 -Jus., dated 1st November, 1991, Gazette of India, 
Extra., Pt. II, Section 1  (E). 
(xii)Assam  on 2nd October , 1991, vide notification No. 79/2/86 Jus., dated 30th November, 1991, Gazette of India, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 1  (E). 
(xiii)Bihar  on 10th December , 1991, vide notification  No. S.O. 838(E), dated 6th December, 1991, Gazette of India, Extra. , 
Pt. II, Section 3( ii). 
(xiv)Manipur  on 3rdFebruary , 1992, vide notification  No. S.O. 91(E), dated 30th January, 1992, Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. 
II, Section 3( ii). 
(xv)Haryana  on 2ndNovember , 1992, vide notification  No. S.O. 784(E), dated 2 3th October, 1992, Gazette of Ind ia, Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3( i). 
(xvi)Andhra Pradesh  on 15 thFebruary , 1995, vide notification  No. S.O. 92 (E), dated 6 th February, 1995, Gazette of India, 
Extra .. Part II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(xvii) Gujarat  on 1stJanuary , 2000, vide notification No. S.O. 1268 (E), dated 2 0nd December, 1999, Gazette of India,  Extra., 
Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 
(xviii)Union territory of Daman and Diu on 10 th October , 2003, vide notification No. S.O. 1161 (E), dated 1 4th October, 
2003, Gazette of India , Extra., Pt. II, Section 3 ( ii). 3 
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Judge” means the Judge or, as the case may be, the Principal Judge, Additional Principal 
Judge or other Judge  of a Family Court;  
(b) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “Family Court ” means a Family Court established under section 3;  
(e) all other words and expressions used but not defi ned in this Act and defined in the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Code.  
  CHAPTER II  
FAMILY  COURTS  
 3. Establishment of Family Courts .—(1) For the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and powers 
conferred on a Family Court by this Act, the State Government, after consultation with the Hi gh Court, 
and by notification, — 
(a) shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, established for every area in the 
State co mprising of city or town whose population excee ds one million, a Family Court;  
(b) may establish Family Courts for such other areas in the State as it may deem necessary.  
(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, specify, by n otification, the 
local  limits of the area to which the jurisdiction of a Family Court shall extend and may, at any time, 
increase, reduce or alter such limits.   
4. Appointment of Judges .—(1) The State Government may, with the concurrence of the High 
Court,  appoint one or more persons to be the Judge or Judges of a Family Court.  
(2) When a Family Court co nsists of more than one Judge, — 
(a) each  of the Judges may exercise all or any of the powers conferred on the Court by this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force;  
(b) the State Government may, with the concurrence of the High Court, appoint any of the Judges 
to be the Principal Judge and any other Judge to be the Additional Principal Judge;  
(c) the Principal Judge may, from time to time, make such arrangements as he may deem fit for 
the distribution of the  business of the Court among the various Judges thereof;   
(d) the Additional Prin cipal Judge may exercise the powers of the Principal Judge in the event of 
any vacancy in the office of the Principal Judge or when the Principal Judge is unable to discharge his 
functions owing to absenc e,  illness or any other cause.  
(3) A person shall n ot be qualified for ap pointment as a Judge unless he — 
(a) has for at least seven years held a judicial office in India or the office of a Member of a 
Tribunal or any post under the Union or a State requiri ng special knowledge of law; or  
(b) has for at leas t seven years been an advocate of a High Court or of two or more such Courts in 
succession; or  
(c) possesses such other qualifications as the Central Government may, with the concurrence of 
the Chief Justice of  India, prescribe.  4 
 (4) In selecting person s for appointment as Judges, — 
(a) every endeavour  shall be made to ensure that persons committed to the need to protect and 
preserve the institution of marriage and to promote the welfare of children and qualified by reason of 
their experience and expertise to promote  the settlement of disputes by concil iation an d counselling 
are selected; and  
(b) preference shall be given to women.  
(5) No person shall be appointed as, or hold the office of, a Judge of a Family Court after he has 
attained the age of sixty -two years.  
(6) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of , a Judge shall be such as the State Government may, in consultation with the High Court, 
prescribe.  
5. Association of social welfare agencies, etc. —The State Government may, in consultation with the 
High Court, provide, by rules, for the association, in such manner and for such purposes and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the  rules, with a Family Court of — 
(a) institutions or organisations engaged in social welf are or the representatives thereof;  
(b) persons professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the family;  
(c) persons working in the field of social welfare; and  
(d) any other person whose association with a Family Court would enable it to exercise it s 
jurisdiction more effectively in accordance with the purposes of this Act.  
6. Counsellors, officers and other employees of Family Courts .—(1) The State Government shall , 
in consultation with the High Court, determine the number and categories of counsell ors, officers and 
other employees required to assist a Family Court in the discharge of its functions and provide the Family 
Court with such counsellors, officers and other employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The terms and conditions of association of the c ounsellors and the terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be such as may be specif ied 
by rules made by the State G overnment.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION  
7. Jurisdiction .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Family Court shall — 
(a) have and exercise all the jurisdiction exercisable by any district court or any subordinate civil 
court under any law for the time being in force in respect of suits and proceedings o f the nature 
referred to in the Explanation ; and  
(b) be deemed, for the purposes of exercising such jurisdiction under such law, to be a district 
court or, as the case may be, such subordinate civil court for the area to which the jurisdiction of the 
Family Court extends.  
Explanation .—The suits and proceedings referred to in this sub -section are suits and proceedings of  
the following nature, namely: — 
(a) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage for a decree of nullity of marriage 
(declaring the marriage to be null and void or, as the case may be, annulling the marriage) or 
restitution of conjugal rights or judicial separation or dissolution of marriage;  
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the validity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial 
status of any person;  5 
 (c) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the 
parties or of either of them;  
(d) a suit or proceeding for an order or injunction in circumstance arising out of a marital 
relationship;  
(e) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the legitimacy of any person;  
(f) a suit or proceeding for maintenance;  
(g) a suit or proceeding in relat ion to the guardianship of the person or the custody of, or access 
to, any minor.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Family Cour t shall also have and exercise — 
(a) the jurisdiction exercisable by a Magistrate of the first class under Chapte r IX (relating to 
order for maintenance of  wife, children and parents) of the Code of Criminal P rocedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974); and  
(b) such other jurisdiction as may be conferred on it by any other enactment.  
8. Exclusion of jurisdiction and pending proceedings .—Where a Family Court has been 
established for any area, — 
(a) no district court or any subordinate civil court referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 7 shall, 
in relation to such area, have or exercise any jurisdiction in respect of any suit or proceeding of the 
nature referred to in the Explanation  to that sub -section;  
(b) no magistrate shall, in relation to such area, have or exercise any jurisdiction or power s under 
Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(c) every suit or proceeding of the nature referred to in the Explanation  to sub -section ( 1) of 
section 7 and every proceeding under Chapter IX of the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 
1974),— 
(i) which is pending immediately before the establishment of such Family Court before any 
district court or subordinate court referred to in that sub -section or, as the case may be, before any 
magistrate under the said Code; and  
(ii) which wou ld have been required to be instituted or taken before such Family Court if, 
before the date on which such suit or proceeding was instituted or taken, this Act had come into 
force and such Family Court had been established , 
shall stand transferred to such Family Court on the date on which it is established.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
9. Duty of Family Court to make efforts for settlement .—(1) In every suit or proceeding, 
endeavour  shall be made by the Family Court in the first instance, where it is possible to do so consistent 
with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist and persuade the parties in arriving at a settlement 
in respect of the subject -matter of the suit or  proceeding and for this purpose a Family Court may, subject 
to any rules made by the High Court, follow such procedure as it may deem fit.  
(2) If, in any suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to the Family Court that there is a reasonable 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Family Court may adjourn the proceedings for such 
period as it thinks fit to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.  
(3) The power conferred by sub -section ( 2) shall be in addition to, an d not in derogation of , any other 
power of the Family Court to adjourn the proceedings.  6 
 10. Procedure generally .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and of any other  law for the time being in 
force shall apply to the suits and proceedings [other than the proceedings under Chapter IX of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] before a Family Court and for the purposes of the said provisions 
of the Code, a Fam ily Court shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have all the powers of such 
court.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or  the rules made thereunder, shall  apply to the proceedings under Chapter 
IX of that Code before a Family Court.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall prevent a Family Court from laying down its 
own procedure with a view to arrive at a settlement in respect of the subject -matter of the suit or 
proceedings or at the truth of the facts alleged by  the one party and denied by the other.  
11. Proceedings to be held in camera .—In every suit or proceedings to which this Act applies, the 
proceedings may be held in camera  if the Family Court so desires and shall be so held if either party so 
desires.   
12.  Assistance of medical and welfare experts .—In every suit or proceedings, it shall be open to a 
Family Court to secure the services of a medical expert or such person (pr eferably a woman where 
available), whether related to the parties or not, including a person professionally engaged in promoting 
the welfare of the family as the Court may think fit, for the purposes of assisting the Family Court in 
discharging the functio ns imposed by this Act.  
13. Right to legal representation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, no party to a 
suit or proceeding before a Family Court shall be entitled, as of right, to be represented by a legal 
practitioner : 
Provided that if the Family Court considers it necessary in the interest of justice, it may seek the 
assistance of a legal expert as amicus curiae . 
14. Application of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 .—A Family Court may receive as evidence any 
report, statement, documents, information or matter that may, in its opinion, assist it to deal effectually 
with a dispute, whether or not the same would be otherwise relevant or admissible under the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
15. Record of oral evidence .—In suit s or proceedings before a Family Court, it shall not be 
necessary to record the evidence of witnesses at length, but the Judge, as the examination of each witness 
proceeds, shall, record or cause to be recorded, a memorandum of the substance of what the wi tness 
deposes, and such memorandum shall be signed by the witness and the Judge and shall form part of the 
record.  
16. Evidence of formal character on affidavit .—(1) The evidence of any person where such 
evidence is of a formal character, may be given by a ffidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be 
read in evidence in any suit or proceeding before a Family Court.  
(2) The Family Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of any of the parties to the suit 
or proceeding summon and examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.  
17. Judgment .—Judgment of a Family Court shall contain a concise statement of the case, the point 
for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for such decision.  
 18. Execution of decrees and orders .—(1) A decree or an order [other than an order under Chapter 
IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], passed by a Family Court shall have the same 
force and effect as a decree or order of a civil court and shall  be executed in the same manner as is 
prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the execution of decrees and orders.  
(2) An order passed by a Family Court under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 
of 1974) shall be execu ted in the manner prescribed for the execution of such order by that Code.  7 
 (3) A decree or order may be executed either by the Family Court which passed it or by the other 
Family Court or ordinary civil court to which it is sent for execution.  
 
CHAPTER V  
1[APPEALS  AND REVISIONS ] 
19. Appeal .—(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2) and notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or in 
any other law, an appeal shall lie from every judgment or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a 
Family Court to the High Court both on facts and on law.  
(2) No appeal shall l ie from a decree or order passed by the Family Court with the consent of the 
parties2[or from an order passed under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974):  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any appeal pending before a High Court or 
any order passed under Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) before the 
commencement of the Family Courts (Amendment) Act, 1991  (59 of 1991) .] 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a p eriod of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment or order of a Family Court.  
 2[(4) The High Court may, of its own motion or otherwise, call for and examine the record of any 
proceeding in which the Family Court situate within its jurisdiction passed an order under Chapter IX of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, 
legality or propriety of the order, not being an interlocutory order, and as to the regularity of such 
proceeding.]  
3[(5)] Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any court from any judgment, order or 
decree of a Family Court.  
4[(6)] An appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be heard by a Bench consisting of two or more 
Judges.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
21. Power of High Court to make rules .—(1) The High Court may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make such rules as it  may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of t he foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) normal working hours of Family Courts and holding of sittings of Family Courts on holidays 
and outside normal working hours;  
(b) holding  of sittings of Family Courts at places other than their ordinary places of sitting;  
(c) efforts which may be made by, and the procedure which may be followed by, a Family Court 
for assisting and persuading parties to arrive at a settlement.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1991, s. 2, for “Appeals” (w.e.f 28 -12-1991).  
2. Ins. by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1991).  
3. Sub -section ( 4) renumbered as sub -section ( 5) thereof by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1991) . 
4. Sub -section ( 5) renumbered as sub -section ( 6) thereof by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1991).  8 
 22. Power of the Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, with the 
concurrence of the Chief Justice of India, by notification, make rules prescribing the other qualifications 
for appointment of a Judge referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 4.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one sessio n or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not  be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
23. Power of the State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, after 
consultation with the High Court, by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the p rovisions of sub -section ( 1) such rules 
may provide for all or any of  the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) the salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of Judges under  sub-section ( 6) of section 4;  
(b)the terms and conditions of association of counsel lors and the terms and conditions of service 
of the officers and other employees referred to in section 6;  
(c) payment of fees and expenses (including travelling expenses) of medical and other experts and 
other persons referred to in section 12 out of the revenues of the State Government and the scales of 
such fees and expenses;  
(d) payment of fees and expenses to legal practitioners appointed under section 13 as amicus  
curiae  out of the revenues of the State Government and the scales of such fees and expenses;  
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed or provided for by rules.  
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made , before the State Legislature.  
--------------------------The Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1984  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. Validation.  
 
  2 
 THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1984  
[8th May, 1984.]  
An Act further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 
1984.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
4. Validation. —Anything done or any action taken on or after the 1st day of March, 1984 and before 
the commencement of this Act for the purposes of elections to the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Mizoram shall be deemed to be, and to have always been, as validly and effectively done or 
taken as if the provisions of the principal Act as amended by section 3 had been in force at all material 
times.  
                                                           
1. Sections  2 and 3 rep. by Act 1 9 of 1988 , s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  
--------------------------The Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1984--------------------------
1 THE HOOGHLY DOCKING AND ENGINEERING COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1984  
_________  
  ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  __________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
 
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company . 
4. General effect of vesting . 
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in an existing 
Government Company . 
6. Transfer of undertakings of the Company from an existing Government company to a new 
Government company . 
7. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities . 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount . 
9. Payment of further amount  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company . 
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc . 
12. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession . 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
13. Continuance of employees . 
14. Provident fund and other funds . 
CHAPTER V I 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments . 
16. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner . 
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or the Government company . 
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
19. Priority of claims . 
20. Examination of claims . 
21. Admission or rejection of claims . 
22. Disbursement of money by the  Commissioner to claimants . 
23. Disbursement of amounts to the Company . 2 SECTIONS  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account . 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect . 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the Government 
company . 
27. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
28. Delegation of powers . 
29. Penalties . 
30. Offences by companies . 
31. Power to make rules . 
32. Power to remove difficulties . 
33. Repeal and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 THE HOOGHLY DOCKING AND ENGINEERING COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 55 OF 1984  
[23rd August , 1984 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Hooghly Docking 
and Engineering Company Limited with a view to securing the better utilisation of the 
available infrastructure thereof, to modernise and increase the capacity for  ship building and 
ship repairing so as to reduce the import of ships, vessels and craft and to augment              
the production of grey iron, non -ferrous and alloy castings by the said undertaking s so as to 
subserve the interests of the general public by ensuring the continued supply of the said 
articles which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country, and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Hooghly Doc king and Engineering Company Limited is, through its undertakings, 
engaged in shipbuilding, ship repairing, general engineering and other activities;  
AND WHEREAS  the Company has the capacity and infrastructure to effect an increase in the country ’s 
capacity to manufacture ships and other vessels and craft;  
AND WHEREAS an increase in the production of such vessels and craft would reduce the need of the 
country to make imports of such vessels and craft and would thereby enable the country to save forei gn 
exchange;  
AND WHEREAS the Company is also engaged in the production of grey iron, non -ferrous and alloy 
castings which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country;  
AND WHEREAS the Company had been suffering heavy losses for a number of years mainly due to 
lack of fresh investment and modernisation;  
AND WHEREAS  further investment of substantial sums of money is needed to run and modernise the 
undertakings of the Company: but in view of the serious adverse financial condition of the Compan y it is 
not in a pos ition to secure such investment;  
AND WHEREAS the liquidation of the Company, by reason of its inability to pay its debts, would 
prejudicially affect the country ’s capacity to manufacture such ships, vessels and craft and would thereby 
be prejudicial to the public interest;  
AND WHEREAS in view of the position aforesaid it is necessary to acquire the undertaking of the said 
Company to enable the Central Government to make necessary investments for securing the proper 
utilisation of the available facilities for sh ipbuilding and ship repairing ( including the production of 
vessels and craft) and also for the production of grey iron, non -ferrous and alloy castings which are 
essential to the needs of the economy of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Hooghly Docking an d 
Engineering Company Limited ( Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking s) Act, 1984.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 28th day of June, 1984.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the d ate of commencement of this Act;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 15;  
(c) “Company ” means the Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited, being a 
company as defined in  the Companies, Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at 12, 
Mission Row, Calcutta -700001; 4 (d) “existing Government company ” means a Government company which is carrying o n 
business on the appointed day;  
(e) “new Government company ” means a Government company formed and registered on or after 
the appointed day;  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision  of this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify  for the purposes of that provision and different dates may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act.  
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined  but defined in the Companies                 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company .—
On the appointed day, the undertaking of  the Company , and the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertaking s, shall, by virtue of  this Act, stand transferred to , and  vested in, the Central 
Government . 
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertaking s of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, 
including land s, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balance s, cash 
on hand, re serve funds, investments,  book debts and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such 
property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of 
the Company , whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court, tribunal 
or other authority restricting the use of such properties in any ma nner shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn . 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has ve sted under this Act  in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give , 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest . 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues , in whol e or in part, out of the amount  specified in sections 8 and also out of the 
amount determined under section 9, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central Government . 
(5) Any licence or other instru ment granted to the Company in relation to any undertaking which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3 , at any time before the appointed day and in force 
immediately before that day , shall continue to be in force on and after such day in acc ordance with its 
tenor in relation to, and for the purposes of , such undertaking  and on and from the date of vesting of such 
undertaking under section 5, in an existing Government company, or under section 6, in a new 
Government company, the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, shall be deemed 
to be substituted in suc h licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been 
granted to such existing, or new, Government company and such existing, or new, Government company 
shall hold it for the remainder of the period for which the Company would have held it under the terms 
thereof . 5 (6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
property which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by or against 
the Company  is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially 
affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of anything contained in this 
Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, p rosecuted or enforced by or against the 
Central Government , or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 5, to vest in 
an existing Government company or become transferred by virtue of the provisions of section 6 to a new 
Governmen t company, by or against such Government company . 
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in an 
existing Government Company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, and 
subject to the provisions of section 6, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that an existing 
Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that 
Government may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of the Company, and 
the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings wh ich have vested in the Central 
Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in that 
existing  Government company either on the date of publication of the notification or on such earlier or 
later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its undertakings vest, under         
sub-section ( 1), in an existing Government company, that Government company shall, on and from the 
date of such vesting be deemed to have become, and until the transfer of the undertakings by virtue of the 
provisions of section 6, to a new Government company, be deemed to be, the owner in relation to such 
undertaking s and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings 
shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed  to have become, and until the date of such transfer, 
be deemed to be, the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that existing Government company.  
6. Transfer of undertakings of the Company from an existing Government company to a new 
Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section s 3 and 4, where the 
undertakings of the Company have been directed, under sub -section ( 1) of section 5, to vest in an existing 
Government company, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a new  Government company is 
willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that Government may think fit to 
impose, declare, by notification, that the undertakings of the Company be transferred to that new 
Government company; and on the i ssue of such declaration, the right, title and interest of the Company in 
relation to its undertakings, which had been directed under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 to vest in an 
existing Government company, shall, instead of continuing to vest in that exist ing Government company, 
vest in that new Government company with effect from the date on which such declaration is made.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the existing Government company in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company vest under su b-section ( 1) in a new Government company, that new 
Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner 
in relation to such undertakings and the rights and liabilities of the existing Government company in 
relation to such undertaki ngs shall, on and from the date  of such vesting, be deemed to have become the 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of that new Government company.  
7. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability, other tha n the liability 
specified in sub -section ( 2), of the Company in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be 
the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it , and not against the Central Government, 
or where t he undertakings o f the Company  vest in an existing, or a new, Government company, against 
such Government company.  
(2) Any liability arising in respect of advances  from  customers for shipbuilding and non -shipbuilding 
orders shall, on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the Central Government or of the existing, 
or new, Government company aforesaid, and shall be discharged by that Government or, as the case may 
be, the exist ing, or new, Government company.   6 (3) For the removal of dou bts, it is hereby declared  that,— 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no liability of  the Company in relation to its 
undertakings , in respect of any period prior to the appointed day , shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government, or  where the undertakings of the  Company  vest in an existing, or a new, 
Government company, against such Government company;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed on or after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute, which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or where 
the undertakings of the Company vest in an existing, or a new, Government company, against such 
Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by the C ompany before the appointed day  for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force shall be enforceable aga inst the Central Government, or  
where the undertakings of the Company ve st in an existing, or a new, Government company, against 
such Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting  in, the Central Government, under section 
3, of the undertakings of the Company and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings, there shall be paid by the Central Government to the Company, in cash and in the manner 
speci fied in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees six hundred and fifty lakhs.  
9. Payment of further amount .—(1) The amount specified in section 8 shall carry simple interest at 
the rate of four per cent . per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the 
date on which payment of such amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(2) The amount determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be paid by the 
Central Government to the Company in addition to t he amount specified in section 8.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company, in relation to 
its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from 
the amount ref erred to in section 8;  and also from the amount determined under sub -section ( 1) in 
accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company,         
the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Government unde r             
section 3, shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of          
section 5, vest , on and from the date specified in such direction, in the existing Government company 
specified therein; or  
(b) where a declaration has been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, vest, on and from the 
date of such declaration, in the new Government company specified therein,  
and thereupon the existing, or new, Government company , as the case may be, shall be ent itled to 
exercise, to the exclusion of all other persons, all such powers and do all such things as the Company is 
authorised to exercise and do in relation to the undertakings owned by it.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc .—(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the Company in the existing, or 
new, Government company, all persons in charge of the manage ment of the undertakings of the Company 
immediately before such vesting , shall be bound to deliver to such Government company, all assets, 
books of account, registers and other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of the 
Company.  7 (2) The  Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the existing, or new, Government company and such Government company may also, if it is 
considered necessary so to do, apply to the Central Governmen t at any time for instructions as to the 
manner in which the management of the undertakings of the Company shall be conducted or in relation to 
any other matter arising in the course of such management.  
12. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in t heir possession .—(1) Any person who has, on 
the appointed day, in his possession or under his control , any assets, books, documents or other papers 
relating to any of the undertakings owned by the Company, which have vested in the Central Government 
or in the existing, or new, Government company under this Act, and which belong to the Company or 
would have  so belonged, if the undertakings owned by the Company had not vested in the Central 
Government or such Government company, shall be liable to account for  the said assets, books, 
documents and other papers to the Central Government or  the Government compan y and shall deliver 
them up to the Central Government or the Government company or to such person or persons as the 
Central Government or the Government company may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government may take or cause to be taken all necess ary steps for securing possession 
of the undertakings of the Company which have vested in it  under section 3.  
(3) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Governmen t a complete inventory of a ll its properties and assets, as on the appointed day, 
pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, and, for this 
purpose, the Central Government or the existing, or new , Government company shall afford to the  
Company all reasonable facilities.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
13. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed in any undertaking s of the Company shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government;  and 
(b) where the undertakings of the Company are vested in an existing, or a new, Government 
company, an employee of that company on and from the date of such vesting,  
and shall hol d office or service under the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government 
company, as the case may be, with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters 
as would hav e been admissible to him if there had been no such v esting and shall continue to do so unless 
and until his employment under the Central Gover nment or the existing, or new, G overnment company, 
as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly 
altered b y the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, a s the case may be:  
Provided that, unless any extension of service is granted to such person after the appointed day in 
accordance with the rules in that behalf in force for the time bei ng, such person shall retire compulsorily 
from the service of the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case 
may be,— 
(a) where he has attained or attains the age of fifty -eight years before, or on, or within a period of 
three months from, the appointed day, on the date of expiry of the said period of three months or on 
the date on which he shall retire compulsorily from service in accordance with the conditions of 
service applicable to him immediately before the appointed  day, whichever date is earlier;  
(b) in any other case, on his attaining the age of fifty -eight years.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer o f the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking of the Company to the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government 
company, shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under 
any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  8 14. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of the 
undertakings of the Company, the monies relatable to the officers or other employees , whose services 
have become transferred , by or under this Act to the Central Government or the existing, o r new, 
Government company , shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such 
provident fund, superannuation  fund, welfare  fund or other fund, stand transferred to , and shall vest in, 
the Central Government or the Government com pany, as the case may be.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or 
that company in such manner as may b e prescribed.  
CHAPTER V I 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts  payable under sections 8 and 9 , by notification, appoint a 
Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if th ey have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
16. Paym ent by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay , in cash , to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8, and  
(b) an amount equal to the amount payable to the Company under section 9.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner , in 
the Public Account of India , and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of the Company 
in relation to which p ayment  has been made to him under this Act.  
(4) The i nterest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in              
sub-section ( 2) shall en sure to the benefit of the Company.  
17. Certain powers of the Central Government or the Government company .—(1) The Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, shall be entitled to 
receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, a ny money due to the Company, in 
relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or such Government company, 
and realised after the appointed day , notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the 
appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government  or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, may 
make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by  that Government or 
Government c ompany, after the appointed day for discharging any liabil ity of the Company in relation to 
any p eriod prior to the appointed day;  and every  such claim shall have priority  in accordance with the 
priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to which such liability has been discharged by 
the Cent ral Government or the Government company.  9 (3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company in respect of any transaction 
prior to the appointed day , which have not been discharged on or before the specified date , shall be the 
liabilities of the Company.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
with regard to any of the matters specified in the Schedule pertaining to the undertakings of the Company 
shall prefer such  claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days and not thereafter.  
19. Priority of claims .—The claims made under section 18 shall have priorities in accordance with 
the following principles, namely :— 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in eq ual proportions and be paid 
accordingly; and  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
20. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower categ ory. 
21. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days’  notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the majo r part of the country 
and one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language a s the Commissioner may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursement made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refutin g the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard,  by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions , including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect o f the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  10 (c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses . 
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within  
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)  and the Commissioner shall 
be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973   (2 of 1974).  
(7) A claimant , who is  dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner , may prefer an appeal 
against the  decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to b e the Commissioner, 
such appeal  shall lie to the High Court exercising jurisdiction over the place in which the registered office 
of the Company is situated and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of 
that High Court.  
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due, and on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of 
such claim shall stand discharged.  
23. Disbursement of amounts of the Company .—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to 
the undertakings of the C ompany, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property has vested in the Central 
Govern ment or the existing, or new, Government company under this Act, but such machinery, 
equipment or other property does not belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central 
Government or the exist ing, or new, Government company  to continue to posses s such machinery or 
equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which they were possessed by the 
Company immediately before the appointed day.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before  his office is finally would up  to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made , and the 
order, if any, for  payment of the claim , being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act  or in any decree or order of an y court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or the 
Government company .—Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its undertaking s, 
which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 , for any service, sale or supply and in force 
immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and eighty days from 
the appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the exp iry of that period, ratified, in 
writing, by the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company in which such 
undertakings have been vested under this Act, and in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or 
the Government company may  make such alteration or modification therein as it may think fit:  11 Provided that the Central Government or such Government company shall not omit to ratify a 
contract and shall not make any alteration or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interest s of the Central Government or the Government company; and  
(b) except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity  of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
27. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other employee of that Government or the 
existing, or new, Government Company or other person authorised by the Central Government or the 
Government company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit  or other legal proceeding  shall lie against the Central Government or any  of its  officer s or 
other employee s or the existing, or new, Government company or other person authorised by the Central 
Government or the Government company for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
28. Dele gation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification , direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other tha n the powers conferred by this s ection, section 31, 
and section 32, may also be exercised by such person or p erson s as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
29. Penalties .—Any person who ,— 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any undertaking s of 
either the Company, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company; o r 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of , or retains, any property forming part of the undertaking s of 
the Company; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the existing , or new, 
Government company or any person or body of persons specified by that Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, any document relating to the undertaking s of the 
Company,  which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the exist ing, or new, Government company  or to 
any person or body of persons specified by that Government or the Government company, any assets, 
books of account, registers or other documents in his possession , custody or control, relating to the 
undertakings of the Company; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the undertaking s of the 
Company; or  
(f) prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to  be false 
or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a ter m which may extend to two years  or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
30. Offences by c ompanies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company , for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had ex ercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence . 12 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the c onsent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable  to be proceeded against and punished accordingly . 
Explanation .—For the purpose s of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in  the firm.  
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation shall be given  to the 
Commissioner u nder sub-section ( 3) of section 4;  
(b) the manner in which the mon ies in any provident fund or other fund under section 14 shall be 
dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in  two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect o nly in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficul ty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may , by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years fro m the appointed 
day. 
33. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Hooghly Docking and Engineering Company Limited (Acquisiti on 
and Transfer of Undertakings ) Ordinance, 1984  (7 of 1984) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal , anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.   13 THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 18, 20, 21 and 23]  
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE COMPANY  
Category I — 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the Company;  
(b) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Companies to the provident fund, 
Employees ’ State Insurance Fund, Life Insurance Corporation premium and any other arrear under 
any law for the time being in force.  
Category II — 
Loans and interest for which Government of India have given  guarantees to the public financial 
institutions . 
Category III — 
Secured loans with interest advanced by — 
(a) public financial institutions ; 
(b) banks.  
Category IV — 
Statutory dues.  
Category V — 
Unsecured loans with interest advanced by the public financial institutions, banks or other 
creditors.  
Category VI — 
Any credits availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
Category VII — 
Any other loans or dues.  
 
--------------------------The Inchek Tyres Limited and National Rubber Manufacturers Limited (Nationalisation) Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE INCHEK TYRES LIMITED AND NATIONAL RUBBER MANUFACTURERS 
LIMITED  (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1984  
_________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUIAITON AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the two companies.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the two companies in an      
existing Government Company.  
7. Transfer of the undertakings of the two companies from an existing Government company to a           
new Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount.  
9. Payment of further amounts.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAKING S OF THE TWO COMP ANIES  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the two companies.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of the two companies to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
12. Duty of persons  to account for assets, etc., in their possession.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
13. Continuance of employees.  
14. Provident fu nd and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner.  
17. Certain powers of Central Government or existing, or new, Government company.  2 
 SECTIONS  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
19. Priority of claims.  
20. Examination of claims.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims.  
22. Disbursement of money by Commissioner.  
23. Disbursement of amounts to the companies.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have over -riding effect.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or existing, or 
New, Government company.  
27. Penalties.  
28. Offence s by companies.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Delegation of powers.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to remove difficulties.  
33. Repeal and saving.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE INCHEK TYRES LIMITED AND NATIONAL RUBBER MANUFACTURERS 
LIMITED  (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 17 OF 1984  
[31st March, 1984 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Inchek Tyres  
Limited and the National Rubber Manufacturers Limited, with a view to securing the proper 
management of such undertakings so as to subserve the interest s of the general public by 
ensuring the continued manufacture, production and distribution of tyres, tubes and other 
rubber goods which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Inchek  Tyre s Limited and the National Rubber Manufacturers Limited had  been 
engaged in the ma nufacture, production and distribution of articles mentioned in the First Schedule to the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , namely, tyres, tubes and other rubber 
goods;  
AND WHEREAS  the management of the undertakings of the Inchek Tyres Limited and the management 
of the undertakings of the National Rubber Manufacturers Limited were taken over by the Central 
Government under the provisions of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of securing the optimum utilisation of the available facilities for the 
manufacture, production and distribution of tyres, tubes and other rubber goods by the undertakings of the 
two companies, investment of a large amount is necessary;  
AND WHER EAS it is necessary to acquire the undertakings of the Inchek tyres Limited and the 
National Rubber Manufacturers Limited to enable the Central Government to have such investments 
made and to ensure that the interests of the general public are served by th e continuance, by the 
undertakings of the companies, of the manufacture, production and distribution of the aforesaid articles 
which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Inchek Tyres Limited and 
National Rubber Manufacturers Limited (Nationalisation) Act, 1984.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 14th day of February, 1984.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 14th day of February 1984;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 15;  
(c) “existing  Government company ” means a Government company which is carrying on 
business on the appointed day;  
(d) “new Government company ” means a Government company formed and registered on or after 
the appointed day;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification publish ed in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of that pro vision, and different dates may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  4 
 (h) “two companies ” means the Inchek Tyres Limited and the National Rubber Manufacturers 
Limited, being companies as defined i n the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), and havi ng their 
registered offices at “Leslie House ”, 19 Jawaharlal Nehru Road, Calcutta -700013;  
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies                 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), shall have the meanings respectively assigne d to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUIAITON AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO  COMPANIES  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the two 
companies. —On the appointed day, the undertakings of each of the two companies, and the right, title 
and interest of each of the two companies in relation to its undertakings, shall, by virtue of the Act, stand 
transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of each of the two companies referred to in 
section 3 shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and 
all property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores,  instruments, 
machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash on hand, cheques, demand drafts, reserve fun ds, 
investments, book debts  and all other rights and interest in, or arising out of such, property as were 
immediately before the appointed day in the ow nership, possession , power or control of such company 
whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents of whatever 
nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Governm ent under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, injunction, decree or order of any court, tribunal 
or other autho rity restricting the use of such properties in any manner or appointing any receiver in 
respect of the whole or any part of such properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the C entral Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or ot her interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or  other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to , any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interest, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount specified, in relation to the company owning 
such property, in the First Schedule, and also out of the amount s referred to in section 9, but, no such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property which has vested in the 
Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to either of the two companies in relation t o any 
undertaking which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed 
day and in force immediately before that day shall continue to be in force on and after such day in 
accordance with its tenor in relation to an fo r the purposes of such undertaking, and , on and from the date 
of vesting of such undertaking under section 6 in an existing Government company, or under section 7 in 
a new Government company, the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, s hall be 
deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had 
been granted to such existing, or new, Government company and such existing, or new, Government 
company, shall hold it for the remainder of the  period for which the company to which it was granted 
would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any, suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature, in relation to 
any property which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by or 
against either of the two companies is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any 
way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of  the undertakings  of such company  or of anything  
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced 5 
 by or against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the two companies vest under   
section 6 or section 7 in an existing, or a new, Gove rnment company, by or against such Government 
company.  
5. Companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities. —(1) Every liability, other than the liability 
specified in sub -section ( 2), of each of the two companies in respect of any period prior to the a ppointed 
day, shall be the liability of the concerned company and shall be enforceable against it and not against the 
Central Government, or where the undertakings of the two companies vest in an existing, or a new, 
Government Company, against such Governm ent company.  
(2) Any liability arising in respect of materials supplied to either of the two companies after the 
management of its undertakings had been taken over by the Central Government, shall, on and from the 
appointed day, be the liability of the Cen tral Government or of the existing, or new, Government 
company aforesaid, and shall be discharged by that Government or, as the case may be, the existing, or 
new, Government company, as and when repayment for such supplies becomes due and payable.  
(3) For the removal of dou bts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other provision of this Act, no 
liability, other than the liability specified in sub -section ( 2), of either of the two companies in relati on 
to its undertakings in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government, or, where the undertakings of the two companies vest in an existing, or a new, 
Government company, against such Government compa ny; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of either of the two companies, passed on or after the appointed day, in respect of any 
matter, claim or dispute, not being a matter, claim or dispu te in relation to any matter referred to in 
sub-section ( 2), which arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government, or 
where the undertakings of the two companies vest in an existing, or a new, Government company, 
against such Government company;  
(c) no liability incurred by either of the two companies before the appointed day, for the 
contravention of any provision of law for the time being in force, shall be enforceable against the, 
Central Government, or, where the undertakin gs of the two companies vest in an existing, or a new, 
Government company, against such Government company.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the two companies in 
an existing Government Company .—(1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in section 3 and 4, and 
subject to the provisions of section 7, the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that an existing 
Government company is willing to comply, or has complied with such terms and conditions as that 
Government may t hink fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the undertakings of each of the two 
companies and the right, title and interest of each of the two companies in relation to its undertakings 
which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shal l, instead of continuing to vest in the 
Central Government, vest in that existing Government company either on the date of the notification or 
on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may be specified in the 
notifi cation.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the two companies, in relation to their undertakings vest, 
under sub -section ( 1), in an existing Government company, that Government company shall, on and from 
the date of such vesting, be deemed to have b ecome, and, until the transfer of the undertakings, by virtue 
of the provisions of section 7, to a new Government company, be deemed to be, the owner in relation to 
such undertakings, and the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such 
undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become, and, until the date of 
such transfer, be deemed to be, the rights and liabilities, respectively, of that existing Government 
company.  
7. Transfer of the undertakings o f the two companies from an existing Government company to 
a new Government company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 4, where the 
undertakings of each of the two companies have been directed, under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, to vest 6 
 in an existing Government company , the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a new 
Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as that 
Government may think fit to impose, declare, by notification,  that the undertakings of each of the two 
companies and the right, title and interest of each of the two companies in relation to its undertakings be 
transferred to that new Government company, and on the issue of such declaration, the right, title and 
interest of each of the two companies in relation to its undertakings which had been directed under sub -
section ( 1) of section 6 vest in an existing Government company, shall, instead of continuing to vest in 
that existing Government Company, vest in that new  Government company with effect from the date on 
which such declaration is made.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the existing Government company in relation to the 
undertakings of the two companies vest, under sub -section ( 1), in a new Governmen t company, that 
Government company shall, on and f rom the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner 
in relation to such undertakings and the rights and liabilities of the existing Government company in 
relation to such undertakings, shall, o n and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of that new Government company.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount. —For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, under      
section 3, of the undertakings of each of the two companies, and the right, title and interest of each of the 
two companies in relation to its undertakings, there shall be paid by the Central Government to each of 
the two companies, in cash and in the  manner specified in Chapter VI, amount equal to the amount 
specified against the name of such company in the First Schedule.  
9. Payment of further amounts .—(1) For the deprivation of the two companies of the management 
of their undertakings during the per iod commencing on the date on which the undertakings of each such 
company was taken over in pursuance of the orders made by the Central Government under the provisions 
of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) and ending on the appointed day, 
there shall be paid by the Central Government to each of the Companies in cash, an amount of rupees fifty 
thousand.  
(2) The amount referred to in section 8 and the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) shall carry simple 
interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and 
ending on the date on which payment of such amounts is made by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner.  
(3) The amount referred to in sub -section ( 1) and the amount determine d in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall be given by the Central Government to the two companies in addition 
to the amount specified in section 8.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of either of th e two companies 
in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall be 
discharged from the amount referred to in section 8, and also from the amount specified in sub -section ( 1) 
and the amount determined under  sub-section ( 2), in accordance with the rights and interests of the 
creditors of the two companies.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC ., OF THE  UNDERTAKING S OF THE TWO COMP ANIES  
10. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the two companies. —The general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of each of the two 
companies, the r ight, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Gov ernment under 
section 3, shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been given by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of    
section 6, vest on and from the date specified in such direction, in the existing Government company 
specified therein; or  7 
 (b) where  a declaration has been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, vest, on and from the 
date of such declaration, in the new Government company specified therein;  
and thereupon the existing, or new, Government company so specified, shall be entitled to exer cise, to the 
exclusion of all other persons , all such powers and do all such things as either, or both, of the two 
companies, is or are, authorised to exercise and do in relation t o its or their undertakings.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of undertakings of the two companies to deliver 
all assets, etc. —(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertakings of the two companies in an 
existing, or a new, Government company, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings of 
either of the two companies immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to such 
Government company, all assets, books of account, registers and other documents in their custody 
relating to the undertakings.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the existing, or new, Government company and such Government company may also, if it is 
considered necessary so to do, apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as t o the 
manner in which the management of the undertakings of the two companies shall be conducted or in 
relation to any other matter arising in the course of such management.  
12. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession. —(1) Any person who has, on 
the appointed day, in his possession or under his control any assets, books, documents or other papers 
relating to the undertakings owned by either of the two companies, which have vested in the Central 
Government or in an existing, or a  new, Government company under this Act, shall be liable to account 
for the said assets, books, documents and other papers to the Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Government company, as the case may be, and shall deliver them to the Central Gove rnment or the 
existing, or new, Government company or to such person or persons as the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government or the Government company aforesaid may take, or ca use to be taken, all 
necessary steps for securing possession of the undertakings of the two companies which have vested in 
the Central Government or the Government company under this Act.  
(3) The two companies shall, within such period as the Central Gover nment may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all their properties and assets, as on the appointed 
day, pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, and, for 
this purpose, the Central Government or the Government company aforesaid shall afford to the two 
companies all reasonable facilities.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
13. Continuance of employees. —(1) Every  person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed in any undertaking of either of the two companies shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government, and  
(b) where the undertakings of the two compan ies are directed, under section 6 or under section 7, 
to vest, in an existing, or a new, Government company, an employee of such Government company 
on and from the date of such vesting,  
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the e xisting, or new, Government 
company, as the case may be, with the rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters, 
admissible to him immediately before the appointed day, as modified by the Memorandum of Settlement 
signed by the representat ives of the management and the employees of each of the two companies on the 
10th day of February, 1984, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under the Central 
Government or the existing , or new, Government company, as the case may b e, is duly terminated or until 
his remuneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Central Government, or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be.  8 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes A ct, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking of eith er of the two companies, to the  Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Government co mpany, shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act 
or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal 
or other authority.  
14. Provident fund and other funds. —(1) Where either of the two companies has established a 
provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of its 
undertakings, the moneys relatable to the officers or other employees whose services have beco me 
transferred by or under this Act to the Central Government or an existing, or a new, Government 
company shall, out of the moneys standing, on the appointed day, to the credi t of such provident fund, 
super annuation, welfare or other fund, stand transferr ed to, and shall vest in, the Central Government or 
the existing, or new, Government company, as the care may be.  
(2) The moneys which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company, as the cas e may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. —(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable under sections 8 and 9 to each of the two companies, by 
notification, appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and  thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commiss ioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries a nd allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed un der this section 
shall be defray ed out of the  Consolidated Fund of India.  
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner. —(1) The Central Government shall, 
within thirty days from the s pecified  date, pay in cash to the Commissioner, for paymen t to each of the 
two companies, — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified against the name of such company in the First 
Schedule; and  
(b) an amount equal to the amounts payable to each of the two  company in the First schedule; and  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour  of the Commissioner in 
the Public Account of India and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited 
by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated by the 
Commissioner.  
(3) Separat e records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of each 
of the two companies in relation to which payments have been made to him under this Act.  
(4) Interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit acco unt referred to in        
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the two companies.  
17. Certain powers of Central Government or existing, or new, Government company. —(1) The 
Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case  may be, shall be entitled 
to receive up to the  specified  date, to the exclusion of all other  persons, any money  due to  either of the  
two companies in relation to its undertakings w hich have vested in the Central Government or the 9 
 existing, or ne w, Government company, as the case may be, and realised after the appointed day 
notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government, or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may b e, may 
make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every payment made by it after the appointed day, for 
discharging any liability of either of the two companies, not being any liability specified in                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 5, in re lation to any period prior to the appointed day, and every such claim 
shall have priority, in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to 
which such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the e xisting, or new, Government 
company.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of either of the two companies in respect of 
any transaction prior to the appointed day which have not been discharged on or before the specified date 
shall be  the liabilities of the respective company.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every  person having a claim against either of the 
two companies with regard to any of the matters specified in the Second Schedule pertaining to any 
undertakings owned by it, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the 
specified date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, be may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days but not thereafter.  
19. Priority of claims. —The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Second Schedule shall 
have priorities in accordance with th e following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Categ ory III, and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accor dingly; and  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
20. Examination of claims. —(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Second Schedule and examine the same 
in accordance with such order.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commiss ioner is of opinion that the amount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the 
priorities specified in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days’  notice of the date s o fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the country 
and in one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commissioner may consider 
suita ble, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the  period specified in the adver tisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the period specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursement made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the concerned company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after g iving the claimant a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, admit or reject by order in writing the claim in whole or in part.  10 
 (5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functi ons, including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while tryin g a suit, in respect of  the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any wit ness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery  and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 19 5 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(7) A claimant who is dissati sfied with the decision of the C ommissioner may prefer an appeal 
against such decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the loc al limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the concerned company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed, to be the Commissioner 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court exercising jurisdiction ove r the place in which the registered office 
of the concerned company is situated and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two 
Judges of that High Court.  
22. Disburs ement of money by Commissioner. —After admitting a claim under this Act , the amount 
due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or persons to whom such 
amount is due, and on such payment, the liability of each of the two companies in respect of such claim 
shall stand discharged.  
23. Disburseme nt of amounts to the companies. —(1) If, out of the moneys paid to him in relation 
to the undertakings of either of the two companies, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as 
specified in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse  such balance to the concerned 
company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property has vested in the Central 
Government or the existing, or new, Government company under this Act, but such machinery, 
equipment or other property does not belong to either of the two companies, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company, as the case may be, to continue to 
possess such machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and condit ions under which 
they were possessed by either of the two companies immediately before the appointed day.  
24. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account. —Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be, transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; bu t a claim to any money so transferred may he preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order, if any, for the payment of the claim being treated as an o rder for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Act to have over -riding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any inst rument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  11 
 26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or existing, or 
New, Government company. —Every contract entered into by either of the two companies in relation to 
any of its undertakings which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 for any service, sale 
or supply, and in force immediately before the appointed, day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period of 
one hundred and eighty days from such day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry 
of that period, ratified, in writing, by the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government 
company and in rat ifying such contract, the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government 
company may make such alteration or modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company shall not omit t o 
ratify a contract and shall not make any alteration  or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous, or has been entered into in bad faith, 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government or such Government company; and  
(b) except after giving the parties to t he contract a reasonable opport unity of being h eard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification there in. 
27. Penalties. —Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any undertaking of 
either of the two companies, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the 
existing, or new, Government company; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of any undertaking of 
either of the two companies; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the existing, or new, 
Governmen t company or any person or body of persons specified by that Government or Government 
company, any document relating to such undertaki ng, which may be in his posses sion, custody or 
control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the existing,  or new, Government company, as 
the case may be, or any person or body of persons specified by that Government, or Government 
company, any assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, custody or 
control, relating to the underta kings of either of the two companies; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any undertaking of either of the 
two companies or prefers any claim which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false  or 
grossly inaccurate , 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
28. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to pr event the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director,  manager, secretary or other  officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and pu nished accordingly.  
  12 
 Explanation. —For the purposes of this  section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or the existing, or new, Government company or any officer or 
other employee of that Government or the Government company or any pers on authorised by that 
Government or Government company for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
(2) No suit, or other legal proceeding, shall lie against the Central Government or the existing, or 
new, Government comp any, or any officer or other employee of that Government or Government 
company or any person authorised by that Government or Government company for any damage caused 
or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done und er this Act.  
30. Delegation of powers. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section, section 31 
or section 32, may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Go vernment.  
31. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or  any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or other fund referred to in sect ion 14 
shall be dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not b e made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
 32. Power to remov e difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act the Central Government may by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry  of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
33. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Inchek Tyres Limited and National Rubber Manufacturers Limited 
(Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1984 (4 of 1984), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
  13 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 4  (4), 8 and 16  (1)] 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Company  Amount  
(Rupees in Lakhs)  
1. Inchek Tyres Limited  330.40  
2. National Rubber Manufacturers Limited  159.64  
___________  
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 18, 19, 20  (1), 21 (1) and 23  (1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABILITIES OF THE TWO COMPANIES  
Category I — 
(a) Wages,  salaries and other dues p ayable to the employees of the c ompanies.  
(b) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the companies to the provident fund, 
Empl oyees’  State Insurance Fund, Life Insurance Corporation premium and any other arrear under 
any law for the time being in force.  
Post-take over management period  
Category II — 
Princip al amount of loans advanced by — 
(a) the Central Government;  
(b) a State Government;  
(c) banks an d public financial institutions;  
(d) any other sources.  
Category III — 
(a) Any credits availed of by the companies for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations, other than the liabilities specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(b) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government and semi -Government institutions 
against supply of goods or services, other than the liabilities specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances.  
Category IV — 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to Central Government, a State Government or any 
local authority.  
(b) Any other dues.  
Category V — 
Principal amoun t of secured loans advanced by — 
(a) the Central Government;  
(b) a State Government;  
(c) banks and public financial institutions.  14 
 Category VI — 
Principal am ount of secured loans advanced by — 
(a) the Central Government;  
(b) a State Government;  
(c) banks an d public financial institutions;  
(d) any other sources.  
Categor y VII— 
(a) Any credits availed of by the companies for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government and semi -Government institutions 
against supply of goods or services.  
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances.  
(d) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues t o Central Government, a State Government or any 
local authority.  
(e) Any other loans or dues.  
 
--------------------------The Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title s, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL  
3. Establishment and composition of the Council.  
4. Mode of election of members.  
5. Term of office of President, Vice -President and members.  
6. Cessation of membership.  
7. Casual vacancies.  
8. Resignation.  
9. Meetings of the Council.  
10. Vacancies in the Council not to invalidate acts, etc.  
11. Appointment of Secretary and other officers or servants.  
12. Executive Committee and other Committees.  
13. Fees and allowances.  
14. Information to be furnished by the Council and publication thereof.  
15. Recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by veterinary institutions in India.  
16. Recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by veterinary institutions in countries with 
which there is a scheme of reciprocity . 
17. Special provisions in certain cases for recognition of veterinary qualifications  granted by 
veterinary institutions in countries with which there is no scheme of reciprocity . 
18. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations.  
19. Inspection of veterinary institutions and examinations.  
20. Appointment of visitors . 
21. Withdrawal of recognition.  
22. Minimum standards of veterinary education.  
CHAPTER III  
INDIAN VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS REGISTER  
23. Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
24. Registration in the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Issue of  certificate of registration.  
26. Registration of additional qualifications.  
27. Removal of names from the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
28. Person enrolled on Indian veterinary practitioners register to notify  change of place of 
residence or practice . 
CHAPTER IV  
PRIVILEGES OF REGISTERED VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS  
29. Privileges of persons, who are enrolled on the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
30. Right of persons who are enrolled on the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
CHAPTER V  
DISCIPLIN E 
31. Professional conduct.  
CHAPTER VI  
STATE VETERINARY COUNCILS  
32. Establishment and composition of State Veterinary Councils.  
33. Inter -State agreements.  
34. Composition of Joint State Veterinary Councils.  
35. Incorporation of State Veterinary Councils.  
36. President.  
37. Mode of elections.  
38. Terms of office and causal vacancies.  
39. Resignation.  
40. Executive and other Committees.  
41. Fees and allowances.  
42. Appointment of Registrar and other officers or servants.  
43. Inf ormation to be furnished by State Veterinary Council.  
CHAPTER VII  
REGISTRATION  
44. Preparation and maintenance of State veterinary practitioners register.  
45. First preparation of register.  
46. Qualifications for entry on preparation of register.  
47. Scrutiny of applications for registration.  
48. Renewal fees.  
49. Removal from the register.  
50. Restoration to State veterinary register.  
51. Printing of State veterinary register.  
  3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
52. Transfer of registration.  
53. Bar  of jurisdiction.  
54. Issue of duplicate certificates.  
55. Penalty for falsely claiming to be registered.  
56. Misuse of titles . 
57. Practice by unregistered persons.  
58. Failure to surrender certificate of registration.  
59. Cognizance of offence.  
60. Bar o f suit and other legal proceedings.  
61. Payme nt of part of fees to Council.  
62. Accounts and audit.  
63. Appointment of Commission of Inquiry.  
64. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
65. Power of State Government to make rules.  
66. Power to make regulations.  
67. Repeal and saving.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
 
  4 
 THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 52 OF 1984  
 [18th August, 1984.]  
An Act to regulate veterinary practice and to provide, for that purpose, for the establishment  of a 
Veterinary Council of India and State Veterinary Councils and the maintenance of registers 
of the veterinary practitioners and for matters connected therewith.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to make provision for the regulation of veterinary practice and to provide, 
for that purpose, for the establishment of a Veterinary Council of India and State Veterinary Councils and 
the maintenance of registers of persons qualified to eng age in veterinary practice for the whole of India 
and for matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto;  
AND WHEREAS Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with respect to any of the matters 
aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution;  
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution, resolutions have been 
passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of the States of Haryana, Bihar, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh 
and Rajasthan to the effect tha t the matters aforesaid should be regulated in those States by Parliament by 
law;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as fo llows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short titles, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Indian Veterinary 
Council Act, 1984.  
(2) It extends, in the first instance, to the whole of the States of Haryana, Bihar, Orissa, Himachal 
Pradesh and Rajasthan and to all Union territories; and it shall also extend to such other States as ma y 
adopt this Act by resolution passed in that behalf in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the 
Constitution.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State or Union territory to which it extends, or may become ex tended 
in future, on such date  as the Centra l Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act or for different States or Union 
territories.  
2. Definitions. — In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Council” means the Veterinary Council of India established under section 3;  
(b) “member” means a member of the Council;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “President” means the President of the Council;  
(e) “recognised veterinary qualification ” means any of the veterinary qualifications included in 
the First Schedule or the Second Schedule;  
(f) “register” means a register maintained under this Act;  
(g) “registered veterinary practitioner ” means a person whose name is for the time being duly 
registered in a register;  
(h) “regulation ” means a regulation made under this Act;  
(i) “State Veterinary Council ” means a Veterinary Council established under section 32 and 
includes a Joint State Veterinary Council establis hed in accordance with an agreement under     
section 33;  5 
 (j) “veterinary institution ” means any University or other institution within or without India 
which grants degrees, diplomas or licences in veterinary science and animal husbandry;  
(k) “veterinary  medicine” means modern scientific veterinary medicine in all its branches and 
includes veterinary surgery and obstetrics;  
(l) “Vice -President” means the Vice -President of the Council.  
CHAPTER II  
INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL  
3. Establishment and composition of the Council. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
a Council to be called the Veterinary Council of India.  
(2) The Council shall be a bod y corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract and shall by the said name sue or be sued.  
(3) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) five members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst Directors of Animal 
Husbandry (by whatever name called) of those State s to which this Act extends;  
(b) four members to be nominated by the Central Govern ment from amongst the heads of 
veterinary institutions in the States to which this Act extends;  
(c) one member to be nominated by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;  
(d) the Animal Husbandry Commissioner, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(e) one  member to be nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of the 
Central Government dealing with animal husbandry;  
(f) one member to be nominated by the Indian Veterinary Association;  
(g) eleven members to be elected from amongst themselv es by persons enrolled in the Indian 
veterinary practitioners register;  
(h) one member to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the Presidents of the 
State Veterinary Councils of those States to which this Act extends;  
(i) one member to be no minated by the Central Government from amongst the Presidents of the 
State Veterinary Associations of those States to which this Act extends;  
(j) Secretary, Veterinary Council of India, ex officio . 
(4) The President and Vice -President shall be elected by t he members from amongst themselves in 
such manner as may be provided by regulations.  
(5) Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the President, the Vice -President shall discharge the 
functions of the President.  
(6) The names of persons nominated or elected as members shall be notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette.  
(7) A person shall not be qualified for nomination or election to the Council unless he holds a 
recognised veterinary qualification . 
4. Mode of election of members. —(1) An election under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3 
shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by it in this 
behalf and any rule so made may provide that pending the preparation of the Indian veterin ary 
practitioners register in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the members referred to in that clause 
may be nominated by the Central Government instead of being elected as provided therein.  6 
 (2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to  the Council, it shall be referred to the Central 
Government for its decision which shall be final.  
5. Term of office of Presiden t, Vice -President and members. —(1) The President or Vice -President 
shall hold office for a term not exceeding three years and n ot extending beyond the expiry of his term as a 
member.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member, other than an ex officio  member, shall hold 
office for a term of three years from the date of his election or nomination to the Council or unti l his 
successor shall have been duly elected or nom inated, whichever is longer.  
(3) Members of the Council shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(4) Where the term of three years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be  
nominated or elected at any time within three months before the said term expires, but, he shall not 
assume office until the said term has expired.  
6. Cessation of membership. —(1) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his of fice— 
(a) if he is absent wi thout excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Council, from three consecutive 
meetings of the Council;  
(b) if he ceases to hold the post from which he has been nominated;  
(c) in the case of a member elected under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 3) of section 3 , if he ceases to 
be a person enrolled in the register;  
(d) if he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with 
imprisonment;  
(e) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(f) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court.  
(2) On the occurrence of a vacancy referred to in sub -section ( 1), the President shall forthwith report 
the fact of such vacancy to the Central Government and thereafter that Government ma y, subject to the 
proviso to section 7, take necess ary steps to fill such vacancy.  
7. Casual vacancies. —A casual vacancy in the Council shall be filled by nomination or election, as 
the case may be, and the person nominated or elected to fill the vacancy s hall hold office only for the 
remainder of the term for which the member whose place he takes was nominated or elected:  
Provided that no such casual vacancy occurring within three months of the date of expiry of the 
normal term of office of a nominated or an elected member need be filled under this section.  
8. Resignation. —(1) The President or Vice -President may at any time resign his office by notice in 
writing addressed to the Council and delivered to the Secretary and the resignation shall take effect fr om 
the date on which it is accepted by the Council or on the expiry of ninety days from the date of receipt of 
the resignation by the Secretary, whichever is earlier.  
(2) A member may at any time resign his office by notice in writing addressed to the Pres ident and 
every such resignation shall take effect from the date on which it is accepted by the President or on the 
expiry of ninety days from the date of receipt of the resignation by the P resident, whichever is earlier.  
9. Meetings of the Council. —(1) The Council shall meet at least twice in a year at such time and 
place as may be appointed by the Council.  
(2) The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a meeting o f the Council shall be nine.  
(3) The President when present shall preside at eve ry meeting of the Council and in his absence the 
Vice -President and in the absence of both any other member elected by the members present from 
amongst themselves shall preside at such meeting.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions which come up before any meeting of the 
Council shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting.  7 
 (5) In the case of an equality of votes, the President shall have a casting vote.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 5), the Council shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided by regulations.  
10. Vacancies in the Council not to invalidate acts, etc. —No act or proceeding of the Council shall 
be invalid by reason  only of the existence of a vacancy in the council or on account of any defect or 
irregularity in its constitution.  
11. Appointment of Secretary and other officers or servants. —(1) The Council may, with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government, appo int a Secretary (who shall also act as Treasurer unless 
the Council appoints any other person as Treasurer) and may appoint such other officers and employees 
as it may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of se rvice of the Secretary, other officers and employees appointed by 
the Council shall be such as may be provided by regulations.  
(3) The Secretary, officers and other employees of the Council shall be deemed to the public servants 
within the meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) All orders and decisions and other instruments of the Council shall be authenticated by the 
signature of the Secretary or any other officer of the Council duly autho rised by it in this behalf.  
12. Executive Committee and other Committees. —(1) The Council shall appoint from among its 
members an Executive Committee and may constitute other Committees for such general or specific 
purposes as the Council considers necessary and may co -opt any person or persons sp ecially qualified to 
advise on any matter to any Committee other than the Executive Committee.  
(2) A Committee constituted under this section shall meet at such time and at such places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided 
by regulations.  
13. Fees and a llowances. —The President and other members and the members of the Committees 
(other than the members of the Council) shall be paid such fees and allowances for attending the meeti ngs 
of the Council and the Committees as may be provided by regulations.  
14. Information to be furnished by the C ouncil and publication thereof. —(1) The Council shall 
furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstract of its accounts and other information to the Central 
Government as that Government may require.  
(2) The Central Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit any report, copy, abstract 
or other information furnished to it under this section.  
15. Recognition of veterinar y qualifications granted by ve terinary institutions in India. —(1) The 
veterinary qualifications granted by any veterinary institution in India which are included in the First 
Schedule shall be recognised veterinary qualifications for the purposes of this A ct. 
(2) Any veterinary institution in India which grants a veterinary qualification not included in the First 
Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have such qualification recognised and the Central 
Government, after consulting the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First 
Schedule so as to include such qualification therein and any such notification may also direct that an entry 
shall be made in the last column of the First Schedule against such veterinary qualificati on declaring that 
it shall be a recognised veterinary qualification only when granted after a specified date.  
16. Recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by veterinary institutions in countries with 
which th ere is a scheme of reciprocity. —(1) The veterinary qualifications granted by veterinary 
institutions outside India which are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognised veterinary 
qualifications for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Council may enter into negotiations with the authority in any country outside India which by 
the law of such country is entrusted with the maintenance of a register of veterinary practitioners, for the 
setting of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of veterinary qualifications, and in pursuance of any 
such scheme, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second 8 
 Schedule so as to include therein the veterinary qualification which the Council has decided should be 
recognised, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the 
Second Schedule against such veterinary qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised veterinary 
qualification only when granted after a specified date.  
(3) The Central Government, after consult ation with the Council, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Second Schedule by directing that an entry be made therein in respect of any 
veterinary qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised veterinary qualification only when  granted 
before a specified date.  
(4) Where the Council has refused to recommend any veterinary qualification which has been 
proposed for recognition by any authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) and the authority applies to the 
Central Government in this behalf, the Central Government, after considering such application and after 
obtaining from the Council a report, if any, as to the reasons for any such refusal, may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include such qualification the rein and the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply to such notification.  
17. Special provisions in certain cases for recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by 
veterinary institutions in countries with which the re is no s cheme of reciprocity. —(1) The Central 
Government, after consultation with the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
the veterniary qualifications granted by veterinary institutions in any country outside India in respect of 
which a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of veterinary qualifications is not in force shall be 
recognised veterinary qualification for the purposes of this Act or shall be so only when granted after a 
specified date:  
Provided that veterinary practice  by persons possessing such qualifications — 
(a) shall be permitted only if such persons are enrolled as veterinary practitioners in accordance 
with the law regulating the registration of veterinary practitioners for the time being in force in that 
country;  
(b) shall be limited to the institution to which they are attached for the time being for the purpose 
of teaching, research work, charitable work; and  
(c) shall be limited to the period specified in this behalf by the Central Government by general or 
special order.  
(2) In respect of any such veterinary qualification, the Central Government, after consultation with 
the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that it shall be a recognised  veterinary 
qualification only when granted before a specified date.  
18. Power to require information as to cou rses of study and examinations. —Every veterinary 
institution in a State which grants a recognised veterinary qualification shall furnish such inf ormation as 
the Council may from time to time require as to the courses of study and examinations to be undergone in 
order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of study and examinations are 
required to be undergone and such qu alification is conferred and generally as to the requisites for 
obtaining such qualification.  
19. Inspection of veterinary institutions and examinations. —(1) A Committee constituted under 
section 12 may, subject to regulations, if any, made by the Council,  appoint such number of veterinary 
inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any veterinary institution or any college or other institution 
where veterinary education is given or to attend any examination held by any veterinary institution for the 
purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of veterinary qualification granted by 
that veterinary institution.  
(2) The veterinary inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but 
shall report to the Commit tee on the adequacy of the standards of veterinary education including staff, 
equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed by regulations for giving veterinary 
education or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  9 
 (3) The Committee shall forward a copy of any such report to the veterinary institution concerned and 
shall also forward a copy with remarks, if any, of the said institution ther eon, to the Central Government.  
20. Appointment of visitors. —(1) The Council may appoint such number of visitors as it may deem 
requisite to inspect any veterinary institution or any college or other institution where veterinary 
education is given or to attend any examination held by any veterinary institution for the  purpose of 
granting any recognise d veterinary qualification.  
(2) Any person, whether he is a member or not, may be appointed as a visitor under this section, but a 
person who is appointed as an inspector under section 19 for any inspection or examination shall not be 
appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or examination.  
(3) The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to 
the President on the adequacy of the standards of veterinary education inc luding staff, equipment, 
accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed by regulations for giving veterinary education or 
on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  
(4) The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unles s in any particular case the President 
otherwise directs:  
Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of the visitor, the Council shall 
furnish the same.  
21. Withdrawal of recognition. —(1) When upon report by the Committee or the visitor, it appears 
to the Council — 
(a) that the courses of study and examinations to be undergone in, or the proficiency required 
from candidates at any examination held by, any veterinary institution, are not in conformity with the 
regulations made under  this Act or fall short of the standards required thereby, or  
(b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and 
training provided in such veterinary institution or in any college or other institution affiliated  to it do 
not conform to the stand ards prescribed by the Council.  
the Council shall make a representation to that effect to the Central Government.  
(2) After considering such representation, the Central Government may send it to the State 
Government of the  State in which the veterinary institution is situated and the State Government shall 
forward it along with such remarks as it may choose to make to the veterinary institution, with an 
intimation of the period within which that institution may submit its e xplanation to the State Government.  
(3) On receipt of the explanation or, where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, then 
on the expiry of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendation to the Central 
Government.  
(4) The Central Government, after making such inquiry, if any, as it may deem fit, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate Schedule against 
the said veterinary qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised veterinary qualification only when 
granted before a specified date or that the said veterinary qualification if granted to students of a specified 
college or institution affiliated to any veterinary institution shall be a recognised veterin ary qualification 
only when granted before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said veterinary qualification 
shall be a recognised veterinary qualification in relatio n to a specified college or institution affiliated to 
any veterinary institu tion only when granted after a specified date:  
Provided that before issuing such notification the Central Government may consult the Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research.  
22. Minimum sta ndards of veterinary education. —(1) The Council may, by regulations , specify 
the minimum standards of veterinary education required for granting recognised veterinary qualifications 
by veterinary institutions in those States to which this Act extends.  
(2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments th ereof shall be furnished by the 
Council to the State Government concerned and the Council shall, before submitting such regulations or 
any amendments thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for approval, take into 10 
 consideration the comments of the State Government received within three months from the furnishing of 
the copies as aforesaid.  
(3) The Central Government may, before approving such regulations or any amendments thereof, 
consult the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.  
(4) The Committee constituted under section 12 shall from time to time report to the Council on the 
efficacy of the regulations and may recommend to the Council such amendments thereof as it may think 
fit.  
CHAPTER III  
INDIAN VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS REGISTE R 
23. Indian vet erinary practitioners register. —(1) The Council shall, as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, cause to be maintained in such form and in such manner as may be provided 
by regulations a register of veterinary practitioners to be known as the Indian veterinary practitioners 
register which shall contain the names of all persons who possess the recognised veterinary qualifications 
and who are for the time being enrolled on a State veterinary register of the State to which this Act 
extends.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Secretar y of the Council to keep the Indian veterinary practitioners 
register in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the Council, and from 
time to time to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India or in such other manner as may be 
provided by regulations.  
(3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.  
(4) Each State Veterinary Co uncil shall furnish to the Council six printed copies of the State 
veterinary register as soon as may be after the 1st day of April of each year and each State Veterinary 
Council shall inform the Council without delay of all additions to, and other amendme nts in, the State 
veterinary r egister made from time to time.  
24. Registration in the Indian veterinary practitioners register. —The Secretary of the Council 
may, on receipt of the report of registration of a person in a State veterinary register or on an a pplication 
made in such form and in such manner, as may be provided by regulations, by any such person, enter his 
name in the Indian veterinary practitioners register:  
Provided that the Secretary is satisfied that the person concerned possesses a recognise d veterinary 
qualification.  
25. Issue of  certificate of registration. —(1) Any person whose name has been entered in the Indian 
veterinary practitioners register shall, on an application made in this behalf in such form and in such 
manner and on payment of such fees, not exceeding fifteen rupees, as may be provided by regulations, be 
entitled to a certificate of registration.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Council shall grant to the applicant a 
certificate of registration in such  form as may be provided by regulations:  
Provided that on the removal of his name from a register, such certificate shall cease to be valid.  
(3) Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the Council that a certificate of 
registration has be en lost or destroyed, the Secretary may, on payment of such fees, not exceeding ten 
rupees, as may be specified by regulations, issue a duplicate certificate in such form as may be specified 
in the regulations.  
26. Registratio n of additional qualifications .—(1) If any person whose name is entered in the 
Indian veterinary practitioners register obtains any post -graduate degree or diploma in veterinary science 
in addition to his recognised veterinary qualification, he shall, on an application made in this beh alf in 
such form and in such manner and on payment of such fees, not exceeding fifteen rupees, as may be 
provided by regulations, be entitled to have an entry stating such degree or diploma made against his 
name in such register in addition to any entry pr eviously made.  11 
 (2) The entries in respect of any such person in a State veterinary register shall be altered in 
accordance with the alterations made in the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
27. Removal of names from the Indian vet erinary practition ers register. —If the name of any 
person enrolled on a State veterinary register is removed therefrom in pursuance of any power conferred 
under this Act, the Council shall direct the removal of the name of such person from the Indian veterinary 
practitioner s register.  
28. Person enrolled on Indian veterinary practitioners register to notify  change of place of 
residence or practice .—Every person registered in the Indian veterinary practitioners register shall notify 
any transfer of the place of his residence or practice to the Council and the State Veterinary Council 
within ninety days of such transfer, failing which his right to participate in the election of members of the 
Council or a State Veterinary Council shall be liable to be forfeited by order of the Central Government 
either permanently or for such period as may be specified therein.  
CHAPTER IV  
PRIVILEGES OF REGISTERED VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS  
29. Privileges of persons, who are enrolled on the Indian vet erinary practitioners register. — 
Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act, every person whose name is for the time 
being borne on the Indian veterinary practitioners register shall be entitled according to his qualifications 
to practise as a veterinary practitione r and to recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any 
expenses, charges in respect of medicaments and other appliances or any fees to which he may be 
entitled.  
30. Right of persons who are enrolled on the Indian vet erinary practitioners reg ister.—No 
person, other than a registered veterinary practitioner, shall — 
(a) hold office as veterinary physician or surgeon or any other like office (by whatever name 
called) in Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority;  
(b) practise veterinary medicine in any State:  
Provided that the State Government may, by order, permit a person holding a diploma or 
certificate of veterinary supervisor, stockman or stock assistant (by whatever name called) issued by 
the Directorate of Ani mal Husbandry (by whatever name called) of any State or any veterinary 
institution in India, to render, under the supervision and direction of a registered veterinary 
practitioner, minor veterinary services.  
Explanation. —“Minor veterinary services ” means the rendering of preliminary veterinary aid, 
like, vaccination, castration, and dressing of wounds, and such other types of preliminary aid or the 
treatment of such ailments as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
speci fy in this behalf;  
(c) be entitled to sign or authenticate a veterinary health certificate or any other certificate 
required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified veterinary practitioner;  
(d) be entitled to give evidence at any inque st or in any court of law as an expert under section 45 
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ), on any matter relating to veterinary medicine.  
CHAPTER V  
DISCIPLINE  
 31. Professional conduct. —(1) The Council may, by regulations, specify standards of professional 
conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for veterinary practitioners.  
(2) Regulations made by the Council under sub -section ( 1) may specify which violations thereof shall 
constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to s ay, professional misconduct, and such 
provisions shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force.  
  12 
 CHAPTER VI  
STATE VETERINARY COUNCILS  
32. Establishment and composition of State Veterinary Councils. —(1) Except where a Joint State 
Veterinary Council is established in accordance with an agreement made under section 33, the State 
Government shall establish a State Veterinary Council consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(a) four members elected fro m among themselves by veterinary practitioners registered in the  
State veterinary register;  
(b) the heads of veterinary institutions, if any, in the State, ex officio ; 
(c) three members nominated by the State Government;  
(d) the Director of Veterinary Serv ices of the State (by whatever name called), ex officio ; 
(e) one member to be nominated by the State Veterinary Association, if any;  
(f) Registrar of the State Veterinary Council, ex officio.  
(2) The names of persons nominated or elected as members shall b e notified by the State Government 
in the Official Gazette.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for nomination or election as a member of the State Veterinary 
Council unless he holds a recognised veterinary qualification.  
33. Inter -State agreements. —(1) Two or more State Governments may enter into an agreement to 
be in force for such period and to be subject to renewal for further periods, if any, as may be specifi ed in 
the agreement to provide — 
(a) for the establishment of a Joint State Veterinary Counci l for all participating States; or  
(b) for the State Veterinary Council of one State to serve the needs of the other participating 
States.  
(2) In addition to such matters as are in this Act specified, an agr eement under this section may — 
(a) provide for th e apportionment between the participating States of the expenditure in 
connection with the State Veterinary Council or Joint State Veterinary Council;  
(b) determine which of the participating State Governments shall exercise the several functions of 
the St ate Government under this Act and the references in this Act to the State Government shall be 
construed accordingly;  
(c) provide for consultation between the participating State Governments either generally or with 
reference to particular matters arising u nder this Act;  
(d) make such incidental and ancillary provisions not inconsistent with this Act as may be 
deemed necessary or expedient for giving effect to the agreement.  
(3) An agreement under this section shall be published in the Official Gazett es of t he participating 
States.  
34. Compos ition of J oint State Veterinary Councils. —(1) A Joint State Veterinary Council shall 
consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) two  members elected from among themselves by veterinary practitioners registered in the 
register of each of the participating States;  
(b) the heads of veterinary institutions, if any, in the participating States, ex officio ; 
(c) two members nominated by each participating State Government;  
(d) the Director of Veterinary Services of each of the participating States, by whatever name 
called, ex officio;  
  13 
 (e) one nominee of the State Veterinary Associations, if any, of each of the participating States;  
(f) Regis trar of the Joint State Veterinary Council, ex officio . 
(2) The names of the persons nominated or elected as members shall be notified by the State 
Governments in the Official Gazettes of the States.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for nomination or el ection as a member of the Joint State 
Veterinary Council unless he holds a recognised veterinary qualification.  
35. Incorporatio n of State Veterinary Councils. —Every State Veterinary Council shall be a body 
corporate by such name as may be notified by the State Government in the Official Gazette or, in the case 
of a Joint State Veterinary Council, as may be determined in the agreement, having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, and shal l by 
the said name sue or be sued.  
36. President. —The President of the State Veterinary Council shall be elected by the members of 
that Council from amongst themselves in such manner as may be prescribed.  
37. Mode of elections. —The election under this Chap ter shall be conducted in the prescribed manner 
and where any dispute arises regarding any such election, it shall be referred to the State Government for 
its decision.  
38. Terms of office and causal vacancies. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this section , a member 
of the State Veterinary Council, other than an ex officio member, shall hold office for a term of three 
years from the date of his election or nomination to the State Veterinary Council or until his successor has 
been duly elected or nominated, whichever is longer:  
Provided that a member of the State Veterinary Council nominated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 32 or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 34, shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
authority nominating him.  
(2) Members of the State Veterinary Council shall be eligible for re -election or re -nomination, as the 
case may be.  
(3) An elected or nominated member of the State Veterinary Council shall be deemed to have vacated 
his office— 
(a) if he is absent without ex cuse, sufficient in the opinion of the State Veterinary Council, from 
three consecutive meetings of the State Veterinary Council;  
(b) if he ceases to hold the office from w hich he has been nominated;  
(c) in the case of a member whose name is required to be  included in any State veterinary 
register, if his name is removed from the register;  
(d) if he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with 
imprisonment;  
(e) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(f) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court.  
(4) No act done by the State Veterinary Council shall be called in question on the ground merely of 
the existence of any vacancy, or defect, in the establishment of, the State Veterinary Council.  
(5) A casual vacancy in the State Veterinary Council shall be filled by fresh election or nomination, 
as the case may be, and the person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the 
remainder of the term for which the me mber whose place he takes was elected or nominated.  
(6) The State Veterinary Council shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of 
business at its meetings as may be prescribed.  
39. Resignation. —(1) The President of the State Veterinary  Council may at any time resign his office 
by notice in writing addressed to the State Veterinary Council and delivered to the Registrar and the 14 
 resignation shall take effect from the date on which it is accepted by that Council or on the expiry of 
ninety days from the date of receipt of the resignation by the R egistrar, whichever is earlier.  
(2) A member of the State Veterinary Council may at any time resign his office by notice in writing 
addressed to the President of the State Veterinary Council and ever y such resignation shall take effect 
from the date on which it is accepted by the President or on the expiry of ninety days from the date of 
receipt of the resignation by the President, whichever is earlier.  
40. Executive a nd other Committees. —Subject to s uch conditions and restrictions as may be 
prescribed, the State Veterinary Council may constitute an Executive Committee and other Committees 
for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the State Veterinary Council or for inquiring into, 
reporting with respect to, or advising on, any matter which the State Veterinary Council may refer to 
them.  
41. Fees and allowances. —The President and other members of the State Veterinary Council and the 
members of the Committees (other than the members of the Stat e Veterinary Council) shall be paid such 
fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the State Veterinary Council and the Committees as 
may be prescribed.  
42. Appointment of Registrar and other officers or servants. —(1) The State Veterinary Council 
may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, appoint a Registrar who shall also act as 
Treasurer unless the State Veterinary Council appoints any person as Treasurer and may appoint such 
other officers and employees as it may deem necessary to c arry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Registrar, and of the other officers and employees 
appointed by the State Veterinary Council shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Registrar and other officers and empl oyees of the State Veterinary Council shall be deemed to 
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) All orders and decisions and other instruments of the State Veterinary Council shall be 
authenticated by  the signature of the Registrar or any other officer of the State Veterinary Council duly 
authorised by it in this behalf.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), for the first two years from the first 
constitution of the State Veterinary Council the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council shall be a person 
appointed by the State Government, who shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Government.  
43. Information to be furnish ed by State Veterinary Council. —(1) The State Veterinary Council 
shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes and of the minutes of the Executive Committee and 
abstract of its accounts to the State Government as the State Go vernment may from time to time require 
and shall forward to the Council copies of all material so furnished to the State Government.  
(2) The State Government may publish in such manner as it thinks fit any report, copy or abstract 
furnished to it under thi s section.  
CHAPTER VII  
REGISTRATION  
44. Preparation and maintenance of State vet erinary practitioners register. —(1) The State 
Government shall as soon as may be cause to be prepared in the manner hereinafter provided a register of 
veterinary practitioners to be known as the State veterinary register for the State.  
(2) The State Veterinary Council shall on its establishment assume the duty of maintaining the State 
veterinary register in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The State veterinary reg ister shall contain the names of the persons possessing the recognised 
veterinary qualifications.  
(4) The State veterinary register shall include the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the full name, nationality and residential address of the registered person;  15 
 (b) the date of his admission in  the State veterinary register;  
(c) his qualification for registration and the date on which he obtained such qualification and 
authority which confer red it;  
(d) his professional address; and  
(e) such further particulars as may be prescribed.  
45. First preparation of register. —(1) For the purpose of first preparing the State veterinary 
register, the State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Registration 
Tribunal consisting of three persons holding recognised veterinary qualifications and shall a lso appoint a 
Registrar who shall act as Secretary of the Tribunal.  
(2) The State Government shall, by the same or a like notification, appoint a date on or before which 
application for registration, which shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee, not ex ceeding twenty -five 
rupees, shall be made to the Registration Tribunal.  
(3) The Registration Tribunal shall examine every application received on or before the appointed 
date, and, if it is satisfied that the applicant is qualified for registration under s ection 46, shall direct the 
entry of the name of the applicant on the register.  
(4) The register so prepared shall thereafter be published in such manner as the State Government 
may direct, and any person aggrieved by a decision of the Registration Tribuna l expressed or implied in 
the register as so published may, within sixty days from the date of such publication, appeal to an 
authority appointed by the State Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(5) The Registrar shall amend the register in accordance with the decisions of the authority appointed 
under sub -section ( 4) and shall thereupon issue to every person whose name is entered in the register a 
certificate of registration in the prescribed form.  
(6) Upon the establishment of the State Veterinary Council, the register shall be given into its 
custody, and the State Government may direct that all or any specified part of the application fees for 
registration in the first register shall be paid to the credit of the State Veteri nary Council.  
46. Qualifications for en try on preparation of register. —A person shall be entitled, on payment of 
the prescribed fee not exceeding twenty -five rupees, to have his name entered on the State veterinary 
register if he resides in the State and i f he holds a recognised veterinary qualification.  
47. Scrutiny of  applications for registration. —(1) After the date appointed for the receipt of 
applications for registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 45, all applications for registration shall be 
addressed to the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee 
not exceeding twenty -five rupees.  
(2) If upon such application the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council is of the opinion that the 
applicant is en titled to have his name entered on the State veterinary register, he shall enter thereon the 
name of the applicant:  
Provided that no person, whose name has under the provisions of this Act been removed from the 
State veterinary register of any State, shall  be entitled to have his name entered on the State veterinary 
register of another State except with the approval of the State Veterinary Council from whose register his 
name was removed.  
(3) Any person whose application for registration is rejected by the Registrar of the State Veterinary 
Council may, within three months from the date of such rejection, appeal to the State Veterinary Council.  
(4) A person aggrieved by the decision of the State Veterinary Council under sub -section ( 3) may, 
within sixty days from the communication to him of such decision, appeal to the State Government.  
(5) Upon entry in the State veterinary register of a name under this section, the Registrar of the State 
Veterinary Council shall issue a certificate of registration in the pre scribed form.  
48. Renewal fees. —(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
for the retention of a name in the State veterinary register, there shall be paid in every five years to the 16 
 State Veterinary Council, such r enewal fee, not exceeding fifteen rupees, as may be prescribed and where 
such direction has been made, such renewal fee shall be due to be paid before the 1st day of April of the 
year to which it relates.  
(2) Where a renewal fee is not paid within the said  period, the Registrar of the State Veterinary 
Council shall remove the name of the defaulter from the State veterinary register:  
Provided that a name so removed may be restored to the said register on payment of renewal fee in 
such manner as may be prescr ibed.  
(3) On payment of the renewal fee, the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council shall issue a 
certificate of renewal and such certificate shall be proof of renewal of registration.  
49. Removal from the register. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this  section, the State Veterinary 
Council may order that the name of any person shall be removed from the State veterinary register where 
it is satisfied after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after such further 
inquiry, if any, as it may thin k fit to make — 
(a) that his name has been entered in the State veterinary register by error or on account of             
mis-representation or suppression of a material fact, or  
(b) that he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with 
imprisonment or has been guilty of any infamous conduct in any professional respect or has violated 
the standards of professional conduct and etiquette or the code of ethics which in the opinion of the 
State Veterinary Council  renders him unfit to be kept in the said register.  
(2) An order under sub -section ( 1) may direct that any person whose name is ordered to be removed 
from the State veterinary register shall be ineligible for registration under this Act, either permanently  or 
for such period of years as may be specified.  
(3) An order under sub -section ( 1) shall not take effect until the expiry of three months from the date 
thereof or until an appeal, if any on such order is finally disposed of, whichever date is later.  
(4) A person aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 1) may, within sixty days from the 
communication to him of such order, appeal to the Council.  
(5) A person aggrieved by the deci sion of the Council under sub -section ( 4) may, within sixty days 
from the comm unication to him of such decision, appeal to the Central Government.  
(6) A person whose name has been removed from the register under this section or under               
sub-section ( 2) of section 48 shall forthwith surrender his certificate of registratio n and certificate of 
renewal, if any, to the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council and the name so removed shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
(7) A person whose name has been removed from the State veterinary register under this section or 
sub-section ( 2) of section 48 shall not be entitled to have his name registered in the State veterinary 
register or in any other State veterinary register, except with the approval of the State Veterinary Council 
from whose register his name has been removed.  
50. Restoration to State veterinary register.—The State Veterinary Council may, at any time for 
reasons appearing to it sufficient and subject to approval of the Council, order that upon payment of the 
prescribed fee not exceeding twenty -five rupees, the name of a person removed from a State veterinary 
register shall be restored thereto . 
51. Printing  of State veterinary register. —As soon as may be after the 1st day of April each year, 
the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council shall cause to be printed copies of the State veterinary 
register as it stood on the said date and such copies shall be made available to persons applying therefor 
on payment of the prescribed charge not exceeding ten rupees and shall be evidence that on the said date 
the persons w hose names are entered therein were regi stered veterinary practitioners.  
  17 
 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
52. Transfer of registration. —Where a registered veterinary practitioner of one State is practising  
veterinary medicine in another State, he may, on payment of prescribed fee which shall not exceed the 
renewal fee for registration in such other State, make an application in the prescribed form to the Council 
for the transfer of his name from the State v eterinary register of the State where he is registered to the 
State veterinary register of the State in which he is practising veterinary medicine, and on receipt of any 
such application, the Council shall, notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in t his Act, direct that 
the name of such person be removed from the first -mentioned State veterinary register and entered in the 
State veterinary register of the second -mentioned State and the State Veterinary Councils concerned shall 
comply with such directi on: 
Provided that such a person shall be required to produce a certificate to the effect that all dues in 
respect of his registration in the former State have been paid:  
Provided further that where any such application for transfer is made by a veterinary practitioner 
against whom any disciplinary proceeding is pending or where for any other reason it appears to the 
Council that the application for transfer has not been made bona fide  and the transfer should not be made, 
the Council may, after giving the ve terinary practitioner a reasonable opportunity of making a 
representation in this behalf, reject the application.  
53. Bar of jurisdiction. —No order refusing to enter a name in a register or removing a name from a 
register shall be called in question in any  court.  
54. I ssue of duplicate certificates. —Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Registrar of the 
State Veterinary Council that a certificate of registration or a certificate of renewal has been lost or 
destroyed, the Registrar may, on payment of the prescribed fee, not exceeding ten rupees, issue a 
duplicate certificate in the prescribed form.  
55. Penalty for falsely claiming to be re gistered.—If any person whose name is not for the time 
being entered in a register falsely represents that it is so  entered or uses in connection with his name or 
title any words or letters reasonably calculated to suggest that his name is so entered, he shall be 
punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and on any subsequent 
conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding one thousand 
rupees or with both.  
56. Misuse of titles .—If any person, — 
(a) not  being a person registered in a register, takes or uses the description of a veterinary 
practitioner, or  
(b) not possessing a recognised veterinary qualification, uses a degree or a diploma or a licence or 
an abbreviation indicating or implying such qualif ication,  
he shall be punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and on any 
subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding five 
thousand rupees or with both.  
57. Pr actice by unregistered persons. —(1) After the expiry of one year from the date appointed 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 45, no person, other than a registered veterinary practitioner or a person 
permitted by the State Government under the proviso to clause (b) of section 30 shall practise veterinary 
medicine or render minor veterinary services, as the case may be, in that State.  
(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable on first 
conviction with fine which may ext end to one thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding five thousand rupees or with 
both.  
58. Failure to surrender certificate of registration .—If any person whose name has b een removed 
from a register fails without sufficient cause forthwith to surrender his certificate of registration or 18 
 certificate of renewal, or both, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
and in case of a continuing offen ce with an additional fine which may extend to ten rupees per day after 
the first day during which the offence continues.  
59. Cognizance of offence. —No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act except upon complaint made by order  of the State Government or State Veterinary Council.  
60. Bar of suit and other legal proceedings .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Central Government or the State Government or the Council or a State Veterinary Council in respect o f 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act, or of any rules, 
regulations or orders made thereunder.  
61. Payme nt of part of fees to Council. —The State Veterinary Council shall, before the end of June 
in each year,  pay to the Council a sum equivalent to one -fourth of the total fees realised by the State 
Veterinary Council under this Act during the period of twelve months ending on the 31st day of March of 
that year.  
62. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Council shall maintain appropriate accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet, in accordance with such 
general directions as may be issued and in such form as may be specified by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India or any person appointed by him in this behalf and any expenditure incurred by him or a ny person so 
appointed in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Council to the Comptroller and    
Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the ac counts of the Council shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to  demand the production of books 
of accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Council.  
(4) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
person appointed by  him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
(5) A copy of the accounts of the Council as so certifie d together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded simultaneously to the Council.  
63. Appoin tment of Commission of Inquiry. —(1) Whenever it appears to the Central Government 
that the Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Act,  the Central Government may 
appoint a Commission of Inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom shall be appointed by the 
Central Government, one being the Judge of a High Court and one by the Council and refer to it the 
matter on which the inquiry is  to be made.  
(2) The Commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and report to the Central 
Government on the matters referred to it together with such remedies, if any, as the Commission may like 
to recommend.  
(3) The Central Government may acc ept the report or remit the same to the Commission for 
modification or reconsideration.  
(4) After the report is finally accepted, the Central Government may order the Council to adopt the 
remedies so recommended within such time as may be specified in the order and if the Council fails to 
comply within the time so specified, the Central Government may pass such order or take such action as 
may be necessary to give effect to the recommendations of the Commission.  
(5) Whenever it appears to the State Governme nt that the State Veterinary Council is not complying 
with any of the provisions of this Act, the State Government may likewise appoint a similar Commission 19 
 of inquiry in respect of the State Veterinary Council to make inquiry in like manner and pass such orders 
or take such action as specified in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4). 
64. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of Chapters II, III, IV and V.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, 
thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
65. Power of  State Government to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of Chapters VI, VII and VIII.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, suc h rules may 
provide for all or any of the follo wing matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the President of the State Veterinary Council shall be elected under 
section 36;  
(b) the manner in which election under Chapter VI shall be conducted;  
(c) the  procedure to be observed by the State Veterinary Council at its meetings under             
sub-section ( 6) of section 38;  
(d) the conditions and restrictions with respect to the constitution of Executive Committee and 
other Committees under section 40;  
(e) the fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the State Veterinary Council and the 
Committees under section 41;  
(f) the terms and conditions of appointment of the Registrar, other officers and employees of the 
State Veterinary Council under  sub-section ( 2) of section 42;  
(g) the particulars to be included in the State veterinary register under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 4) 
of section 44;  
(h) the fee which shall be accompanied by an application for registration under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 45 a nd sub -section ( 1) of section 47;  
(i) the form of certifi cate of registration under sub -section ( 5) of section 45 and sub -section ( 5) of 
section 47;  
(j) the fee payable under section 46, section 50, section 52 and section 54;  
(k) the renewal fee under sub -section ( 1) of section 48;  
(l) the manner of payment of renewal fee under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 48;  
(m) the charge for supplying printed copies of the State veterinary register under section 51;  
(n) the form of duplicate certificate under section 54;  
(o) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under Chapters VI, VII and VIII.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of the Sta te Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or, where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House.  
66. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make regulations, not inconsisten t with the provisions of this Act and the rules made under 
section 64, to carry out the purposes of Chapters II, III, IV and V.  20 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the President and Vice -President shall be elected under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 3;  
(b) the procedure to be observed respectively by the Council and the Committee at their meeting 
under sub -sectio n (6) of section 9 and sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(c) the terms and conditions of appointment of the Secretary, other officers and empl oyees of the 
Council under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(d) the fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the Council and the Committees under 
section 13;  
(e) the form and manner in which the Indian veterinary practitioners register shall be maintained 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 23;  
(f) the  manner of keeping the Indian veterinary practitioners register under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(g) the form and manner in which an application may be made under section 24;  
(h) the form of application  and the fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 25;  
(i) the form of certificat e of registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 25;  
(j) the fee payable under sub -section ( 3) of section 25;  
(k) the form of duplicate certificate under sub -section (3) of section 25;  
(l) the form and manner in which an  application may be made and the fee payable under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 26;  
(m) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by 
veterinary practitioners under sub -section ( 1) of section 31;  
(n) any o ther matter for which under this Act provision may be made by regulations.  
(3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made by the Council, be forwarded to the 
Central Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid b efore each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the success ive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall, thereafter, 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may  be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that regulation.  
67. Repeal and saving. —As from the commencement of this Act in any State, every other Act 
relating to any matter contained in this Act and in force in that State shall, to the extent to which that Act 
or any provision contained therein corresponds, or is repugnant, to this Act o r any provision contained in 
this Act, stand repealed and the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), 
shall apply to such repeal as if such o ther Act were a Central Act.  
  21 
  
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 (e) and section 15] 
RECOGNISED VETERINARY QUALIFICATION S GRANTED BY UNIVERSITIES OR VETERINARY INSTITUTIONS 
IN INDIA  
University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
DEGREES    
1. Agra University    Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
2. Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University    Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
3. Assa m Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
4. Bidhan Chandra Krishi Vis wa 
Vidyalaya  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. sc. & A.H . 
5. University of Bihar  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
6. University of Bombay  Bachelor of Science (Vety.)  B.Sc. (Vet.)  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. &  A.H. 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
7. University  of Calcutta  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
8. University of Calicut  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
9. Chandra  Shekhar  Azad  University of 
Agriculture and Techn ology  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
10. Gauhati Univeresity  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
11. Govind Ballabh Pant University  of 
Agriculture and Technology  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
12. G ujarat Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
13. H aryana Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Animal Science  B. V. A. Sc.  
14. University of Jabalpur  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  22 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
15. Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishwa   
Vidyalaya  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
16. Kerala Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.   
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
17. University of Kerala  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
18. Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
19. University of Madras  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
20. Magadh University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. S c. & A. H. 
21. Maha rashtra Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
22. Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth  Bachelor of Veterinary  Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
23. Marathwada Krishi Vidyapeeth  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
24. University of Mysore  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc. 
25. Nagpur University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H.  
 Bachelor of Science (Vety .) B. Sc. (Vet.)  
26. Orissa Univeresit y of Agriculture and 
Technology  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
27. Osmania  University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
28. Punja b Un iversity Lahore            
(1942—Aug.  1947)  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
29. East Punjab University, Solan   
(1948—54) Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
30. Punjab University, Chandigarh 
(1984—62) Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
31. Punjab Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
  23 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for  
registration   
1 2 3 
32. Punjab  Krishi Vidyapeeth  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
33. R ajasthan Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
34. University of Rajasthan  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
35. R ajendra Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
36. Ranchi University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
37. Sardar Patel University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
38. University of Saugar  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
39. Sri Venkateswara University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
40. Tamil  Nadu Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
41. University of Udaipur.  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V.  Sc. &  A.H. 
42. University of Agricultural Science s, 
Hebbal.  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
43. Uttar Pradesh Agricultural University, 
Pantnagar.  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
44. Utkal University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
45. Vikram University  Bachelor of Veterin ary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
46. Mohan Lal Sukhadia University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandary  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
DIPLOMAS    
1. Assam Veterinary College  Graduate in Veterinary Science  G.V. Sc.  
 Graduate in Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  G.V. Sc. & A. H. 
2. Bengal Veterinary College  Graduate of Bengal Veterinary College  G.B.V. C. 
 Graduate in Veterinary Science  G.V. Sc.  
3. Bihar Veterinary College  Graduate of Bihar Veterinary College  G.B.V. C. 
4. Bombay Veterinary College  Graduate of Bombay Veterinary College  G.B.V. C. 
5. Madras Veterinary College  Graduate of Madras Veterinary College  G.M.V. C. 
6. Punjab Veterinary College  Licensed Veterinary Practitioner 
(Conferred before 15 -8-1947)  L.V.P. 
  24 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 (e) and section 16 ] 
RECOGNISED VETERINARY QUALIFICATIONS GRANTED BY INSTITUTIONS OUTSIDE INDIA  
 
Country and I nstitution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for registration  
1 2 3 
UNITED KINGDOM    
1. Royal College of Veterinary 
Surgeons  Member of the Royal College of 
Veterinary Surgeons.  M.R.C.V. S. 
2. University of Bristol  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc. 
3. University of Cambridge  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc. 
4. University of Edinburgh  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc.  
5. University of Glasgow  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc.  
6. University of Liverpool  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc.  
7. University of London  Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine  B. Vet. Med.  
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND    
8. University of Dublin  Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine  B.V. M. 
9. National University of Ireland  Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine  B.V. M. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) AMENDMENT ACT, 1984  
__________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and Commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. Validation . 
7. [Repealed ]. 
  2 
 THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) AMENDMENT ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 4 OF 1984  
[21st March , 1984.]  
An Act fu rther to amend the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and Commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 1984.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 12 th day of January, 1984.  
1*                                 *                           *                                *                                   *  
6. Validation. —Notwithstanding anythin g contained in any judgment, dec ree or order of any court,  
tribunal or other authority and notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, agreement or other 
instrument for the time being in force, every notification made or purporting to have been made by the 
Central Government under the principal Act , on or after the 19 th day of February, 1970, reserving any 
article or class of articles for production by any ancillary, or small scale, industrial undertaking or any 
class of ancillary, or small scale, industria l undertakings shall, for all purposes, be, and s hall be deemed 
always to have been, as valid and effective as if the amendments made to the principal Act by this Act 
had been in force at all material times and such notificat ion had  been made in full compliance with th e 
provisions made by such amend ments  and accordingly any reservation made or purporting to have been 
made by such notification shall, in accordance with the tenor thereof, have, and be deemed always to have 
had, effect on and from the date of such reservation and shall, until it is altered o r superseded by any fresh 
notification under the principal Act as amended by this Act, continue to have effect.  
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts it is hereby provided that no act or omission on the part of 
any person shall be punishable as an offence  which would not have been so punishable if this section had 
not come into force.  
2*                                       *                                *                                  *                              * 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 5 r ep. by Act 19 of 1988, s. 2 and the First  Schedule  (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
2. Section 7 r ep. by s. 2 and the First  Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -3-1988).  
--------------------------The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY ACT, 1984  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Mischief causing damage to public property . 
4. Mischief causing damage to public property by fire or explosive substance . 
5. Special provisions regarding bail.  
6. Saving.  
7. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1984  
[16th March, 1984 .] 
An Act to provide for prevention of damage to public property and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Preven tion of 
Damage to Public Propert y Act, 1984.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 28th day of January, 1984.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “mischief” shall have the same meaning as in section 425 of the Indian Penal               
Code (45 of 18 60); 
(b) “public property ” means any property, whether immovable or movable (including any 
machinery) which is owned by, or in the possession of, or under the co ntrol of— 
(i) the Central Government; or  
(ii) any State Government; or  
(iii) any local authority; or  
(iv) any corporation established by, or under, a Central, Provincial or State Act; or  
(v) any company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); or  
(vi) any institution, concern or undertaking which the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:  
Provided that the Central Government shall not specify any institution, concern or 
undertaking under this sub -clause unless such institution, concern or undertaking is financed 
wholly or substantially by funds provided directly or indirectly by the Central Government or 
by one or more State Governments, or partly by the Central Government and partly  by one or 
more State Governments.  
3. Mischief causing damage to public property .—(1) Whoever commits mischief by doing any 
act in respect of any public property, other than public property of the nature referred to in sub -section 
(2), shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.  
(2) Whoever commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any public property being — 
(a) any building, installation or other property used in connection with the production, 
distribution or supply of water, light, power or energy;  
(b) any oil installations;  
(c) any sewage works;  
(d) any mine or factory;  
(e) any means of public transportation or of tele -communications, or any building, installation 
or other property used in connecti on therewith,  
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, but 
which may extend to five years and with fine:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in its judgment, award a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term of less than six months.  3 
 4. Mischief causing damage to public property by fire or explosive substance .—Whoever 
commits an offence under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 3 by fire or explosive 
substance shall be punished with re gorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one 
year, but which may extend to ten years and with fine:  
Provided that the court may, for special reasons to be recorded in its judgment, award a sentence 
of imprisonment for a term of le ss than one year.  
5. Special provisions regarding bail .—No person accused or convicted of an offence punishable 
under section 3 or section 4 shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless the 
prosecution has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release.  
6. Saving .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force, and nothing contained in this Act shall exempt 
any person from  any proceeding (whether by way of investigation or otherwise) which might apart 
from this Act, be instituted or taken against him.  
7. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Ordinance,            
1984 (Ord. 3 of 1984), is hereby  repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE TERRORIST AFFECTED AREAS (SPECIAL COURTS) ACT, 1984  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Declaration of terrorist affected area . 
4. Establishment of Special Courts . 
5. Composition and appointment of Judges of Special Courts.  
6. Place of sitting . 
7. Jurisdiction of Special Court . 
8. Powers of Special Courts with respect to other offences . 
9. Public Prosecutors . 
10. Procedure and powers of Special Courts . 
11. Power of Supreme Court to transfer case . 
12. Protecti on of witnesses . 
13. Power to transfer cases to regular courts . 
14. Appeal . 
15. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code . 
15A. Abolition of certain Special Courts . 
16. Overriding effect of Act . 
17. Delegation.  
18. Power to make rules . 
19. Saving . 
20. Amendment of Act 1 of 1872 . 
21. Repeal and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
APPENDIX . 
  2 
 THE TERRORIST AFFECTED AREAS (SPECIAL COURTS) ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1984  
[31st August, 1984.]  
An Act to provide for the speedy trial of certain offences in terrorist affected areas and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Terrorist Affected Areas 
(Special Courts) Act, 1984.  
(2) It extends to t he whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 14th day of July, 1984.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(b) “High Court ”, in relation to a Special Court, means the High Court within the territorial limits 
of whose jurisdiction such Special Court is proposed to be, or is, established;  
(c) “judicial zone ” means a judicial zone constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “Public Prosecutor ” means a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor or a Special 
Public Pros ecutor appointed under section 9 and includes any person acting under the directions of 
the Public Prosecutor;  
(f) “scheduled offence ” means an offence specified in the Schedule being an offence committed 
in a terrorist affected area;  
(g) “Special Court ” means a Special Court or an Additional Special Court established under 
section 4;  
(h) “terrorist” means a person who indulges in wanton killing of persons or in violence or in the 
disruption of services or means of communications essential to the community or in damaging 
property with a view to — 
(i) putting the public or any section of the public in fear; or  
(ii) affecting adversely the harmony between different religious, racial, language or regional 
groups or castes or communities; or  
(iii) coercing  or overawing the Government established by law; or  
(iv) endangering the sovereignty and integrity of India;  
(i) “terrorist affected area ” means an area declared as a terrorist affected area under section 3;  
(j) words and expressions used but not defined i n this Act and defined in the Code shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Code.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to the Code or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in which 
the Code or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law or the 
relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
3. Declarati on of terrorist affected area. —(1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that 
offences of the nature spec ified in the Schedule are being committed in any area by terrorists on such a 
scale and in such a manner that it is expedient for the purpose of coping with the activities of such 
terrorists to have recourse to the provisions of this Act, it may, by notifi cation,— 
(a) declare such area to be a terrorist affected area; and  3 
 (b) constitute such area into a single judicial zone or into as many judicial zones as it may deem 
fit. 
(2) A notification issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of an area shall specify the period during 
which the area shall, for the purposes of this Act, be a terrorist affected area, and where the Central 
Government is of the opinion that terrorists had been committing in that area, from a date earlier than the 
date of issue of the notif ication, offences of the nature specified in the Schedule on such a scale and in 
such a manner that it is expedient to commence the period specified in the notification from such earlier 
date, the period specified in the notification may commence from that  date:  
Provided that — 
(a) no period commencing from a date earlier than six months from the date of publication of the 
notification shall be specified therein; and  
(b) so much of the period specified in such notification as is subsequent to the date of pub lication 
of the notification shall not, in the first instance, exceed six months, but the Central Government may, 
by notification, extend such period from time to time by any period not exceeding six months at any 
one time, if the Central Government, havin g regard to the activities of terrorists in such area, is of the 
opinion that it is expe dient so to do.  
Explanation. —For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the period specified in a 
notification issued under this section may commence from a date earlier than the date of commencement 
of this Act.  
4. Establishment of Special Courts. —(1) For the purpose of providing for speedy trial of scheduled 
offences committed in a judicial zone, the Central Government may establish, by notification, a Spe cial 
Court in relation to such judicial zone — 
(a) within such judicial zone; or  
(b) if the Central Government having regard to the exigencies of the situation in such judicial 
zone considers it expedient so to do, at any place outside such judicial zone but within the State in 
which such judicial zone is situated.  
(2) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in sub -section ( 1), if, having regard to the exigencies of the 
situation prevailing in a State, the State Government is of the opinion that it is expedient to establish in 
relation to a judicial zone, or in relation to two or more judicial zon es, in the State, an Additional Special 
Court outside the State, for the trial of such scheduled offences committed in the judicial zone or judicial 
zones, the trial whereof within the State — 
(a) is not likely to be fair or impartial or completed with utmo st dispatch; or  
(b) is not likely to be feasible without occasioning a breach of peace or grave risk to the safety of 
the accused, the witnesses, the Public Prosecutor and the Judge or any of them; or  
(c) is not otherwise in the interests of justice,  
the State Government may request the Central Government to establish in relation to such judicial zone or 
judicial zones an Additional Special Court outside the State and thereupon the Central Government may, 
after taking into account the information furnished  by the State Government and making such inquiry, if 
any, as it may deem fit, establish, by notification, such Additional Special Court at such place outside the 
State as may be specified in the notification.  
5. Composition and appointment of Judges of  Special Courts. —(1) A Special Court shall be 
presided over by a judge to be appointed by the Central Government with the concurrence of the Chief 
Justice of the High Court.  
(2) The Central Government may also appoint, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice  of the High 
Court, Additional judges to exercise jurisdiction in a Special Court.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge or an Additional judge of a Special 
Court unless he is immediately before such appointment a Sessions Judge or  an Additional Sessions 
Judge in any State.  4 
 (4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby provided that the attainment by a person, appointed as a 
Judge or an Additional Judge of a Special Court, of age of superannuation under the rules applicable to 
him in the Service to which he belongs, shall not affect his continuance as such Judge or Additional 
Judge.  
(5) Where any Additional Judge or Additional Judges is, or are, appointed in a Special Court, the 
Judge of the Special Court may, from time to time, by general or special order, in writing, provide for the  
distribution of business of  the Special Court among himself and the Additional Judge or Additional 
Judges and also for the disposal of urgent business in the event of his absence or the absence of any 
Additional Judge.  
6. Place of sitting. —A Special Court may, if it considers it expedient or desirable so to do, sit for any 
of its proceedings at any place, other than the ordinary place of its sitting, in the State in which it is 
established:  
Provided that  if the Public Prosecutor certifies to the Special Court that it is in his opinion necessary 
for the protection of the accused or any witness or otherwise expedient in the interests of justice that the 
whole or any part of the trial should be held at some place other than the ordinary place of its sitting, the 
Special Court may, after hearing the accused, make an order to that effect unless, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, the Special Court thinks fit to make any other order.  
7. Jurisdiction of Speci al Court. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or in any 
other law, a scheduled offence committed in a judicial zone in a State at any time during the period during 
which such judicial zone is, or is part of, a terrorist affected area shall b e triable, whether during or after 
the expiry of such period, only by the Special Court established for such judicial zone in the State:  
Provided that where the period specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 as the period during which 
an area declared  by notification under sub -section ( 1) of that section to be a terrorist affected area 
commences from a date earlier than the date on which such notification is issued, then — 
(a) nothing in the foregoing provisions of this sub -section shall apply to a sche duled offence 
committed in such area in which the whole of the evidence for the prosecution has been taken before 
the date of issue of such notification; and  
(b) all other cases involving scheduled offences committed in such area and pending before any 
court immediately before the date of issue of such notification shall stand transferred to the Special 
Court having jurisdiction under this section and the Special Court to which such proceedings stand 
transferred shall proceed with such cases from the stage at which they were pending at that time.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if in respect of a case involving a 
scheduled offence committed in any judicial zone in a State, the Central Government, having regard to the 
provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 4 and the facts and circumstances of the case and all other relevant 
factors, is of the opinion that it is expedient that such offence should be tried by the Additional Special 
Court established in relation to such judicial zone outside the State, the Central Government may make a 
declaration to that effect:  
Provided that no such declaration shall be made unless the State Government has forwarded to the 
Central Government a report in writing containing a request for making of such  declaration.  
Explanation. —Where an Additional Special Court is established in relation to two or more judicial 
zones, such Additional Special Court shall be deemed, for the purposes of this sub -section, to have been 
established in relation to each of such  judicial zones.  
(3) A declaration made under sub -section ( 2) shall not be c alled in question in any court.  
(4) Where any declaration is made in respect of any offence committed in a judicial zone in a State, 
any prosecution in respect of such offence shall be instituted only in the Additional Special Court 
established in relation to such judicial zone outside the State, and if any prosecution in respect of such 
offence is pending immediately before such declaration in any other court, the same shall st and 
transferred to such Additional Special Court and such Additional Special Court shall proceed with such 
case from the stage at which it was pending at that time.  5 
 8. Powers of Special Courts with respect to othe r offences. —(1) When trying any scheduled 
offence, a Special Court may also try any offence other than the scheduled offence with which the 
accused may, under the Code, be charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with the scheduled 
offence.  
(2) If, in the course of any trial under this  Act, it is found that the accused person has committed any 
offence, the Special Court may, whether such offence is or is not a scheduled offence, convict such person 
of such offence and pass any sentence authorised by law for the punishment thereof.  
9. Pu blic Prosecutors. —(1) For every Special Court, the Central Government shall appoint a person 
to be the Public Prosecutor and may appoint one or more persons to be the Additional Public Prosecutor 
or Additional Public Prosecutors:  
Provided that the Central Government may also appoint for any case or class of cases a Special Public 
Prosecutor.  
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public 
Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section only if he ha s been in practice as an Advocate 
for not less than seven years or has held any post, for a period of not less than seven years, under the 
Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law.  
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additio nal Public Prosecutor or a Special 
Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of 
clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code, and the provisions of the Code shall have effect accordingly.  
10. Procedur e and powers of Special Courts. —(1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any 
scheduled offence, without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint of facts 
which constitute such offence or upon a police report of such facts.  
(2) Wh ere a scheduled offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years 
or with fine or with both, a Special Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 260 or section 262 of the Code, try the offence in  a summary way in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed in the Code and the provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the Code, shall, so far as 
may be, apply to such trial:  
Provided that when, in the course of a summary trial under this sub -section, it appe ars to the Special 
Court that the nature of the case is such that it is undesirable to try it in a summary way, the Special Court 
shall recall any witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to re -hear the case in the manner 
provided by the provisions  of the Code for the trial of such offence and the said provisions shall apply to 
and in relation to a Special Court as they apply to and in relation to a Magistrate:  
Provided further that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section , it shall be 
lawful for a Special Court to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years.  
(3) A Special Court may, with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to have been 
directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy  to, an offence, tender a pardon to such person on condition of 
his making a full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances within his knowledge relative to the 
offence and to every other person concerned whether as principal or abettor in the commiss ion thereof, 
and any pardon so tendered shall, for the purposes of section 308 of the Code, be deemed to have been 
tendered under section 307 thereof.  
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, for the purpose of trial of any 
offence, have all the powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of 
Session so far as may be in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for the trial before a 
Court of Session.  
(5) Subject to the other provisi ons of this Act, every case before an Additional Special Court shall be 
dealt with as if such case had been transferred under section 406 of the Code to such Additional Special 
Court.  
11. Power of Supreme Court t o transfer case. —Whenever it is made to appe ar to the Supreme 
Court that an order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular 
case be transferred from one Special Court to another Special Court.  6 
 12. Protection  of witnesses. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, all proceedings 
before a Special Court shall be conducted in camera : 
Provided that where the Public Prosecutor so applies, any proceedings or part thereof may be held in 
open court.  
(2) A Special Court may, on an application made by a witness in any proceedings before it or by the 
Public Prosecutor in relation to such witness or on its own motion, take such measures as it deems fit for 
keeping the identity and address of the witness secret.  
(3) In particular and without prejudice to t he generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
measures which a Special Court may take under that sub -section may include — 
(a) the holding of the proceeding at a protected place;  
(b) the  avoiding of the mention of the names and addresses of the witnesses in its orders or 
judgments or in any records of the case accessible to public;  
(c) the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and addresses of the witnesses are 
not disc losed.  
(4) Any person who contravenes any direction issued under  sub-section ( 2) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees.  
13. Power to tr ansfer cases to regular cou rts.—Where after taking cognizance of any offence, a 
Special Court is of opinion that the offence is not a scheduled offence, it shall, notwithstanding that it has 
no jurisdiction to try such offence, transfer the case for trial of such offence to any cour t having 
jurisdiction under the Code and the court to which the case is transferred may proceed with the trial of the 
offence as if it has take n cognizance of the offence.  
14. Appeal. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal shall lie as a matter of 
right from any judgment, sentence or order, not being interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the 
Supreme Court both on facts and on law.  
(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any court from any judgment, sentence or  
order of a Special Court.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the  said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period 
of thirty days.  
15. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the  Code or any other law, every scheduled offence shall be deemed to be a cognizable 
offence within the meaning of clause ( c) of section 2 of the Code and “cognizable case ” as defined in that 
clause shall be construed accordingly.  
(2) Section 167 of the Code  shall apply in relation to a case involving a scheduled offence subj ect to 
the modifications that — 
(a) the reference in sub -section ( 1) thereof to “Judicial Magistrate ” shall be construed as a 
reference to “Judicial Magistrate or Executive Magistrate ”; 
(b) the references in sub -section ( 2) thereof to “fifteen days ”, “ninety days ” and sixty days ”, 
wherever they occur, shall be construed as references to “thirty days ”, “one year” and “one year”, 
respectively; and  
(c) sub -section ( 2A) thereof shall be deemed to have been omitted.  
(3) Sections 366 to 371 and section 392 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving a 
scheduled offence subject to the modifications that the references to “Court of Session ” and “High 
Court”, wherever occurring therein, s hall be construed as references to “Special Court ” and “Supreme 
Court”, respectively.  7 
 (4) Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving the arrest of any 
person on an accusation of having committed a scheduled offence in a terrorist affected area.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of a scheduled offence shall, 
if in custody, be released on b ail or on his own bond unless — 
(a) the  Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such 
release, and  
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such o ffence and that he is not likely to 
commit any offence while on bail.  
(6) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub -section ( 5) are in addition to the limitations 
under the Code or any other law for the time being in force on granting of bail.  
1[15A. Abolit ion of certain Special Courts. —Where the area comprising a judicial zone has ceased 
to be a terrorist affected area and no cases are pending before a Special Court or an Additional Special 
Court established in relation to such judicial zone, the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, abolish such Special Court or A dditional Special Court.]  
16. Overriding effect of Act. —(1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code or a ny other law, but save as expressly provided in this Act, the 
provisions of the Code shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, apply to 
the proceedings before a Special Court; and for the purpose of the said provisions of the Code, the Special 
Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), 
the provisions of sections 326 and 475 of the Code shall, as far as may be, a pply to the proceedings before 
a Special Court, and for this purpose any reference in those provisions to a Magistrate shall be construed 
as a reference to the Special Court.  
17. Delegation. —The Central Government may, by notification, delegate, subject to  such conditions 
as may be specified, all or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act [except the power under sub -
section ( 2) of section 4 and the power under sub -section ( 2) of section 7] to the State Government.  
18. Power to make rules. —The Sup reme Court may, by notification, make such rules, if any, as it 
may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
19. Saving. —(1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercisable by, or the procedure 
applicable to, any court or oth er authority under any law relating to the naval, military or air forces or any 
other armed forces of the Union.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of any such law as is referred 
to in sub -section ( 1), a Special Cour t shall be deemed to be a Court of ordinary criminal justice.  
20. Amendment of Act 1 of 1872. —In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, after section 111, the 
following sect ion shall be inserted, namely: — 
“111A. Presumption as to certain offences. —(1) Where a person is accused of having 
committed any offence s pecified in sub -section ( 2), in— 
(a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under any enactment, for the time being in force, 
making provision for the suppression of disorder and restoration and maintenance of public order; 
or 
(b) any area in which there has been, over a period of more than one month, extensive 
disturbance of the public peace,  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26 -8-1985).  8 
 and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a time when firearms or explosives  
were used at or from that place to attack or resist the members of any armed forces or the forces 
charged with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of their duties, it shall be 
presumed, unless the contrary is shown, that such person ha d committed such offence.  
(2) The offences referred to in sub -section (1) are the following, namely: — 
(a) an offence under section 121, section 121A, section 122 or section 123 of the Indian        Code 
(45 of 1860);  
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence under section 122 or 
section 123 of the Indi an Penal Code (45 of 1860). ” 
21. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Ordinance, 1984(9 of 
1984 ), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such re peal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 ( f)] 
 1. Offences under the following provisi ons of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860): — 
sections 121, 121A, 122 and 123.  
2. Offences under the following provisions of the Anti -Hijacking Act, 1982 (65 of 1982): — 
sections 4 and 5.  
NOTE 1.—The offence of criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence 
specified in this Schedule shall be deemed to be a scheduled offence.  
NOTE 2.—The commission of an offence specified in this Schedule by any member of an unlawful 
assembly shall be deemed to be the commission of that scheduled offence by every other member of  the 
unlawful assembly.]  
 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1985, s. 3 , for the Schedule  (w.e.f. 26 -8-1985).  9 
 APPENDIX  
EXTRACT  FROM  THE TERRORIST  AFFECTED AREAS  (SPECIAL COURTS ) AMENDMENT  ACT, 1985  
(45 of 1985)  
*                                    *                            *                                      *                                          * 
4. Special Courts to cease to exercise jurisdiction with respect to certain cases and transfer of 
pending cases. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7 of the principal Act but subject to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2), after the commencement of this Act, a Special Court shall not take 
cognizance of, or have or exercise any jurisdiction with respect to, any offence other than an offence 
mentioned in or connected with an offence mentioned in the Schedule to the principa l Act as substituted 
by section 3 of this Act.  
(2) Every case which is pending immediately before the commencement of this Act before any 
Special Court and which is in respect of an offence other than an offence mentioned in, or connected with 
an offence m entioned in, the Schedule to the principal Act as substituted by section 3 of this Act shall, as 
soon as may be after such commencement, be transferred to the principal Act to take cognizance thereof 
and the court to which the case is so transferred may pr oceed with the case from the stage at which it was 
at the time of such transfer as if it had originally taken cognizance of the case and the case was pending 
with it at that time.  
(3) This section shall be read as one with the principal Act and words and e xpressions used in this 
section shall be construed accordingly.  
--------------------------The Visva-Bharati (Amendment) Act, 1984--------------------------
1 
 THE VISVA -BHARATI (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1984  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. [Repealed. ] 
3. [Repealed. ] 
4. [Repealed. ] 
5. [Repealed. ] 
6. [Repealed. ] 
7. [Repealed. ] 
8. [Repealed. ] 
9. [Repealed. ] 
10. [Repealed. ] 
11. [Repealed. ] 
12. [Repealed. ] 
13. [Repealed. ] 
14. [Repealed. ] 
15. [Repealed. ] 
16. [Repealed. ] 
17. [Repealed. ] 
18. [Repealed. ] 
19. [Repealed. ] 
20. [Repealed. ] 
21. [Repealed. ] 
22. [Repealed. ] 
23. [Repealed. ] 
24. [Repealed. ] 
25. [Repealed. ] 
26. [Repealed. ] 
27. [Repealed. ] 
28. Transitional provisions . 
29. Saving.  
30. Powers of Paridarsaka  (Visitor) to make appointment in certain cases . 
 
 
  2 
 THE VISVA -BHARATI (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1984  
[21st May, 1984 .] 
An Act further to amend the Visva -Bharati Act, 1951.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Visva -Bharati (Amendment) 
Act, 1984.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Governme nt may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
28. Transitional provisions. —(1) Every authority of the University shall, as soon as may be, after 
the commencement of this Act, be constituted in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, and 
of the Statutes of the University, as amended by this Act and until any such authority is constituted, the 
authority functioning immediately before such commencement shall continue to exercise all the powers 
and perform all the du ties under the principal Act and the Statutes, so amended.  
(2) The Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor), the Karma -Sachiva  (Registrar), the Artha -Sachiva  (Treasurer) 
and the Granthagarika  (Librarian) holding office immediately before the commencement of this Act, 
shall, on and from such commencement hold their respective offices for the same tenure and upon the 
same terms and conditions as they held it immediately before such commencement.  
(3) The Acharya  (Chancellor), Adhyakshas  of the Institutes and the Chatra -Parichalaka  (Proctor) 
shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement of this Act, be appointed in accordance with the 
provisions of the principal Act and the Statutes of the University as amended by this Act and the person 
holding any such office immediatel y before such commencement shall continue to hold that office until 
his successor enters upon his office.  
(4) The person holding the office of the Dean of Student Welfare immediately before the  
commencement  of this Act, shall continue to hold that office until the Director of Physical Education, 
Sports, National Service and Student Welfare enters upon his office.  
29. Saving. —Anything done, any action taken or any degree or other academic distinction conferre d 
by the Visva -Bharati before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding any change made by 
this Act in the constitution of the Samsad  (Court), the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council), t he Siksha -
Samiti  (Academic Council), or any other authority of t he University, be valid as if such thing were done, 
action were taken or degree or other academic distinction were conferred under the provisions of the 
principal Act as amended by this Act.  
30. Powers of Paridarsaka  (Visitor) to make appointment in certai n cases.—If any difficulty 
arises with respect to the establishment of any authority of the University or in connection with the first 
meeting of any authority of the University, the Paridar  saka (Visitor) may, in consultation with the 
Upacharya  (Vice -Chan cellor), by order make any appointment or do anything which appears to him 
necessary or expedient for the proper establishment of that authority or for the first meeting of that 
authority.  
                                                           
1. 8th August , 1984 , vide notification No. S.O.584 (E), dated 7thAugust , 1984 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3(ii). 
2. Sections  2 to 27 rep. by Act 19 of 1988 , s. 2 and the First Schedule ( w.e.f . 31-3-1988).  
