--------------------------The Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS ACT, 1985  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Act not to apply to certain persons.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNALS AND BENCHES THEREOF  
4. Establishment of Administrative Tribunals.  
5. Composition of Tribunals and Benches thereof.  
6. Qualification s for appointment as Chairman, Vice -Chairman and  other Members.  
7. Vice -Chairman to act as Chairman or to dis charge his functions in certain  circumstances.  
8. Term of office.  
9. Resignation and removal.  
10. Salaries and allowances and other terms and con ditions of service of Chairman,  and other 
Members.  
10A. Saving  terms and conditions of service of Vice -Chairman . 
10B. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairman and Member.  
11. Provision as to the holding of offices by Chairman, etc., on ceasing to be such Chairman, etc.  
12. Financial and administrative powers of the Chairman . 
13. Staff of the Tribunal . 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF  TRIBUNALS  
14. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal.  
15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of State Administrative Tribunals.  
16. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of a Joint Administrative Tribunal.  
17. Power to punish for contempt.  
18. Distribution of business amongst the Benches.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
19. Applications to tribunals . 
20. Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted.  
21. Limitation.  
22. Procedure and powers of Tribunals.  
23. Right of applicant to take assistance of legal practitioner and of Government, etc., to appoint 
presenting officers.  
24. Conditions as to making of interim orders.  
25. Power of Chairman to transfer case s from one Bench to another . 
26. Decision to be by majority.  2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Execution of orders of a Tribunal.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Exclusion of jurisdiction of courts except the Supreme Court under article 136 of the 
Constitution.  
29. Transfer of pending cases.  
29A.  Provision for filing of certain appeals.  
30. Proceedings before a Tribunal to be judicial proceedings.  
31. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants.  
32. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
33. Act to have overriding effect.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Power of the Central Government to make rules . 
36. Power of the appropriate Government to make rules.  
36A. Power to make rules retrospectively.  
37. Laying of rules.  
 
  3 
 THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 13 OF 1985  
 [27th February, 1985.]  
An Act to provide for the adjudication or trial by Administrative Tribunals of di sputes and 
complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to 
public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State  or of any 
local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of 
India or of 1[any corporation or society owned or  controlled by the Government  in pursuance 
of article 323A of the Constitution]  and for matters con nected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follow s:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Admi nistrative 
Tribunals Act, 1985.  
(2) It extends, — 
(a) in so far as it relates to the Central Administrative T ribunal, to the whole of India;  
(b) in so far as it relates to Administrative Tribunals for States, to the whole of India, except the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) The prov isions of this Act, in so far as they relate to the Central Administrative Tribunal, shall 
come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may,  by notification, appoint.  
(4) The provisions of this Act, in so far as they relate to an Administrative Tribunal for a State, shall 
come into force in a State on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Act not to apply to certain persons .—The provisions of this Act shall not apply to — 
(a) any  member of the naval, military or air forces or of any o ther armed forces of the Union;  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(c) any officer or servant of the Supreme Court or of any High Court 4[or courts subordinate     
there to]; 
(d) any  person appointed to the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament or to the secretarial 
staff of any State Legislature or a House thereof or, in the case of a Union territory having a 
Legislature, of that Legislature.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, un less th e context otherwise requires, — 
5[(a) “Administrative Member ” means a Member of a Tribunal who is not a Judicial Member 
within the meaning of clause ( i);] 
6[(aa)] “Administrative Tribunal ”, in relation to a State, means the Administrative Tribunal for 
the State or, as the case may be, the Joint Administrative Tribunal for that State and any other State or 
States;  
(b) “application ” means an app lication made under section 19;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 2, for “any corporation owned or controlled by the Government” (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. 1st July , 1985, vide notification No. G.S.R. 527(E), dated by 1st July, 1985, see Gazette of India , Extraordinary, Part II,         
sec. 3( i). 
3. Clause ( b) omitted by Act 19 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
4. Ins. by Act 51 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f.  22-12-1987).  
5. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986,  s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
6. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( aa) thereof by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  4 
 (c) “appointed day”, in relation to a Tribunal, means the date1 with effect from which it is 
established, by  notification, under section 4;  
(d) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to the Central Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tr ibunal, the  
Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to a State Administrative Tribunal, the State Government;  
(e) “Bench ” means a Bench of a Tribunal;  
(f) “Central Administrative Tribunal ” means the Administrative Tribunal established under                   
sub-section  (1) of section 4;  
(g) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of a Tribunal;  
(h) “Joint Administrative Tribunal ” means an Administrative Tribunal for two or more States 
established under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
2[(i) “Judicial Member ” means a Member of a Tribunal appointed as such under this Act, and 
includes 3[the Chairman]  who possesses any of the qualifications specified in  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 6;  
(ia) “Member ” means a Member (whether Judicial or Administrative) of a Tribunal , and includes 
the Chairman 4***;] 
(j) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(k) “post” means a post within or outsid e India;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “President ” means the  President of India;  
5*    *    *    *    * 
(o) “rules ” means rules made under this Act;  
(p) “service ” means s ervice within or outside India;  
(q) “service matters ”, in relation to a person, means all matters relating to the conditions of his service 
in co nnection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the 
territory of India or under the control of the Government of India, or, as the ca se may be, of any 
corporation 6[or society] owned or controlled by the Gov ernment, as respects — 
(i) remuneration (including allowances), pension  and other retirement benefits;  
(ii) tenure including confirmation, seniority, promotion, reversion, premature  retirement and 
superannuation;  
(iii) leave of any kind;  
(iv) disciplinary  matters; or  
(v) any other matter whatsoever;  
(r) “service rules as to redressal of grievances ”, in relation to any matter, means the rules, regulations, 
orders or other instruments or arrangements as in force for the time being with respect to redressal, 
otherwise than under this Act, of any grievances in relation to such matters;  
                                                           
1. 1st Nove mber , 1985, vide notification No. G.S.R. 764(E), dated 28th September, 1985, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 4, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 22-1-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act  1 of 2007, s. 2, for “t he Chairman or a Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
4. The words “and a Vice -Chairman” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
5. Clause ( n) omitted by Act 19 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
6. Ins. b y s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  5 
 1[(rr) “society ” means a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or 
under any corresponding law for the t ime being in force in a State;]  
(s) “Supreme Court ” means the Supreme Court of India;  
(t) “Tribunal ” means the Central Administrative Tribunal or a State Administrative Tribunal or a  Joint 
Administrative Tribunal;  
2[(u) “Vice -Chairman” means a Member who has been authorised by the appropriat e Government to 
perform administrative functions at each of the places where Benches of the Tribunal have been set up.]  
Explanation. —In the case of a Tribunal  having two or more Vice -Chairme n, references to the         
Vice -Chairman in this Act shall be construed as a reference to each of those Vice -Chairmen.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRIBUNALS AND BENCHES THEREOF  
4. Establishment of Administrative Tribunals .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish an Administrative Tribunal, to be known as the Central Administrative Tribunal, to exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Central Administrative Tribunal by or under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, on receipt of a request in this behalf from any State Government, 
establish, by notification, an Administrative Tribunal for the State to be known as the.......(name of the 
State) Administrative Tribunal to exercise the jurisd iction, powers and authority conferred on the 
Administrative Tribunal for the State by or under this Act.  
(3) Two or more States may, notwithstanding an ything contained in sub -section (2) and 
notwithstanding that any or all of those States has or have Trib unals established under that                           
sub-section, enter into an agreement that the same Administrative Tribunal shall be the Administrative 
Tribunal for each of the States participating in the agreement, and if the agreement is approved b y the 
Central Government and published in the Gazette of India and the Official Gazette of each of those States, 
the Central Government may, by notification, establish a Joint Administrative Tribunal to exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority confe rred on the Administrative Tribunals for those States by or und er 
this Act.  
(4) An agreement under sub -section ( 3) shall contain provisions as to the name of the Joint 
Administrative Tribunal, the manner in which the participating States may be associated in the selection 
of the 3[Chairman and other Members ] of the Joint Administrative Tribunal, the places at which the 
Bench or Benches of the Tribunal shall sit, the apportionment among the participating States of the 
expenditure in connection with the Joint  Administrative Tribunal and may also contain such other 
supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions not inconsistent with this Act as may be deemed 
necessary or expedient for giving effect to the agreement.  
4[(5) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section or sub -section ( 1) 
(1) of section 5, the Central Government may, — 
(a) with the concurrence of any State Government, designate, by notification, all or any of the 
Members of the Bench or Benches of  the State Administrative Tribunal established for that State 
under sub -section ( 2) as Members of the Bench or Benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal in 
respect of that State and the same shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority confer red on 
the Central Administrative  Tribunal by or under this Act;  
(b) on receipt of a request in this behalf from any State Government, designate, by notification, 
all or any of the Members of the Bench or Benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal 
functioning in that State as the Members of the Bench or Benches of the State Administrative 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 2, for clause ( u) (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “ Chairman ,  Vice -Chairman and other Members” (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
4. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  6 
 Tribunal for that State and the same shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on 
the Administrative Tribunal for that State by or under this Act ,  
and upon such designation, the Bench or Benches of the State Administrative Tribunal or, as the case may 
be, the Bench or Benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be deemed, in all respects, to be the 
Central Administrative Tribunal, or the State Administrative Tribunal for that State established under the 
provisions of article 323A of  the Constitution and this Act.  
(6) Every notification under sub -section ( 5) shall also provide for the apportionment between the 
State concerned and the Centra l Government of the expenditure in connection with the Members common 
to the Central Administrative Tribunal and the State Administrative Tribunal and such other incidental 
and consequential provisions not inconsistent with this Act as may be deemed necess ary or expedient.]  
5. Composition of Tribunals and Benches thereof .—(1) Each Tribunal shall consist of                   
1[a Chairman and such number of Judicial and Administrative Members] as the appropriate Government 
may deem fit and, subject to the oth er provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the 
Tribunal may b e exercised by Benches thereof.  
2[(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial Member and one 
Adm inistrative Member.]  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), 4*** the Chairman — 
5[(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial Member or the Administrative 
Member of the Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or, as 
the case may be, the Administrativ e Member, of any other Bench;]  
(b) may transfer 6[a Member ] from one Bench to another Bench;  
7[(c) may authorise 8[the Judicial Member]  or the Administrative Member appointed to one Bench 
Bench to dischange also the functions of 9[the Judicial Member or the Administrative Member , as the 
case may be]  of another Bench; and]  
(d) may, for the purpose of securing that any case or cases which, having regard to the nature of 
the questions involved, requir es or require, in his opinion or under the rules made by the Central 
Government in this behalf, to be decided by a Bench composed of more than 10[two members], issue 
such general or special orders, as he may deem fit.  
11[Provided that every Bench constituted in pursuance of this clause shall include at least one Judicial 
Member and one Administrative Member.]  
12*   *   *   *   * 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, it shall be 
competent for the Chairman or any other Member authorised by the Chairman in this behalf to function as 
13[a Bench] consisting of a single Member and exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 4, for “a Chairman and such number of Vice -Chairman and Judicial and Administrative Members” 
(w.e.f 19 -2-2007).  
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985). 
3. Sub-section ( 3) omitted by s. 6, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
4. The words, brackets and figure “or sub -section ( 3)” omitted by s. 6, ibid.  (w.e.f.1 -11-1985).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
6. Subs . by Act 1 of 2007, s. 4, for “the Vice -Chairman or other Members” (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
7. Subs. by Act 19 of 198 6, s. 6,  for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
8. Subs . by Act 1 of 2007,  s. 4, for “ the Vice -Chairman or the Judicial Member” (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
9. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “the Vice -Chairman or , as the case may be,  the Judicial Member  or the Administrative Member”    
(w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
10. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 6, for “ three Members” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985 ). 
11. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1985).  
12. Sub -sectio n (5) omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
13. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “an additional  Bench ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  7 
 Tribunal in respect of such classes of cases or such matters pertaining to such classes of cases as the 
Chairman may by ge neral or special order specify:  
Provided that if at any stage of the hearing of any such cas e or matter it appears to the Chairman or 
such Member that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of 
1[two members], the case or matter may be transferred by the Chairman or, as the case may be, referred to 
to him for transfer to, such Bench as the Chairman may deem fit.  
2[(7) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Benches of the Central Administrative Tribunal 
shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi (which shall be known as the principal Bench), Allahabad, C alcutta, 
Madras, New Bombay and at such other places as the Central Government  may, by notification, specify.  
(8) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the places at which the principal Bench and other 
Benches of a State Administrative Tribunal shal l ordinarily sit shall be such as the State Government 
may, by notification, specify. ] 
3[6. Qualification s for appointment as Chairman, Vice -Chairman and other                
members .—(1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he is, or has been, 
a Judge of a High Court:  
Provided that a person appointed as Vice -Chairman before the commencement of this Act shall be 
qualified for appointment as Chairman if such person has held the office of the Vice -Chairman at least for 
a period of two years.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment, — 
(a) as an Administrative Member, unless he has held for at least two years the post of Secretary to 
the Government of India or any other post under the Central or State Government a nd carrying the 
scale of pay which is not less than that of a Secretary to the Government of India for at least two years 
or held a post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India for at least five years or any other 
post under the Central or State  Government carrying the scale of pay which is not less than that of 
Additional Secretary to the Government of India at least for a period of five years:  
Provided that the officers belonging to All -India Services who were or are on Central deputation 
to a lower post shall be deemed to have held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, as the case 
may be, from the date such officers were granted proforma promotion or actual promotion whichever 
is earlier to the level of Secretary or Additional Secretar y, as the case may be, and the period spent on 
Central deputation after such date shall count for qualifying service for the purposes of this clause;  
(b) as a Judicial Member, unless he is or qualified to be a Judge of a High Court or he has for at 
least t wo years held the post of a Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal 
Affairs or the Legislative Department including Member -Secretary, Law Commission of India or held 
a post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India in the D epartment of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department at least for a period of five years.  
(3) The Chairman and every other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be appointed 
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India by the President . 
(4) Subject to the provision of sub -section ( 3), the Chairman and every other Member of an 
Administrative Tribunal for a State shall be appointed by the President after consultation with the 
Governor of the concerned State.  
(5) The Chairman and every oth er Member of a Joint Administrative Tribunal shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 3) and subject to the terms of the agreement between the participating State 
Governments published under sub -section ( 3) of section 4 of the principal Act, be app ointed by the 
President after consultation with the Governors of the concerned States.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 6, for “three Members” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1985).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f. 1-11-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 5, for section 6 (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  8 
 Explanation. —In computing for the purpose of this section, the period during which a person has held 
any post under the Central or State Government, there shall be included the period during which he has 
held any other post under the Central or State Government (including an office under this Act) carrying 
the same scale of pay as that of first mentione d post on a higher scale of pay .] 
 7. Vice -Chairman to act as Cha irman or to discharge his functions in certain            
circumstances. —(1) In the event of the occurrance of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman by 
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, 1[such one of the  Member s] as the appropriate Governm ent 
may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall act as the Chairman until the date on which a new 
Chairman, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy enters upon his 
office.  
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, the Vice -Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice -Chairmen as the appropriate 
Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, sha ll discharge the functions of the Chairman 
until the date on which the Chairman resumes his duties.  
2[8. Term of office. —(1) The Chairman shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office:  
Provided that no Chairman shall hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty -eight years.  
(2) A Member shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the da te on which he enters upon 
his office extendable by one more term of five years:  
Provided that  no Member shall hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty -five years.  
(3) The conditions of service of Chairman and Members shall be the same as applicable to Judges of 
the High Court.]  
9. Resignation and removal. —(1) The Chairman, 3*** or other Member may, by notice in writing 
under his hand addressed to th e President, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairman, 3*** or other Member shall, unless he is permitted by the President to 
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of his term of off ice, whichever is the earliest.  
(2) The Chairman, 3*** or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order 
made by the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a 
Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairman, 3*** or other Member had bee n informed of the 
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges . 
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman, 3*** or other Member referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
10. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairman,                   
4*** and other Members. —The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of servi ce (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairman, 4*** and other 
Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of serv ice of the 
Chairman, 4*** or other Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
5[Provided further that where a serving Government officer is appointed as a Member, he shall be 
deemed to have retired from the service to which he belonged on the   date    on    which   he  assumed the   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 6, for “Vice -Chairman or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 8 (w.e.f. 19-2-2007).  
3. The word  “Vice -Chairman” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
4. The word “Vice -Chairman” omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
5. The Proviso i nserted  by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  9 
 charge of the Member but his subsequent service as  Member shall, at his option, be reckoned as a               
post-retirement  re-employment counting for pension and other retirement benefits in the service to which 
he belonged.]  
1[10A. Saving terms and conditions of service of Vice -Chairman .—The Chairman,                        
Vice -Chairman and Member of a Tribunal appointed before the commencement of the Administrative 
Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 (1 of 2007) shall continue to be governed by the provisions of the Act, 
and the rules made t hereunder as if the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 had not come 
into force:  
Provided that, however, such Chairman and the Members appointed before the coming into force of 
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006  (1 of 2007) , may on c ompletion of their term or 
attainment of the age of sixty -five or sixty -two years, as the case may be, whichever is earlier may, if 
eligible in terms of section 8 as amended by the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 2006 be 
considered for a fresh ap pointment in accordance with the selection procedure laid down for such 
appointments subject to the condition that the total term in office of the Chairman shall not exceed five 
years and that of the Members, ten years.]  
 2[10B. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairman and Member. —
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and 
other Members of the Tribunal appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the 
Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the Chairman and Member appointed before the commenc ement of Part XIV of Chapter 
VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act, and 
the rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into 
force. ] 
11. Prov ision as to the holding of offices by Chairman, etc., on ceasing to be such Chairman, 
etc.—On ceasing to hold office, — 
(a) the  Chairman of the Central Administrative Tribunal shall be ineligible for further 
employment either under the Government of India or under the Governme nt of a State;  
(b) the Chairman of a State Administrative Tribunal or a Joint Administrative Tribunal shal l, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or                    
3*** any other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal or as the Chairman of any other State 
Administrative Tribunal or Joint Administra tive Tribunal, but not for any other employment either 
under the Government of India or u nder the Government of a State;  
4*   *   *   *  * 
(e) a Member (other than the Chairman 5***) of any Tribunal shall, subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, be el igible for appointment as the Chairman 5*** of such Tribunal or as the 
Chairman, Vice -Chairman  or other Member of any other Tribunal, but not for any other employment 
either under the Government of India or u nder the Government of a State;  
(f) the Chairman , 6*** or other Member shall not appear, act or plead before any Tribunal of 
which he was the Chairman, 6*** or other Member.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, employment under the Government of India or under 
the Government of a State includes employment under any local or other authority within the territory of 
India or under the control of the Government of India or under any cor poration 7[or society] owned or 
controlled by the Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19-2-2007).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 201 7, s. 176 (w.e.f. 26-5-2017). 
3. The words “Vice -Chairman or” omitted by Act 1 of 200 7, s. 11  (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
4. Clauses ( c) and ( d) omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
5. The words “or Vice -Chairman” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
6. The word “Vice -Chairman” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
7. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 8 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  10 
 1[12. Financial and administrative powers of the Chairman .—(1) The Chairman shall exercise 
such financial and administrative powers over the Benches as may be vested in him under the rules made 
by the appropriate Government.  
(2) The appropriate Government may designate one or more Members to be the Vice -Chairman or, as 
the case may be, Vice -Chairman thereof and the Members so designated shall exercise such of the powers 
and perform such of the fu nctions of the Chairman as may be delegated to him by the Chairman by a 
general or special order in writing.]  
13. Staf f of the Tribunal. —(1) The appropriate Government shall determine the nature and 
categories of the officers and other employees required t o assist a Tribunal in the discharge of its 
functions and provide the Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.  
2[(1A) The officers and other employees of a Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the 
general sup erintendence of the Chairman.]  
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of a 
Tribunal shall be such as may be specified by rules made by the appropriate Government.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND A UTHORITY OF  TRIBUNALS  
14. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal .—(1) Save as 
otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall exercise, on and from 
the appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by 
all courts (except the Sup reme Court 3***) in relation to — 
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any All -India Service or to any civil 
service of the Union or a  civil post under the Union or to a post connected with defence or in the 
defence services, being, in either case, a post filled by a ci vilian;  
(b) all service matters concerning — 
(i) a memb er of any All -India Service; or  
(ii) a person [not being a member of an All -India Service or a person referred to in                
clause ( c)] appointed to any civil service of the Union or any civil post under the Union; or  
(iii) a civilian [not being a member of an All -India Service or a person referred to in                      
clause ( c)] appointed to any defence services or a post connected with defence,  
and pertaining to the service of such member, person or civilian, in connection with the affairs of the 
Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the 
control of the Government of India or of any corpora tion 4[or society] owned o r controlled by the 
Government;  
(c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the Union concerning a 
person appointed to any service or post referred to in sub -clause ( ii) or sub -clause ( iii) of c lause ( b), 
being a person whose services have been placed by a State Government or any local or other authority 
or any corporation 4[or society] or other body, at the disposal of the Central Government for such 
appointment.  
5[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that references to “Union ” in this   
sub-section shall be construed as including referen ces also to a Union territory.]  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, apply with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the notification the provisions of sub -section ( 3) to local or other authorities within the 
territory of India or under the control of the Government of India and to corporations 4[or societies] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 12, for section 12 (w.e.f. 19-2-2007).  
2. Ins. by  Act 19 of 1986,  s. 10 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. The words and figures “under article 136 of the Constitution” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
5. Explanation  inserted  by s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1985 ). 11 
 owned or controlled by Government, not being a local or ot her authority or corporation 1[or society] 
controlled or owned by a State Government:  
Provided that if the Central Government considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of facilitating 
transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dates may be so specified under this                  
sub-section in respect of different c lasses of, or different categories under any class of, local or other 
authorities or  corporations 1[or societies].  
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Central Administrative Tribunal shall also 
exercise, on and from the date with effe ct from which the provisions of this sub -section apply to any local 
or other authority or corporation 1[or society], all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable 
immediately before that date by all courts (except the Sup reme Court 2***) in relati on to — 
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any service or post in connection with the 
affairs of such local or other authority or corporation 1[or society]; and  
(b) all service matters concerning a person [other than a person referred t o in clause ( a) or                 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1)] appointed to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such 
local or other authority or corporation 1[or society] and pertaining to the service of such person in 
connection with such affairs.  
15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of State Administrative Tribunals .—(1) Save as otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act, the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall exercise, on and from the 
appointed day, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before that day by all 
courts (except the Supr eme Court 3***) in relation to — 
(a) recruitment, and matters concerning recruitment, to any civil service of the State or to any 
civil post under the State;  
(b) all servi ce matters concerning a person [not being a person referred to in clause ( c) of this               
sub-section or a member, person or civilian referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 1 4] 
appointed to any civil service of the State or an y civil post under the State and pertaining to the 
service of such person in connection with the affairs of the State or of any local or other authority 
under the control of the State Government or of any corporation 4[or society] owned or controlled by 
the State Government;  
(c) all service matters pertaining to service in connection with the affairs of the State concerning a 
person appointed to any service or post referred to in clause ( b), being a person whose service s have 
been placed by any such local or other authority or corporation 4[or society] or other body as is 
controlled or owned by the State Government, at the disposal of the State G overnment for such 
appointment.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, app ly with effect from such date as may be specified 
in the notification the provisions of sub -section ( 3) to local or other authorities and corporations              
4[or societies] controlled or  owned by the State Government:  
Provided that if the State Gove rnment considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of facilitating 
transition to the scheme as envisaged by this Act, different dates may be so specified under this                
sub-section in respect of different classes of, or different categories under any class of, local or other 
authorities o r corporations 4[or societies].  
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall also 
exercise, on and from the date with effect from which the provisions of  this sub -section apply to any local 
or other authority or corporation 4[or society], all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable 
immediately before that date by all courts (except the Su preme Court  3***) in relation to — 
(a) recruitment, and mat ters concerning recruitment, to any service or post in connection with the 
affairs of such local or other authority or corporation 4[or society]; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. The words and figures “under article 136 of the Constitution” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. The words and figures “under article 136 of the Constitution” omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Ins. by s. 12 , ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  12 
 (b) all serv ice matters concerning a person [other than a person referred to in clause ( b) of                      
sub-section ( 1) of this section or a member, person or civilian referred to in clause ( b) of                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 14 ] appointed to any service or post in connection with the affairs of such 
local or other aut hority or corporation 1[or society] and pertaining to the service of such person i n 
connection with such affairs.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the 
Administrative Tribunal for a State sh all not extend to, or be exercisable in relation to, any matter in 
relation to which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central Administrative Tribunal extends or 
is exercisable.  
16. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of a Joint Administrative Tribunal .—A Joint 
Administrative Tribunal for two or more States shall exercise all the jurisdiction, powers and authority 
exercisable by the Administrative Tribunals for such States.  
17. Power to punish for contempt. —A Tribunal shall have, and exercise, t he same jurisdiction, 
powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may exercise and, for this 
purpose, the provisions of the Contempt o f Courts Act, 1971 (70 of 1971 ), shall have effect subj ect to the 
modifications that — 
(a) the reference s therein to a High Court shall be construed as including a reference to such 
Tribunal;  
(b) the references to the Advocate -General in section 15 of th e said Act shall be construed, — 
(i) in relation to the Central Administrative Tribunal, as a reference to the Att orney -General 
or the Solicitor -General or the Ad ditional Solicitor -General; and  
(ii) in relation to an Administrative Tribunal for a State or a Joint Administrative Tribunal for 
two or more States, as a reference to the Advocate -General of the State or any of the States for 
which such Tribunal has been established.  
18. Distribution of business amongst the Benches .—(1) Where 2[any Benches of a Tribunal are 
constituted], the appropriat e Government may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to 
the distribution of the business of the Tribunal amongst the 3*** Benches and specify the matters which 
may be dealt  with by each Bench.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether an y matter falls within the purview of the business allocated to 
a Bench of a Tribunal, the decision of the Chairman thereon shall be final.  
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression “matters ” includes 
applications un der section 19.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
19. Applications to tribunals. —(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by 
any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of a Tribunal may make an application to the 
Tribunal for the redressal of his grievance.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “order ” means an order made — 
(a) by the Government or a local or other authority within the territory of India or under the 
contr ol of the Government of India or  by any corporation 4[or society] owned or controlled by the 
Government; or  
(b) by an officer, committee or other body or agency of the Government or a local or other 
authority or corporation 4[or society] referred to in clause ( a). 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 12  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid.,  for “any additional Benc h or Benches of a Tribunal is or are constituted” (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. The words “principal Bench and the additional Bench or additional”  omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  13 
 (2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and be accompanied by such 
documents or other evidence and by such fee (if any, not exceeding one hundred rupees) 1[in respect of 
the filing of such application and by such other fees for the service or execution  of processes, as may be 
prescribe d by the Central Governmen t].  
2[(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal shall, if satisfied after such 
inquiry as it may deem necessary, that the application is a fit case for adjudication or trial by it, admit 
such application; but where the Tribunal is not so satisfied, it may summarily reject the applicatio n after 
recording its reasons.]  
(4) Where an application has been admitted by a Tribunal under sub -section ( 3), every proceeding 
under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances in relation to the subject -matter of such 
application pending immediately before such admission shall abate and save as otherwise directed by the 
Tribunal, no appeal or repr esentation in relation to such matter shall thereafter be entertained under such 
rules.  
20. Applications not to be admitted unless other remedies exhausted. —(1) A Tribunal shall not 
ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies 
available to him under the relevant service rules  as to redressal of grievances.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies 
available to him under the relevant servi ce rules a s to redressal of grievances, — 
(a) if a final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other person 
competent to pass such order under such rules, rejecting any appeal preferred or representation made 
by such person in co nnection with the grievance; or  
(b) where no final order has been made by the Government or other authority or officer or other 
person competent to pass such order with regard to the appeal preferred or representation made by 
such person, if a period of six months from the date on which such appeal was preferred or 
repre sentation was made has expired.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), any remedy available to an applicant by way of 
submission of a memorial to the President or to the Gove rnor of a State or to any other functionary shall 
not be deemed to be one of the remedies which are available unless the applicant had elected to submit 
such memorial.  
21. Limitation. —(1) A Tribunal shall not admit an appli cation, — 
(a) in a case where a fi nal order such as is mentioned in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 20 
has been made in connection with the grievance unless the application is made, within one year from 
the date on which such final order has been made;  
(b) in a case where an appea l or representation such as is mentioned in clause ( b) of                         
sub-section ( 2) of section 20 has been made and a period of six months had expired thereafter without 
such final order having been made, within one year from the date of expi ry of  the said period of six 
months.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where — 
(a) the grievance in respect of which an application is made had arisen by reason of any order 
made at any time during the period of three years immediat ely preceding the date on which the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal becomes exercisable under this Act in respect of the 
matter t o which such order relates; and  
(b) no proceedings for the redressal of such grievance had been commenced be fore the said date 
before any High Court,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 14, for “as may be prescribed by the Central Government” (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 2-1-1986).  14 
 the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if it is made within the period referred to in            
clause ( a), or, as the case may be, clause ( b), of sub -section ( 1) or within a period of six months from the 
said date, whichever period expires later.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), an application may be 
admitted after the period of one year specified in clause ( a) or clau se (b) of sub -section ( 1) or, as the case  
may be, the period of six months specified in sub -section ( 2), if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he 
had sufficient cause for not making the application within such period.  
22. Procedure and powers of Tr ibunals. —(1) A Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid 
down in the Code of Ci vil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ), but shall be guided by the principles of natural 
justice and subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the Ce ntral Government, 
the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its 
inquiry and deciding whether to sit in public or in private.  
(2) A Tribunal shall decide every application made to it as expeditiously as possible and ordinarily 
every application shall be decided on a perusal of documents and written representations and                    
1[after hearing such oral arguments as may be  advanced ]. 
(3) A Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of 2[discharging its functions under this Act], the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Ci vil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ), while trying a 
suit, in respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of th e Indian Evidence Act, 1872                         
(1 of 1872 ), requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or docu ment from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witness or document s; 
(f) reviewing its decisio ns; 
(g) dismissing a representation for d efault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any o rder passed by it 
ex parte ; and  
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Governme nt. 
23. Right of applicant to take assistance of legal practitioner and of Government, etc., to 
appoint presenting officers .—(1) A person making an application to a Tribunal under this Act may 
either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to presen t his case before 
the Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local or other authority or corporation          
3[or society], to which the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 14 or sub -sectio n (3) of section 15 
apply, 4[may authorise one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers to act as presenting officers 
and every person so authorised by it may present its case with respect to any application before a 
Tribunal .]  
24. Conditions as  to making of interim orders .— Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 15, for “after hearing of oral arguments , if any, allowed by the Tribunal in the circumstances of the 
case”  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 15 , ibid.,  for “holding any inquiry ” (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. Ins. by s. 1 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Subs. by  s. 16, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  15 
 injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in an y proceedings relat ing to, an 
application unless — 
(a) copies of such application and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim order 
are furnished to the party against whom such application is m ade or proposed to be made; and  
(b) opportunity  is given to such p arty to be heard in the matter:  
Provided that a Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of clauses ( a) and ( b) and make an 
interim order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is 
necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the applicant which cannot be adequately 
compensated in money but any such interim order shall, if it is not sooner vacated, cease to have effect on 
the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the  date on which it is made unless the said requirements 
have been complied with before the expiry of that period and the Tribunal has continued the operation of 
the interim order.  
1[25. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to another. —On the application of any 
of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, 
or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, 
for disposal, to any othe r Bench.  
26. Decision to be by majority. —If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point 
shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the Members are 
equally divided, they shall state the poi nt or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairman who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or 
points by one or more of the other Members of the Tribunal and such point or points sha ll be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the Tribunal who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it.]  
27. Exe cution of orders of a Tribunal. —Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, 
2[the order of a Tribunal finally disposing of an application or an appeal shall be final and shall not be 
called in question in any court (including a High Court) and such order] shall be executed in the same 
manner in which any final order of the nature referr ed to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 20 
(whether or not such final order had actually been made) in respect of the grievance to which the 
application relates would have been executed.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Exclusion of jurisdiction of c ourts except the Supreme Court under article 136 of the 
Constitution .—On and from the date from which any jurisdiction, powers and authority becomes 
exercisable under this Act by a Tribunal in relation to recruitment and matters concerning recruitment to 
any Service or post or service matters concerning members of any Service or persons appointed to any 
Service or post, 3[no court except — 
(a) the Supreme Court; or  
(b) any Industrial Tribunal, Labour Court or other authority constituted under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or any other corresponding law for the time being in force,  
shall have],  or be entitled to exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to such recruitment 
or matters concerning such recr uitment or such service matters.  
29. Transfer of pending cases .—(1) Every suit or other proceeding pending before any court or 
other authority immediately before the date of establishment of a Tribunal under this Act, being a suit or 
proceeding the cause of action whereon  it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 19 of 1986, s. 17, for sections 25 and 26 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 18 , ibid.,  for “the order of a Tribunal finally disposing of an application”  (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
3. Subs. by s. 19 , ibid., for “no court (except the Supreme Court under article 136 of the Constitution) shall have”                         
(w.e.f. 1 -11-1985). 16 
 such establishment, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal, shall stand transferred  on that date to such 
Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any appeal pe nding as aforesaid before a High 
Court 1***. 
(2) Every suit or other proceeding pending before a court or other authority immediately before the 
date with effect from which jurisdiction is conferred on a Tribunal in relation to any local or oth er 
authority  or corporation 2[or society], being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based is 
such that it would have been, if it had arisen after the said date, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal, 
shall stand transferred  on that date to such Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any appeal pending as aforesaid before a High 
Court 1***  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section “date with effect from which jurisdiction is 
conferred on a Tribunal ”, in relatio n to any local or other authority or corporation 2[or society], means the 
date with effect fr om which the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 14 or, as the case may be,                
sub-section ( 3) of section 15 are applied to such local or other authority  or corporation 2[or society].  
(3) Where immediately before the date of establishment of a Joint Administrative Tribunal any one or 
more of the States for which it is established, has or have a State Tribunal or State Tribunals, all cases 
pending before such State Tribunal or State Tribunals immediately before the said date together with the 
records thereof shall stand transferred on that date to such  Joint Administrative Tribunal.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “State Tribunal ” means a Tribunal established 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 4.  
(4) Where any suit, appeal or other proceeding stands transferred from any court or other authority to 
a Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) the court or other authority shall, as soon as may be after such transfer, forward the records of 
such suit, appeal or other p roceeding to the Tribunal; and  
(b) the Tribunal may, on receipt of such records, proceed to deal with such suit, appeal or other 
proceeding, so far as may be,  in the same manner as in the case of an application under section 19 
from the stage which was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo  as the 
Tribunal may deem fit.  
(5) Where any case stands transferred to a Joint Administrative T ribunal under sub -section ( 3), the 
Joint Administrative Tribunal may proceed to deal with such case from the stage which was reached 
before it stood so transferred.  
3[(6) Every case pending before a Tribunal immediately before the commencement of the 
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 1987  (51 of 1987) , being a case the cause of action whereon 
it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after such commencement, within the 
jurisdiction of any court, shall, together with the reco rds thereof, stand transferred on s uch 
commencement to such court.  
(7) Where any case stands tr ansferred to a court under sub -section ( 6), that court may proceed to deal 
with such case from the stage which was reached before it stood so transferred.]  
4[29A. Provision  for filing of certain appeals. —Where any decree or order has been made or passed 
by any court (other than a High Court) in any suit or proceeding before the establishment of a Tribunal, 
being a suit or proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based is such that it would have been if it had 
arisen after such establishment, within the jurisdiction of such Tribunal, and no appeal has been preferred 
                                                           
1. The words “or the Supreme Court” omitted by Act 19 of 1986, s. 20 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 22-1-1986).  
3. Ins. by Act 51 of 1987, s. 5 (w.e.f.  22-12-1987).  
4. Ins. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 21 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  17 
 against such decree or order before such establishment and the time for preferring such appeal un der any 
law for the time being in force had not expire d before such establi shment, such appeal shall lie — 
(a) to the Central Administrative Tribunal, within ninety days from the date on which the 
Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 1986  receives the  assent of the President, or within 
ninety days from the date of receipt of the copy of such decree o r order, whichever is later, or  
(b) to any other Tribunal, within ninety days from its establishment or within ninety days from 
the date of receipt of the copy of such decr ee or order, whichever is later .] 
30. Proceedings before a Tribunal to be judicial proceedings .—All proceedings before a Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the  Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
31. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants. —The 1[Chairman  and other Members ] 
and the officers and other employees provided under section 13 to a Tribunal shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the meanin g of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
32. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central or State Government or against the Chairman, 2*** or other Member of any Centr al 
or Joint or State Administrative Tribunal, or any other person authorised by such Chairman, 2*** or other 
Member for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any 
rule or order made thereunder.  
33. Act to ha ve overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
34. Power  to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
35. Power of the Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central G overnment may, subject 
to the provisions of section 36, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, nam ely:— 
(a) the case or cases which shall be decided by a Bench composed of more than 3[two members] 
under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 4) of section 5;  
(b) the procedure under sub -section ( 3) of section 9 for the investigation of misbehaviour  or 
incapacity of 4[Chairman or other Member ];  
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of, the            
5[Chairman  and other Members ]; 
(d) the form in which an application may be made under section 19, the documents and other 
evidence by which such application shall be accompanied 6[and the fees payable in respect of the 
filing of such application or for the ser vice or execution of processe s;] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 13, for “Chairman, Vive -Chairman and other Members” (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
2. The word  “Vice -Chairman” omitted by s. 1 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 19 of 1986, s. 22, for “three Members” ( w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2007, s. 15, for “Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member” (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for “Chairman, Vice -Chairman and  other Member” (w.e.f. 19 -2-2007).  
6. Subs. by  Act 19 of 1986,  s. 22, for “and the fees payable in respect of such application ” (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  18 
 (e) the rules subject to which a Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 22 and the additional matters in respect of which a Tribunal may exercise 
the powers of a civil court under clause ( i) of sub -section (3) of that section; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed or in respect of which rules are required to be made 
by the Central Government.  
36. Power of the appropriate Government to make rules .— The appropriate Government may, by 
notificatio n, make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the financial and administrative powers which the Chairman of a Tribunal may exercise over 
the 1*** Benches of  the Tribunal under section 12;  
(b) the salaries and allowances and  conditions of service of the officers and other employees of a 
Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of section 13; and  
(c) any  other matter not being a matter specified in section 35 in respect of which rules are 
required to be made by the appropriate Government.  
2[36A. Power to make rules retrospectively. —The power to make rules under clause ( c) of                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 35 or clause ( b) of section 36 shall include the power to make such rules or any 
of them retrospectively from a date not earlier than the date on which this Act received the assent of the 
President, but no such retrospective effect shall be g iven to any such rule so as to prejudicially affect the 
interests of any person to whom such rule may be applicable].  
37. Laying of rules. —(1) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, befor e each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that a ny such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything p reviously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislatu re.  
                                                           
1. The words “principal Bench and the additional” omitted by Act 19 of 1986 , s. 23 (w.e.f. 22 -1-1986).  
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 1987, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22 -12-1987).  
--------------------------The Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act, 1985--------------------------
1 THE BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER (PROCESSING OF CLAIMS) ACT, 1985  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Power of Central Government to represent claimants . 
4. Claimant’s right to be represented by a legal practition er. 
5. Power of Central Government . 
6. Commissioner and other officers and employees . 
7. Power to delegate . 
8. Limitation.  
9. Power to frame a Scheme . 
10. Removal of doubts . 
11. Overriding effect . 
12. Repeal and saving . 
  2 THE BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER (PROCESSING OF CLAIMS) ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 21 OF 1985  
[29th March , 1985 .] 
An Act to confer certain powers on the Central Government to secure that claims arising out of, 
or connected with, the Bhopal gas leak disaster are dealt with speedily, effectively, equitabl y 
and to the best advantage of the claimants and for matters incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster 
(Processing of Claims) Act, 1985.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of February, 1985.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act , unless t he context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “Bhopal gas leak disaster ” or “disaster ” means the occurrence on the 2nd and 3rd days of 
December, 1984 , which involved the release of highly noxious and abnormally dangerous gas from a 
plant in Bhopal (being a plant of the Union Carbide India Limited, a subsidiary of the Union Carbide 
Corporati on, U.S.A.) and which resulted in loss of life and damage to property on an extensive scale;  
(b) “claim ” means— 
(i) a claim, arising out of , or connected with, the disaster, for compensation or damages for 
any loss of life or personal injury which has been , or is likely to be , suffered;  
(ii) a claim, arising out of , or connected with , the disaster, for any damage to property which 
has been , or is likely to be, sustained;  
(iii) a claim for expenses incurred or required to be incurred for containing the disaster or 
mitigating or otherwise coping w ith the effects of the disaster ; 
(iv) any other claim (including any claim by way of loss of business or employment) arising 
out of , or connected with , the disaster;  
(c) “claimant ” means a person entitled to make  a claim;  
(d) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner appointed under section 6;  
(e) “person”  includes the Government;  
(f) “Scheme ” means a Scheme framed under section 9.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clauses ( b) and ( c), where the death of a person has taken 
place as a result of the disaster, the claim for compensation or damages for the death of such person 
shall be for the benefit of the spouse, children (including a child in the womb) and other heirs of the 
deceased and they shall be deemed to be the claimants in respect thereof.  
3. Power of Central Government to represent claimants .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of 
this Act , the Central Government shall, and shall have the exclusive right to , represent, and act in place of 
(whether within or outside India) every person who has made , or is entitled to make , a claim for all 
purposes connected with such claim in the same manner and to the same effect as such person.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
purpos es referred t o therein include — 
(a) institution of any suit or other proceeding in or before any court or other authority (whether 
within or outside India) or withdrawal of any suc h suit or other proceeding, and  
(b) entering into a compromise.  3 (3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply also in relation to claims in respect of which suits or 
other proceedings have been instituted in or before any court or other authority (whether within or outside 
India) before the commencement of this Act:  
Provided  that in the case of any such suit or other proceeding with respect to any claim pending 
immediately before the commencement of this Act in or before any court or other authorit y outside India, 
the Central Government shall represent, and act in place of, or along with , such claimant, if such court or 
other authority so permits.  
4. Claimant ’s right to be rep resented by a legal practitioner .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 3, in representing, and acting in place of, any person in relation to any claim, the 
Central Government shall have due regard to any matters which such person may require to be urged with 
respect to his claim and shall, if such person so desires, p ermit at the expense of such person, a legal 
practitioner of his choice to be associated in the conduct of any suit or other proceeding relating to his 
claim.  
5. Power of Central Government .—(1) For the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, 
the Central Government shall have the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning  and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining 
him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning  any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify.  
(2) Every notificat ion made under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shal l be laid, as soon as may be af ter it 
is made , before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be made , 
the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the ca se may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that notification.  
6. Commissioner and other officers and employees .—(1) For the purpose of assisting it in 
dischar ging its functions under this Act , the Central Government may appoint an officer, to be known as 
the Commissioner for the welfare of the victims of the Bhopal gas leak disaster, and such other officers 
and employees to assist him as that Government may deem fit.  
(2) The Commissioner shall discharge such functions as may be assigned to him by the Scheme.  
(3) The Commissioner and such of the officers subordinate to him as may be authorised by the 
Central Government by notification in the Offi cial Gazette in this behalf may,  for the discharge of their 
functions under the Scheme, exercise all or any of the powers which the Central Government may 
exercise under section 5.  
(4) All officers and authorities of the Government shall act in aid of the Commissioner.  4 1[(5) The Commissioner and the office rs subordinate to him authorised to discharge functions under 
the Scheme shall be deemed to be a c ivil court for the purposes of s ection 195 and Chapter XXVI of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).]  
7. Power to delegate .—The Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
delegate, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the notification, all or any of its 
powers under this Act (excepting the power under section 9 to frame a Scheme) to the Government o f 
Madhya Pradesh or an officer of the Central Government not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that 
Government or an officer of the Government of Madhya Pradesh not below the rank of a Secretary to that 
Gover nment 2[or the Commissioner].  
8. Limitation .—(1) In computing, under the Limitation Act , 1963  (36 of 1963)  or any other law for 
the time being in force, the period of limitation for the purpose of instituting a suit or other proceeding for 
the enforcement of a claim, any period after the date on which such claim is registered under, and in 
accordance with , the provisions of the Scheme shall be excluded.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any proceedings by way of appeal.  
9. Power to frame a Scheme .—(1) The Central Government shall, for carrying into effect the 
purposes of this Act , frame by notification in the Official Gazette a Scheme as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), a Scheme 
may provide for all or any of the followi ng matt ers, namely: — 
(a) the registration of the claims under the Scheme and all matters connected with such 
registration;  
(b) the processing of the claims for securing their enforcement and matters connected therewith;  
(c) the maintenance of records and registers in respect of the claims;  
(d) the creation of a fund for meeting expenses in connection with the administration of the 
Scheme and of the provisions of this Act;  
(e) the amounts which the Central Government may, after d ue appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in that behalf, credit to  the fund referred to in clause (d) and any other amounts which may be 
credited to such fund;  
(f) the utilisation , by way of disbursal (including apportionment) or otherwise, of any amount s 
received in satisfaction of the claims;  
(g) the officer (being a judicial officer of a rank not lower than that of a District Judge) who may 
make such disbursal or apportionment in the event of a dispute;  
(h) the maintenance and audit of accounts with re spect to the amounts referred to in clauses( e) 
and ( f); 
(i) the functions of the Commissioner and other officers and employees appointed under section 
6. 
(3) Every Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is framed, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act  24 of 1992, s.  2 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1992) . 
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -8-1992) . 5 modification in the S cheme or both Houses agree that the Scheme should not be framed, the Scheme shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modif ied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,  however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of  anything previously done 
under that Scheme . 
10. Removal of doubts .—For the removal of dou bts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) any sums paid by the Government to a claimant otherwise than by way of disbursal of the 
compensation or damages received as a result of the adjudication or settlement of his claim by a court 
or other authority, shall be deemed to be with out prejudice to the adjudication or settlement by such 
court or other authority of his claim to receive compensation or damages in satisfaction of his claim 
and shall not be taken into account by such court or other authority in determining the amount of 
compensation or damages to which he may be entitled in satisfaction of his claim;  
(b) in disbursing under the Scheme the amount received by way of compensation or damages in 
satisfaction of a claim as a result of the adjudication or settlement of the claim  by a court or other  
authority, deduction shall be made from such amount of the sums , if any , paid to the claimant by the  
Government before the disbursal of such amount.  
11. Overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act and of any Scheme framed thereunder shall have  
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or  
any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act . 
12. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster ( Proces sing of Claims) Ordinance,  1985  
(1 of 1985), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Calcutta Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Temporary Provisions Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE CALCUTTA METRO RAILWAY (OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE) 
TEMPORARY PROVISIONS ACT, 1985  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CALCUTTA  METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION  
3. Calcutta metro railway administration to be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the 
metro railway . 
4. Previous sanction of the Central Government required for the opening of metro railway . 
CHAPTER III  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE RUNNING OF THE METRO RAILWAY  
5. Carriage of goods . 
6. Reservation of compartments for females not necessary.  
7. Dangerous or offensive goods . 
8. Penalty for taking or causing to take offensive or dangerous goods upon the metro railway . 
9. Smoking in compartments, etc . 
10. Drunkenness or nuisance upon the metro railway . 
11. Prohibition of demonstrations upon the metro railway.  
12. Penalty for travelling on roof, etc., of a train . 
13. Penalty for unlawfully entering or remaining upon the metro railway or walking on the metro 
railway line . 
14. Endangering the safety of passengers . 
15. Abandoning train, etc., without authority . 
16. Obstructing running of trains, etc . 
17. Offences by companies . 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEO US 
18. Application of Act 9 of 1890 and the rules, etc., made thereunder to the metro railway . 
19. Effect of Act and rules, etc., inconsistent with other enactments . 
20. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
21. Power to remove difficulties . 
22. Power to make rules.  
23. Repeal and saving . 
 2 
 THE CALCUTTA METRO RAILWAY (OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE) 
TEMPORARY PROVISIONS ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1985  
[16th February , 1985 .] 
An Act to make temporary provisions for the operation and maintenance of the Calcutta metro 
railway and for matters connected therewith, pending the making of regular arrangements for 
such operation and maintenance.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Calcutta Metro 
Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Temporary Provisions Act, 1985.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 22nd day of October, 1984.  
(3) It shall appl y to the metropolitan city of Calcutta.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires,— 
(a) “Calcutta m etro railway administration ” or “metro railway administration ” means the General 
Manager of the metro railway appointed under section 3 of the Construction Act;  
(b) “commissioner ” means a commissioner of the metro railway appointed under section 27 of 
the Construction Act;  
(c) “Construction Act ” means the Metro R ailways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978  (33 of 
1978) ; 
(d) “metro railway ” means such portion of the metro railway constructed in the metropolitan city 
of Calcutta under the provisions of the Construction Act as may , for the time being, be available for 
public carria ge of passengers, and includes — 
(i) all land within the boundary marks indicating the limits of the land appurtenant to the 
metro railway;  
(ii) all lines of rails, sidings, yards or branches worked over for the purposes of, or in 
connection with, the metro railway;  
(iii) all stations, offices, ventilation shafts and ducts, warehouses, workshops, manufactories, 
fixed plants and machineries, sheds, dep ots and other works constructed for the purpose of, or in 
connection with, the metro railway;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
(2) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian Railways  
Act, 1890  (9 of 1890) , or the Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978  (33 of 1978) , shall have 
the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CALCUTTA METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION  
3. Calcutta metro railway administration to be responsible for the operation and maintenance 
of the metro railway .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Calcutta metro railway 
administration shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the metro railway.  
(2) The Calcutta metro railway administration may, for the efficient performance of its functions 
under this Act, appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary on such terms and 
conditions of service as may be prescribed.  3 
 4. Previous sanction of the Central Government required for the opening of metro railway .—(1) 
No metro railway shall be opened for the public carriage of passengers except with the previous sanction 
of the Central Government.  
(2) Before giving its sanction u nder sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall, after considering 
the report given (whether before or after the commencement of this Act) by the commissioner under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 27 of the Construction Act and other relevant factors, satisfy itself 
that the metro railway can be opened without danger to the public using it.  
(3) A sanction  given under this section may be either absolute or subject to such conditions as the 
Central Government thinks necessary for the safety of th e public.  
(4) Where any sanction for the opening of the metro railway under this section is given subject to any 
conditions, such railway shall not be worked or used until such conditions are fulfilled to the satisfaction 
of the Central Government.  
CHAPTER  III 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE RUNNING OF THE METRO RAILWAY  
5. Carriage of goods .—(1) No person shall, while travelling in the metro railway, carry with him any 
goods other than a small baggage containing personal belongings not exceeding such volume and weight 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where any person travels in the metro railway in contravention of the provisions of sub -section 
(1), he shall, notwithstanding that he holds a valid pass or ticket for any travel in such railway, be liable to 
be removed from the train by any metro railway official authorised by the metro railway administration in 
this behalf or by any other person whom  such metro railway official may call to his aid.  
6. Reservation of compartments for females not necessary .—It shall not be necessary for the 
metro railway administration to reserve any compartment in any train for the exclusive use of females.  
7. Dangerou s or offensive goods .—(1) No person shall take or cause to be taken any dangerous or 
offensive goods upon the metro railway.  
(2) If any metro railway official has reason to believe that any such goods are contained in a package 
in the custody of any passenger, he may cause the package to be opened for the purpose of ascertaining its 
contents.  
8. Penalty for taking or causing to take offensive or dangerous goods upon the metro railway .—
(1) If, in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 7, a person takes or causes to be taken any offensive 
goods upon the metro railway, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) If, in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 7, a person takes or causes to be taken any 
dangerous g oods upon the metro railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to four years and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.  
(3) In addition to the penalties specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), a person taking or 
causing to be taken any offensive goods or dangerous goods upon the metro railway shall be responsible 
also for any loss, injury or damage which may be caused by reason of such goods having been so brought 
upon  the metro  railway.  
9. Smoking in compartments, etc. —(1) No person shall smoke in any compartment or carriage of 
the metro railway or in any underground metro railway station.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.  
(3) If any person persists in so smoking after being warned by any metro railway official to desist, he 
may, in addition to incurring the liability mentioned in sub -section ( 2), be removed from the compartment 4 
 or car riage in which he is travelling or from the underground station at which he may be found smoking 
by any metro railway official authorised by the metro railway administration in this behalf.  
10. Drunkenness or nuisance upon the metro railway .—(1) If any person,— 
(a) is in a state of intoxication; or  
(b) commits any nuisance or act of indecency, or uses obscene or abusive language; or  
(c) wilfully or without excuse interferes in any way with the comfort of any passenger,  
in any carriage or upon any part of  the metro railway, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to two hundred and fifty rupees and shall also be liable to forfeiture of the fare which he may have paid or 
any pass or ticket which he may have obtained or purchased, or be removed fro m such carriage or part by 
any metro railway official authorised by the metro railway administration in this behalf.  
(2) If any metro railway official is in a state of intoxication while on duty, he shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or, where the improper performance of the duty 
would be likely to endanger the safety of any passenger travelling or being upon the metro railway, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both.  
11. Prohibition of demonstrations upon the metro railway —(1) No demonstration of any kind 
whatsoever shall be held on any part of the metro railway or other premises thereof and it shall be open to 
the metro rai lway administration to exclude from such premises any person attending such 
demonstrations whether or not he is in possession of a pass or ticket entitling him to be in the said 
premises.  
(2) No person shall paste or put up any poster or write or draw anything or matter in any compartment 
or carriage of the metro railway,  or any premises thereof, without any lawful authority and any person 
found engaged in doing any such act may be removed from the compartment, carriage or premises by any 
metro railway official authorised by the metro railway administration in this behalf.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), or being asked 
by any metro railway official to leave any compartment, carriage or premises refuses  to do so, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
12. Penalty for travelling on roof, etc., of a train .—If any passenger travels on the roof of a train or 
persists in trave lling in any part of a train not intended for the use of passengers or projects any part of his 
body out of a train after being warned by any metro railway official to desist, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, 
or with both, and shall also be liable to be removed from the train by any metro railway official 
authorised by the metro railway administration in this behalf.  
13. Penalty for u nlawfully entering or remaining upon the metro railway or walking on the 
metro railway line .—(1) If a person enters into or upon the metro railway without any lawful authority 
or having entered with lawful authority remains there unlawfully and refuses to leave on being requested 
to do so by any metro railway official , he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both.  
(2) If any person walks on the metro railway line without any lawful authority, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or with both.  
14. Endangering the safety of passengers .—If any me tro railway official, when on duty, endanger s 
the safety of any passenger, — 
(a) by any rash or negligent act or omission; or  
(b) by  disobeying any rule or order which such official was bound by the terms of his 
employment to obey, and of which he had notice,  5 
 he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which 
may extend to six thousan d rupees, or with both.  
15. Abandoning train, etc., without authority .—If any metro railway official, when on duty, is 
entrusted with any responsibility connected with the running of a train, or any other rolling stock from 
one station or place to another station or place, and he abandons his duty before reaching such station or 
place, without authority or without properly handing over such train or rolling stock to another authorised 
metro railway official, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a te rm which may extend to four 
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
16. Obstructing running of trains, etc. —If any person obstructs or causes to be obstructed or 
attempts to obstruct any train or other rolling stock upon  the metro railway by squatting, picketing, or 
keeping without authority any rolling stock on the metro railway or tampering with any signalling 
installations or by interfering with the working mechanism thereof, or otherwise, he shall be liable to be 
remo ved by any metro railway official authorised by the metro railway administration in this behalf and 
shall also be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to four years, or with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
17. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded aga inst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he prove s that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a  company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Application of Act 9 of 1890 and the rules, etc., made thereunder to the metro railway .—
 Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, and 
the rules, orders or notifications made or issued thereunder shall, so far as may be, and subject to such 
modifications as may be necessary, apply to t he operation and maintenance of the metro railway, as if 
such metro railway were a railway as defined under that Act, and the references to “railway 
administration ” and “inspector” in that Act shall be construed as references to the “metro railway 
administ ration” and “commissioner ” respectively.  
19. Effect of Act and rules, etc., inconsistent with other enactments .—The provisions of this Act 
or any rule made or any notification issued thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument having effect 
by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
20. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against t he Central Government, the metro railway administration or any officer or other 
employee of that Government or the metro railway administration for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act.  6 
 (2) No suit, prosecution or othe r legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the 
metro railway  administration or any officer or other employee of that Government or the metro railway 
administration for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act.  
21. Power to remove difficul ties.—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which 
appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the pur pose of removing the difficul ty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisi ons of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for the followi ng matters , namely:— 
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the metro railway 
administration under sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(b) the cases in which and the extent to which the procedure specified in section 4 for the opening 
of the metro ra ilway for public carriage of passengers may be dispensed with;  
(c) the volume and weight of the baggage containing personal belongings that may be carried by 
a person while travelling in the metro railway;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or m ay be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule s hall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
23. Repeal and savin g.—(1) The Calcutta Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Temporary 
Provisions Ordinance, 1984  (13 of 1984) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance,  shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Handlooms (Reservation of Articles for Production) Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE HANDLOOMS ( RESERVATION OF ARTICLES FOR PRODUCTION) ACT , 1985  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Power to specify articles for exclusive production by handlooms . 
4. Constitution of Advisory  Committee . 
5. Prohibition of production of articles exclusively reserved for handlooms . 
6. Power to call for information or to furnish samples . 
7. Power to enter and impact.  
8. Power to search and seize.  
9. Search and seizure to be made in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973 . 
10. Penalty for contravention of orders made under section 3.  
11. False statement . 
12. Attempts and abetment . 
13. Offences by companies . 
14. Offences to be cognizable.  
15. Power to delegate . 
16. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
17. Protection of ac tion taken in good faith . 
18. Power to exempt . 
19. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE HANDLOOMS ( RESERVATION OF ARTICLES FOR PRODUCTION) ACT , 1985  
ACT NO. 22 OF 1985  
[29th March , 1985 .] 
An Act to provide for reservation of certain articles for exclusive production by handlooms and 
for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follow s:— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Handlooms (Reservation 
of Articles for Production) Act, 1985.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, b y notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Advisory Committee ” means the Advisory Committee constituted under section 4;  
(b) “handloom ” means any loom, other than power  loom;  
(c) “manufacture r” includes the producer and processor, and the expression “manufacture ” shall 
be construed accordingly;  
(d) “power  loom ” means a loom which is worked by power as defined in clause ( g) of section 2 
of the Factories Act, 1948  (63 of 1948) ; 
(e) “processor ” means a person engaged in any ancillary process subsequent to the production of 
cloth, such as dyeing, bleaching, mercerising, calendering, embroidering, printing, raising, cloth 
embossing or any other finishing process, but does not include a producer, a nd the expression 
“process ” shall be  construed accordingly;  
(f) “producer ” means a person engaged in the production of cloth on any loom, other than 
handloom, and shall include a person who owns, works or operate s on, a loom for the production of 
cloth, an d the expression “produce”  shall be construed accordingly.  
3. Power to specify articles for exclusive production by handlooms .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), the Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied, after considering the recommendations made to it by the Advisory 
Committee, that it is necessary so to do for the protection and development of the handloom industry, by 
order published in the Official Gazette, direct, f rom time to time, that any article or class of articles shall, 
on and from such date as may be specified in the order (hereinafter referred to as the date of reservation), 
be reserved for exclusive production by handlooms.  
(2) Every order published under s ub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised  in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall 
thereafter have effect only in such  modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such  modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that order.  
                                                           
1. 31st March , 1986, vide notificat ion No. G.S. R 505(E), dated 10th March , 1986, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary, Part II,         
sec. 3 (i). 3 
 4. Constitution of Advisory Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, with a view to 
determining the nature of any article or class of articles that may be reserved for exclusive production by 
handlooms, constitute an Advisory Committee consisting of such persons as have, in the opinion of that 
Government, the necessary expertise to give advice on the matter.  
(2) The Advisory Committee shall, after considering the following matters, communicate its 
recommendations to the Central Government, namely: — 
(a) the article  or class of articles which is being produce d by handlooms for mass consumption;  
(b) the article or class of articles which is being produced traditionally by handlooms;  
(c) the level of employment likely to be generated by the production of the article or class of 
articles referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) exclusively by handlooms;  
(d) the protection of interests of persons engaged in the handloom industry and the need for the 
continued maintenance of the industry; and  
(e) such other matters as the Advisory Committee may think fit.  
5. Prohibit ion of production of articles exclusively reserved for handlooms .—Where an order ha s 
been made under section 3 reserving any article or class o f articles for exclusive production by 
handlooms, such article or class o f articles shall not, on and from the date o f reservation, be produced by 
any loom, other than handloom:  
Provided that any person who, immediately before the date of reservation of any article or class of 
articles, was engaged in the production of such article or class of articles in any loom, other than 
handloom may continue to be so engaged till the expiry of three months from the date of such reservation.  
6. Power to call for information or to furnish samples .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
order,  require any manufacturer to furnish , for the purposes of this Act, — 
(a) such information in his possession with respect to  any manufacturing activity or business 
carried on by him or by any other person to any officer or authority specified by it in such form and 
within such period as may be specified by that Government in the order;  
(b) such samples of any articles manufactu red by him or by any other person for inspection by 
such off icer or authority, at such places and within such period as may be specified by it in the order.  
(2) Where any order has been issued to any manufacturer under sub -section ( 1), he shall comply with  
such order.  
7. Power to enter and imp act.—Any officer authorised by the Central Government (hereinafter 
referred to as the authorised officer) may enter, at all reasonable times, any place or premises of any 
manufacture r in which any textile articles are stored , kept or exposed for sale and may require the 
production for inspection of any books of account, registers, records or other documents kept therein and 
ask for such information relating to the manufacture, storage or keeping for sale of any such articles or to 
any power  looms that may be found in such place as he may think fit for the purposes of carrying into 
effect the provisions of this Act.  
8. Power to search and seize .—(1) If the authorised officer has any reas on to believe that, — 
(a) any article or class of articles specified in any order made under section 3 is being produced in 
any place in contravention of such order; or  
(b) any  article or class of articles produced in contravention of such order are secreted in any 
place; or  
(c) any article or class of articles is liable to forfeiture under this Act,  
he may enter into and search such place or premises for such article, or class of articles or any powerloom 
which in the opinion of the authorised officer may have been used for the production of such article or 
class o f articles.  4 
 (2) Where, as a result of any search made under sub -section ( 1), any article or  class of articles or any  
power  loom has been found and the authorised officer has reason to believe that such article or class of 
articles h as been produced, or such power  loom has been used for the production of any article or class of 
articles, in contravention of any order mad e under section 3, he may seize such articl e, class of articles or 
power  loom, together with the package, covering or receptacle, if any, in which such article  or class of 
articles is found:  
Provided that where it is not practicabl e to seize any article or  power  loom, the authorised officer may 
serve on the ow ner of the article or the power  loom, as the case may be , an order that he shall not remove, 
part with, or otherwise deal with, the article or powe r loom except with the previous permission of such 
authorised officer.  
(3) Where any article or power  loom is seized under sub -section ( 2) and no prosecution has been 
launched within six months of such seizure, it shall be returned to the person from whose possession it 
was seized.  
(4) The authorised  officer may also seize any documents or things which, in his opinion, will be 
useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act.  
 (5) The person from whose custody any documents are seized under sub -section ( 4) shall be entitled 
to make copies the reof or takes extracts therefrom in the presence of the authorised officer.  
(6) If any person legally entitled to the documents or things seized under sub -section ( 4) objects, for 
any reason, to the retention by the authorised officer of the documents or t hings, he may make an 
application to the Central Government stating therein the reasons for such objection and requesting for the 
return of the documents or things.  
(7) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 6), the Central Government may, after giving the 
applicant an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it may think fit.  
9. Search and seizure to be made in accordance with the Code of Criminal Procedure ,1973 .—
The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , relating to searches and seizures 
shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this Act.  
10. Penalty for contravention of orders made under section 3 .—Whoever produces any article or 
class of articles in contravention of  an order made under section 3, — 
(a) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees per loom by which the said article or class of articles is 
produced, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees per loom for every day during which such contravention continues 
after conviction for the first such contravention; and  
(b) the article or class of articles in respec t of which the order has been contravened or any power  
loom by the use of which such order is contravened, including any package, covering or receptacle in 
which the article or class of articles is found, shall be forfeited to the Central Government:  
Provi ded that if the court is of opinion that it is not necessary to direct forfeiture in respect of any 
of the articles, power  loom or any package, covering or receptacle, it may, for reasons to be recorded, 
refrain from doing so.  
11. False statement .—If any p erson,— 
(a) when required by any order made under section 6 to furnish any information or sample, makes 
any statement or furnishes any information which is false in any material particular and which he 
knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, to be false  or does not believe it to be true, or fails to 
furnish such sample or damages or destroys any article from which such sample was required; or  
(b) when required by the authorised  officer under section 7 to produce any books of account, 
registers, records or other documents, fails to produce, or damages or destroys any such books, 
registers or other documents,  5 
 he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
12. Attempts and abetment .—Any person who attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of 
any order made under section 3 shall be deemed to have contravened that order.  
13. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as  well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in th is Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has b een 
committed by a company and it  is prov ed that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, man ager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company”  means any b ody corporate and includes a co operative society registered or 
deemed to be registered under any law for the time being in force, a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director” , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
14. Offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the C ode of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ), every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.  
15. Power to delegate .—The Central Government may, by order, direct that the powers exercisable 
by it under  any provision of this Act, other than the power to make orders under section 3 or under section 
18 or to make rules under section 19, shall in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if 
any, as may be specified in the di rection, be exerci sable also by — 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government; or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to a State Government,  
as may be specified in the direction.  
16. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions as it may consider necessary to a State Government as to the carrying into execution of the 
provisions of this Act.  
17. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosec ution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, State Government or any officer or employee of the Central 
Government or of any State Government or any authorised officer f or anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or an order made under section 3.  
18. Power to exempt .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that the demand for any article or 
class of articles reserved by an order under section 3 outside India is such that it is not possible for the 
handloom industry to meet such demand or any such article or class of articles is required to be produced 
for purposes of research or for the development of markets for such article or class o f articles or of the 
handloom industry generally, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, exempt such article or class of articles from the operation of such order, and permit such 
article or class of arti cles to be produced by any power  loom solely for the purposes of export or for 
research by such institutions as may be specified in the order.  6 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modif ication 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
19. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this  Act. 
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall therea fter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
--------------------------The Indira Gandhi National Open University Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY ACT, 1985  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment and incorporation of the University . 
4. The objects of the University.  
5. Powers of the University . 
6. Jurisdiction . 
7. University  open to all classes, castes and creeds . 
8. The Visitor.  
9. Officers of the University.  
10. The Vice -Chancellor.  
11. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor s. 
12. The Directors.  
13. The Registrars.  
14. The Finance Officer.  
15. Other officers.  
16. Authorities of the University  
17. The Board of Management . 
18. The Academic Council.  
19. The Planning Board . 
20. The Board of Recognition.  
21. The Schools of Studies . 
22. The Finance Committee . 
23. Other authorities . 
24. Statutes.  
25. Statutes how made . 
26. Ordinances.  
27. Regulations.  
28. Annual report.  
29. Annual accounts, etc.  
30. Conditions  of service of employees.  
31. Tribunal of Arbitration.  
32. Provident and pension funds.  
33. Disputes as to the constitution of the University authorities and bodies.  
34. Filling of casual vacancies.  
35. Proceedings of the University authorities or bodies not invalidated by va cancies.  
36. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
37. Mode of proof of University record.  
38. Power to remove difficulties.  
39. Transitional provisions.  
 2 
  
SECTIONS  
40. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
THE FIRST S CHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 50 OF 1985  
[2nd September , 1985 .] 
An Act to establish and incorporate an open University at the national level for the introduction 
and promotion of the open university and distance education systems in the educational 
pattern of the country and for the co -ordination and determination of s tandards in such 
systems.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indira G andhi National Open 
University Act, 1985.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and the Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise              
requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “Board of Management ” means the Board of Management of the University;  
(c) “Board of Recognition ” means the Board of Recognition of the University;  
(d) “College ” means a College or other academic instituti on established or maintained by, or 
admitted to the privileges of, the University;  
(e) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, semina rs, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more of such means;  
(f) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University, and include s teachers and other 
academic staff of the University;  
(g) “Finance Committee ” means the Finance Committee of the University;  
(h) “Governing Body ”, in relation to a College, means any body (by whatever name called) 
charged with the management of the affairs of the College and recognised as such by the University;  
(i) “Planning Board ” means the Planning Board of the University;  
(j) “Regional Centre ” means a centre  established or maintained by the University for the purpose 
of co -ordinating and supervising the work of Study Centre s in any region and for performing such 
other functions as may be conferred on such centre  by the Board of Management;  
(k) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under this Act 
for the time being in force;  
(l) “School ” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(m) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean , respectively, the Statutes and Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in force;  
(n) “student ” means a student of the University, and includes any person who has enrolled 
himself for pursuing any course of study of the University;  
(o) “Study Centre ” means a centre  established, maintained or recognised by the University for the 
purpose of advising, counselling or for rendering any other assistance required by the students;  
                                                           
1. 20th  September, 1985, vide notificat ion No. S.O. 678(E), dated 19th  September, 1985, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                    
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (p) “teachers ” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as may be designated 
as such by the Ordinances for imparting instruction in the University or for giving guidance or 
rendering assistance to students for pursuing any course of study of the University;  
(q) “University ” means the Indira Gandhi National Open University established under this Act;  
(r) “Vice-Chancellor ” and “Pro-Vice-Chancellor ” mean , respectively, the Vice -Chancellor and a 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University.  
3. Establishment and incorporation of the University .—(1) There shall be established a University 
by the name of “the Indira Gandhi National Open University ”. 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Delhi and it may establish or maintain Colleges, 
Regional Centre s and Study Centres at such other places in India as it may deem fit.  
1[Provided that the University may, with the prior approval of the Visito r, also establish Study 
Centres outside India.]  
(3) The first Vice -Chancellor, the first Pro -Vice -Chancellors and the first members of the Board of 
Management, the Academic Council and the Planning Board and all persons who may hereafter become 
such office rs or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby 
constituted a body corporate by the name of “the Indira Gandhi National Open University ”. 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall s ue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. The objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be to advance and disseminate 
learning and knowledge by a diversity of means, including the use of any communication technology, to 
provide opportunities for higher education to a larger segment of the population and to promote the 
educational well being of the community generally, to encourage the Open University and distance 
education systems in the educational pattern of the country and to co -ordinate and determine the standards 
in such systems, and the University shal l, in organising its activities, have due regard to the objects 
specified in the First Schedule.  
5. Powers of the University .—(1) The University shall have  the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of knowledge, technology, vocations and 
professions as the University may determine from time to time and to make provision for research;  
(ii) to plan and prescribe courses of study for degrees, diplomas, certificates or for any other 
purpose;  
(iii) to hold examinations  and confer degrees, diplomas, certificates or other academic 
distinctions or recognitions on persons who have pursued a course of study or conducted research in 
the manner laid down by the Statutes and Ordinances;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinction s in the manner laid down by the Statutes;  
(v) to determine the manner in which distance education in relation to the academic 
programmes of the University may be organised;  
(vi) to institute professorships, readerships, lecture rships and other academic position s 
necessary for imparting instruction or for preparing educational material or for conducting other 
academic activities, including guidance, designing and delivery of course and evaluation of the 
work done by the students, and to appoint p ersons to such professorship s, readerships, lecture rships 
and other academic positions;  
(vii) to co -operate with, and seek the co -operation of, other universities and institutions of 
higher learning, professional bodies and organisations for such purposes as the University considers 
necessary;  
                                                           
1. Proviso added by Act 32 of 1997, s. 2  (w.e.f. 29 -8-1997).  5 
 (viii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, prizes and such other awards for 
recognition of merit as the University may deem fit;  
(ix) to establish and maintain such Regional Centres as may be determined by the University 
from time to time;  
(x) to establish, maintain or recognise Study Centres in the manner laid down by the Statutes;  
(xi) to provide for the preparation of instructional materials, including films, cassettes, tapes, 
video cassettes and other  software;  
(xii) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, lesson writers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xiii) to recognise  examinations of, or periods of study (whether in full or part) at, other 
universities, institutions or other places of higher learning as equivalent to examinations or periods 
of study in the University, and to withdraw such recognition at any time;  
(xiv) to make provision for research and development in educational technology and related 
matters;  
(xv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto;  
(xvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, maintain and dispose of 
any property movable or immovable, including trust and Government property, for the purposes of 
the University;  
(xvii) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, whether on the security of the 
property of  the University or otherwise, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xviii) to enter into, carry out, vary or cancel contracts;  
(xix) to demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be laid down by the 
Ordinances;  
(xx) to provide, control and maintain discipline among the students and all categories of 
employees and to lay down the conditions of service of such employees, including their codes of 
conduct;  
(xxi) to recognise any institution of higher learning or studies for such purposes as the 
University may determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(xxii) to appoint, either on contract or otherwise, visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, 
Consultants, fellows, scholars, artists, course writers and such other persons who may contribute to 
the advancement of the objects of the University;  
(xxiii) to recognise persons working in other universities, institutions or organisations as 
teachers of the University on such terms and conditions as may be laid down by the Ordinances;  
(xxiv) to determine standards and to specify conditions for the admission of students to courses 
of study of the University which may include examination, evaluation and any other method of 
testing;  
(xxv) to make arrangements for the promotion of the general health  and welfare of the 
employees;  
(xxvi) to confer autonomous status on a College or a Regional Centre  in the manner l aid down 
by the Statutes;  
(xxvii ) to admit to its privileges any College in or outside India subject to such conditions as 
may be laid down by the Statutes:  
Provided that no College shall be so admitted except with the prior approval of the Visitor;  6 
 (xxviii ) to do all such acts as may be nec essary or incidental to the exercise of all or any of the 
powers of the University as are necessary and conducive to the promotion of all or any of the 
objects of the University.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in  force, but without 
prejudice t o the provisions of sub -section  (1), it shall be the duty of the University to take all such steps as 
it may deem fit for the promotion of the open university and distance education systems and for the 
determination of standa rds of teaching, evaluation and research in such systems, and for the purpose of 
performing this function, the University shall have such powers, including the power to allocate and 
disburse grants to Colleges, whether admitted to its privileges or not, or  to any other university or 
institution of higher learning, as may be specified by the Statutes.  
6. Jurisdiction .—The University shall in the exercise of its powers have juris diction over the whole 
of India 1[and to the Study Centres outside India] . 
7. University open to all classes, castes and creeds .—(1) The University shall be open to person s of 
either sex and of whatever  race, creed, caste or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person any test whatsoever of religio us belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or admitted as a student in the 
University, or to graduate thereat, or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to prevent the University from making any special 
provision for the appointment or admission of women or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of 
the society, and in particular, of persons belonging to the Schedule d Castes or Scheduled Tribes.  
8. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), the Visitor shall have the right to cause an 
inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, 
laboratories and equipment, and of any College , Regional Centre , a Study Centre  and also of the 
examination, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University, and to cause an inquiry to 
be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration and finance s of the 
University.  
(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his intention to cause an 
inspection or inquiry to be mad e and the University shall, on receipt of such notice, have the right to 
make, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice or such other period as the Visitor may 
determine, such representations to him as it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall be 
entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to appear in person and to be heard on such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the results of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer and on receipt of the address  made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate forthwith to the Board of Management the results of the inspection or inquiry and the views 
of the Visitor and the advice tendered by him upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Board of Mana gement shall communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such 
action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken by it upon the results of such inspection or inquiry.  
(8) Where the Board of Management does not  within a reasonable time, tak e action to the satisfaction 
of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the 
                                                           
1. Added by Act 32 of 1997, s. 3, for “whole of India” (w.e.f. 29 -8-1997).  7 
 Board of Management, issue such directions as he may think fit and any Board of Management shall be 
bound to comply with  such directions.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing  Provision  s of this section, the Visitor ma y, by an order in 
writing, annu l any proceedings of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the University to show cause way such 
an order should not be made and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(10) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be specified by the Statutes.  
9. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) The Vice -Chancellor;  
(2) The Pro -Vice-Chancellor s; 
(3) The Directors;  
(4) The Registrars;  
(5) The Finance Officer ; and 
(6) Such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the University.  
 10. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner , for such term and on such emoluments and other conditions of service as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principle academic and executive officer of the University, and 
shall exercise supervision and control over the  affairs of the University and give effect to the decisions of 
the all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority o f the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visito r whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in  the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section , shall have the right to appeal against such action to the 
Board o f Management within ninety days from the date on which such action is communicated to him and 
thereupon the Board of Management may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the                     
Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he in of the opinion that any decision of any authority is beyond the 
powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, Statutes or Ordinances or that any 
decision taken is not in the interests of the University, may ask the authority concerned t o review its 
decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review its decision either in 
whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall be 
referred to the Visitor whose de cision thereon shall be final:  
Provided that the decision of the authority concerned shall remain suspended during the period of 
review of such decision by the authority or the Visitor, as the case may be , under this sub -section.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor sh all exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Ordinances.  
11. The Pro -Vice-Chancellors .—Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner, on 
such emoluments and other conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers and perform such 
functions, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  8 
 12. The Directors .—Every Director shall be appointed in such manner, on such emoluments and 
other conditions of service, and shall exercise such power s and perform such functions, as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes . 
13. The Registrars .—(1) Every Registrar shall be appointed in such manner, on such emoluments 
and other conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) A Registrar empowere d by the Board of Management shall have the power to enter into, and sign, 
agreements and authenticate records on behalf of the University.  
(3) Every Registrar shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes.  
14. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner, on such 
emoluments and other conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. Other officers .—The manner of  appointment, emoluments, powers and duties of the other 
officers of the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the  authorities of the University: — 
(1) The Board of Management;  
(2) The Academic Council;  
(3) The Planning Board;  
(4) The Board of Recognition;  
(5) The Schools of Studies;  
(6) The Finance Committee; and  
(7) Such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
 17. The Board of Management .—(1) The Board of Management shall be the principal executive 
body of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Management, the term of office of its members and its powers 
and functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and Ordinances, have the control 
and general regulation of, and be responsible for, the mainten ance of standards of learning, education, 
instruction, evaluation and examination within the University and shall exercise such other powers and 
perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
(2) The constitution of th e Academic Council and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Planning Board .—(1) There shall be constituted a Planning Board of the Univers ity which 
shall be the principal  planning body of the University and shall also be responsible for the monitoring of 
the developments of the University on the lines indicated in the objects of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Planning Board, the term of office of its members a nd its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Board of Recognition .—(1) The Board of Recognition shall be responsible for admitting 
Colleges to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution and the other powers and functions of the Board of Recognition shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  9 
 21. The Schools of Studies .—(1) There shall be such number of Schools of Studies as the University 
may determine from time to time.  
(2) The constitution, powers and functions of the  Schools of Studies shall be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
22. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of the other authorities which may 
be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for al l or any of  the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of appointment of the Vice -Chancellor, the term of his appointment, the 
emoluments and other conditions of his service and the powers and functions that may be exercised 
and performed by him;  
(b) the manner of appointment of Pro -Vice-Chancellors, Director, Registrars, the Finance Officer 
and other officers, the emoluments and other conditions of their service and the powers and functions 
that may be exercised and performed by each of the officers;  
(c) the constitution of the Board of Management and other authorities of the University, the terms 
of office of the members of such authorities and the powers and functions that may be exercised and 
performed by such authorities;  
(d) the appointment of tea chers and other  employees of the University, their emoluments and 
other conditions of service;  
(e) the constitution of a pension or provident fund and the establishment of an insurance scheme 
for the benefit of the employees of the University;  
(f) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(g) the procedure in relation to any appeal or application for review by any employee or student 
of the University against the action of any officer or authority of the Univ ersity, including the time 
within which such appeal or application for review shall be preferred or made;  
(h) the procedure for the settlement of disputes between the employees or students of the 
University, and the University;  
(i) the conferment of autono mous status on Colleges and Study Centres;  
(j) the co -ordination and determination of standards in the open University and distance education 
systems and the allocation and disbursement of grants to Colleges and other universities and 
institutions;  
(k) the conditions that are required to be fulfilled for admission of the Colleges to the privileges 
of the University;  
(l) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, provide d by the Statutes.  
25. Statutes how made .—(1) The  first Statutes are those set out in the Second Schedule.  
(2) The Board of Management may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may 
amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Board of Management shall no t make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the 
status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given a 
reasonable opportunity to express its opinion in writing on the proposed changes and any opinion so 
expressed has been considered by the Board of Management.  10 
 (3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal thereof shall require the 
approval of the Visitor, who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Board of Manag ement 
for re -consideration in the light observations, if any, made by him.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall not be valid unless it 
has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the Board of 
Management is unable to implement such a direction within sixty days of its receipt, t he Visitor may, 
after considering the reason s, if any, communicated by the Board of Management for its inability to 
comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
26. Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes,  the Ordinances may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students, the course s of study and the fees therefor , the qualifications 
pertaining to degrees, diploma s, certificates and other course s, the conditions for the grant of 
fellowships, awards and the like;  
(b) the conduct of examinations, including the terms and conditions and appointment of 
examiners;  
(c) the management of Colleges admitted to the privileges of the University; and  
(d) any  other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be, or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amende d, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Board of Management in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of th eir own business and that of the committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
28. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the directions of 
the Board of Management which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by t he University 
towards the fulfi lment of its objects.  
(2) The annual report so prepared shall be submitted to the Visitor on or before such date as  may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
29. Annual accounts, etc .—(1) The annual accounts and the balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Board of Management and shall, once at least every year, and at 
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the  Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
such person or person s as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the accounts together with the audit report shall be submitted to the Visitor along with 
the observations, if any, of the Board of Management.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to notice of the 
Board of Management and the views of the Board of Management, if any, on such observations shall be 
submitted to the Visitor.  11 
 (4) A copy of the ac counts together with the audit report, as submitted to the Visitor, shall also be 
submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both the Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts, after ha ving been laid before both the Houses of Parliament, shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
30. Conditions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee  of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract and such contract shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances.  
(2) The contract referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be lodged with the University  and a copy of which 
shall be furnished to the employee concerned.  
31. Tribunal of Arbitration .—(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract of employment referred to in 
section  30 between the University and an employee shall, at the request of either party, be referred to a 
Tribunal of Arbitration which shall consist of one member nominated by the Board of Management, one 
member nominated by the employee  concerned and an umpire to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Every such reference shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this 
section within the meaning of the Arbitration Act, 1940  (2 of 1940) , and all the provisions of that Act, 
with the exception of  section  2 thereof, shall apply accordingly.  
(3) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(4) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final and binding on the parties, and no sui t 
shall lie in any court in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal.  
 32. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of the 
employees such provident or pension funds or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 19 25) shall apply to such funds, as if 
it were a Government Provident Fund.  
 33. Disputes as to the constitution of the University authorities and bodies .—If any question 
arises as to whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled t o be a member of any 
authority or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision 
thereon shall be final.  
34. Filling of casual vacancies .—All the casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be convenient, 
by the person or body who appoints elects or co -opts the member  whose place has become vacant and any 
person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casua l vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for 
the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
35. Proceedings of the University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceeding s of any authority or any other body shall be invalidated merely by reason of the existence of 
any vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
36. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or emp loyee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
37. Mode of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice,  order, 
proceeding s, resolution of any authority or committee of the University, or other documents in the 
possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by 
the Registrar so designated shall, notw ithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872    
(1 of 1872)  or in any other law for the time being in force, be admitted as evidence of the matters and 
transactions specified therein, where the original thereof would, if produced, have be en admissible in 
evidence.  12 
  38. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Gazette of India, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expe dient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided  that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
39. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained  in this Act and the Statutes: — 
(a) The first Vice -Chancellor, the first Registrar s and the first Finance Officer shall be 
appointed by the Visitor and they shall be governed by the terms and conditions of service 
specified by the Statutes:  
Provided that the first Vice -Chancellor shall  be eligible for appointment in the manner 
specified in the Statutes for another term;  
(b) The first Board of Management shall consist of not more than fifteen members who shall 
be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three yea rs; and  
(c) (i) The first Planning Board shall consist of not more than ten members who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(ii) The Planning Board shall, in addition to the powers and functions conferred  on it by this 
Act, exercise the powers of the Academic Council, until the Academic Council is constituted 
under the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, and in the exercise of such powers, the Planning 
Board may co -opt such members as it may decide.  
40. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or succ essive sessions aforesaid, both  Houses agree in making 
any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Hous es agree that the Statute, Ordinance 
or Regulation shoul d not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of an ything previously done under that  Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation.  13 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 4)  
THE OBJECTS OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The University shall endeavour through education, research, training and extension to play a 
positive r ole in th e development of the country, and , based on the rich heritage of the country, to promote 
and advance the culture of the people of India and its human resourc es. Towards this end, it shall: — 
(a) strengthen and diversify the degree, certificate and diploma courses related to the needs of 
employment and necessary for building the economy of the country on the basis of its natural and 
human resources;  
(b) provide access to higher education for larg e segments of the population, and in particular, the 
disadvantage d groups such as those living in remote and rural areas including working people, 
housewives and other adults who wish to upgrade or acquire knowledge through studies in various 
fields;  
(c) promote acquisition of knowledge in a rapidly deve loping and changing society and to 
continually offer opportunities for upgrading knowledge, training and skills in the context of 
innovations, research and discovery in all fields of human endeavour;  
(d) pro vide an innovative system of university level education, flexible and open, in regard to 
methods and pace of learning, combination of courses, eligibility for enrolment, age of entry, conduct 
of examination and operation of the programmes with a view to pr omote learning and encourage 
excellence in new fields of knowledge;  
(e) contribute to the improvement of the educational system in India by providing a non -formal 
channel complementary to the formal system and encouraging transfer of credits and exchange of 
teaching staff by making wide use of texts and other software developed by the University;  
(f) provide education and training in the various arts, crafts and skills of the country, raising their 
quality and improving their availability to the people;  
(g) provide or arrange training of teachers required for such activities or institutions;  
(h) provide suitable post -graduate courses of study and promote research;  
(i) provide the counselling and guidance to its students; and  
(j) promote national integration  and the integrated development of the human personality through 
its policies and programmes.  
2. The University shall strive to fulfill the above objects by a diversity of means of distance and 
continuing education, and shall function in co -operation with the existing Universities and Institutions of 
higher learning and make full use of the latest scientific knowledge and new educational technology to 
offer a high quality of education which matches contemporary needs.  
  14 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 24)  
STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Vice -Chancellor  
(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from out of a panel of not less than 
three persons recommended (the names being arranged in the alphabetical order) by a committee 
constituted under clause ( 3): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended he may call 
for fresh recommendations.  
(3) The committee referred to in cla use ( 2) shall consist of three members of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Board of Management and one by the Visitor, and the person nominated by the 
Visitor shall be the Convenor of the committee:  
Provided that no person who is an employee of the Unive rsity or of any affiliated College or a 
member of any authority of the University shall be nominated to be a member of the Committee.  
(4) The Vi ce-Chancellor shall hold office  for a term of five years from the date on which he  
enters upon his office, or un til he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall 
not be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that the Visitor may require any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to continue 
in office for such period, not exceeding a t otal period of one year as may be specified by him.  
 (5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) There shall be paid to the Vice -Chancellor a salary of Rs. 3,000  per month and he would 
be entitled to the free use of furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge shall 
fall on the Vice -Chancellor personally in respect of the  maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) In addition to the salary specified in  sub-clause ( i), the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled 
to such other allowances as are admissible to University employees from time to time.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Board o f Management with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a College or of any other university or 
any institution maintained by or affiliated to such other university is appointed as the Vice -
Chan cellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provide nt fund of which he is a 
member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund at 
the same rate at which such person had been contributing immediate ly before his appointment as 
Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme.  
(iv) The  Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as may be 
fixed by the Board of Management.  
(v) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay for one -eleventh of the period 
spent by him on active service.  
(vi) In addit ion to the leave referred to in sub -clause  (v), the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days per year of every completed year of service and the 
half pay leave may be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical  certificate.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or 
if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the senior -most                         15 
 Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall p erform the duties of the Vice -Chancellor, and if there is no                          
Pro-Vice-Chancellor, the senior -most Director shall perform the functions of the Vice -Chancellor 
until the new Vice -Chancellor assumes his office or until the existing Vi ce-Chancellor attends to the 
duties of his office, as the case may be.  
2. Powers and functions of the Vice -Chancellor  
(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman of the Board of Management, the Academic 
Council, the Planning Board , and the Finance Committee.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any other 
authority or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a 
member of such authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances and 
Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over  the affairs of the University and shall give 
effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of 
discipline in the University and he may delegate any s uch powers to such person or persons as he may 
deem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall be empowered to grant leave to any officer of the University and 
make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such officer during his absence.  
(7) The Vice -Chancellor shall grant leave of absence to any employee of the University in 
accordance with the rules and if he so desires, delegate such powers to another officer of the 
University.  
(8) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause  to be convened the meetings of 
the Board of Management, the Academic Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee.  
(9) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the following further powers, namely: — 
(i) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and ot her teachers as may be necessary 
with the prior approval of the Board of Management;  
(ii) to appoint course writers, script writers, counsel lors, programmers, artists and such other 
persons as may be considered necessary for the efficient functioning of the University;  
(iii) to make short -term appointments for a period not exceeding six months at a time, of such 
persons as may be considered necessa ry for the functioning of the University;  
(iv) to arrange for the establishment and maintenance of Regional and Study Centres at 
different places as may be required from time to time and delegate to any employee such powers 
as are necessary for their effic ient functioning.  
3. The Pro -Vice-Chancellors  
(1) Every Pro -Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the 
recomm endation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided  that if any recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Board of 
Management, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person 
recommended by the Vice -Chancellor or request the Vice -Chancellor to recommend anot her person 
for consideration by the Board of Management:  
Provide d further that the Board of Management may, on the recommendation of the Vice -
Chancellor, appoint a Professor to perform the functions of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his 
own functions  as a Professor.  16 
 (2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Board of 
Management, but it shall not in any case exceed three years or until the expiration of the term of 
office of the Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier and he shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that a Pro -Vice-Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five years:  
Provided further that a Pro -Vice-Chancellor shall, while performing the functions of the                      
Vice-Chancellor under clause ( 6) of Statute 1, continue in office not withstanding the expiration of his 
term of office as Pro -Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes his office or until the 
existing Vice -Chancellor attends to the duties of his of fice, as the case may be  
(3) (a) The salary of a Pro -Vice Chancellor shall be Rs. 2,750 per month and where a Professor is 
appoi nted to perform the functions of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own functions as such 
Professor, he shall draw his pay  in his substantive  post plus a special pay of Rs. 500 per month , 
whichever is less.  
(b) Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to the use of a furnished 
residence throughout his term of office and no charge shall fall on the  Pro-Vice-Chancellor personally 
in respect of maintenance of such residence.  
(c) In addition to the salary specified in sub -clause ( a), a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to 
such other allowances as are admissible to the employees of the University fr om time to time.  
(d) Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits as may be fixed by the 
Board of Management from time to time.  
(e) The Pro -Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to subscribe to the contributory provident fund of 
the Un iversity till the end of his tenure:  
Provided  that where an employee of the University or a College or of any University or institution 
maintained by or affiliated to such other University is appointed as a Pro -Vice -Chancellor, he shall 
continue to be governed by the same retirement benefit scheme to  which he was entitled prior to his 
appointment  as Pro -Vice -Chancellor till he  continues to hold his lien on that post, but under this 
provision, the pay for the purpose of subscription to the General Provident Fund and subscription to 
the University Contr ibutory Provident Fund shall be the pay drawn by him as Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
(f) Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may 
be specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf from time to time and shall als o exercise such 
powers and perform such functions as may be delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
4. The Directors  
(1) Every Director shall be appointed by the Board of Manag ement on the recommendation of — 
(i) the  Vice-Chancellor, in case the candidate to be appointed is already a teacher of the 
University; and  
(ii) a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose, in case the candidate to be appointed 
is from outside the University.  
(2) Every Director shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University:  
Provided that one of the Directors shall be in charge of the administrative affairs of the teachers.  
(3) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Director shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances:  
Provided that a Director shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years.  
(4) A Director shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
  17 
 5. The Registrar  
(1) Every Registrar shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the recommendation of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The emoluments and other conditions of service of a Registrar shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances:  
Provided that a Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years.  
(3) A Registrar designated by the Board of Management shall have power to take disciplinary 
action against such of the employees, excluding teachers and other members as may be specified by 
the Board of Management by order.  
(4) An appeal shall lie to an office so designated by the Board of Management against any order 
made by the Registrar in pursuance of clause ( 3). 
(5) In case s where an inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the powers of a Registrar is 
called for, the Registrar shall, consequent to the enquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along 
with his recommendations for such action as the Vice -Chancellor may deem fit:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Board of Management against an order of the Vice -
Chancellor imposing any penalty.  
(6) Such of the Registrars as is designed by the Board of Management sha ll be— 
(i) the Secretary to the Board of Management;  
(ii) the Member -Secretary of the Academic Council;  
(iii) the Member -Secretary of the Planning Board.  
(7) A Registrar so designated shall — 
(a) be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other properties of the 
University as the Board of Management may commit to his charge;  
(b) issue notices and convene  meetings of the Board of Management, the Academic Council 
and the Planning Board and of the committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) keep the minutes  of the meetings of the Board of Management, the Academic Council and 
the Planning Board and of the committees appointed by such authorities;  
(d) conduct the official proceedings and correspondence of the Board of Management, the 
Academic Council and the P lanning Board;  
(e) supply to the Visitor, a copy of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(f) represent  the University in suits or proceedings, by or against the University, sign powers 
of attorney, verify pleadings and depute his  representative for the purpose;  
(g) perform such other functions as may be specified in the Statutes, Ordinances or 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the Board of Management or the Vice -
Chancellor.  
6. The Finance Officer  
(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the recommendation 
of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpo se and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of 
the University, and shall work under the control of the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be prescribed by 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years.  18 
 (3) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is by reason of 
ill health, absence or any other cause unable to perform his functions as Finance Officer, hi s functions 
shall be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(4) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision of the funds of the University and advise it as  regards its 
financial policies;  
(b) perform  such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Board of 
Management or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Finance Officer shall not incur any expenditure or make any investment 
exceeding one lakh of r upees without the previous approval of the Board of Management.  
(5) Subject to the control of the Vice -Chancellor and the Board of Manage ment, the Finance 
Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the properties and investments of the University, including trust and 
immovable properties for fulfilling any of the objects of the University;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Finance Committee for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and the money is expended or spent for the purpo ses for 
which it was granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of the annual accounts and the budget of the University 
and for their presentation to the Board of Management after they have been considered by the 
Finance Committee;  
(d) kee p a constant watch on the cash and bank balances and investments;  
(e) watch the progress of collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of properties of the University are  maintained properly and th at 
stock  checking is conducted of equipments and other materials in the offices of the University 
including Regional Centres, Study Centres and other institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor any unauthorised  expenditure or other financial 
irregularities and suggest appropriate action against persons at fault;  
(h) call from any office of the University, including Regional Centres, Study Centres  and 
other institutions maintained by the University, any information or reports that he may consider 
necessary for the performance of his functions.  
(6) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or by the person or persons duly authorised in this 
behalf by  the Board of Management shall be a sufficient discharge for payment of moneys to the 
University.  
7. Powers and functions of the Board of Management  
(1) The Board of Management shall have the power of management and administration of the 
revenue and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University 
not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Board of 
Management shall, in addition to the other powers  vested in it under the Statutes hav e the following 
powers, namely: — 
(a) to create teaching and other academic posts and to define the functions and conditions of 
service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other teachers and other academic staff employed 
by the University;  
(b) to prescribe qualifications for teachers and other academic staff;  19 
 (c) to approve the appointment of such Professors, Readers, Lecturer s and other teachers and 
academic staff as may be necessary on the recommendations of the  Selection Committees 
constituted for the purpose;  
(d) to approve appointments to temporary vacancies of any academic staff;  
(e) to specify the manner of appointment of temporary vacancies of academic staff;  
(f) to provide for the appointment of visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Fellows, artists 
and writers and determine the terms and conditions of such appointments;  
(g) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property of the University 
and all other affairs of the University an d to appoint such agents as may be considered fit;  
(h) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income , in such 
stock s, funds, shares or securities as it thinks fit or in the purchase of immovable property in India 
with like  power of varying such investment from time to time, provided that no action under this 
clause shall be taken without consulting the Finance Committee;  
(i) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts after taking into account the 
recomm endations of the Finance Committee and to specify the manner of appointment thereto;  
(j) to regulate and enforce discipline amongst the employees in accordance with the Statutes 
and Ordinances;  
(k) to transfer or accept transfers of any immovable or movabl e property on behalf of the 
University;  
(l) to entertain, adjudicate upon, or redress the grievances of the employees and the students 
of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(m) to fix the remuneration payable to course writers, counsellors, examiners and invigilators, 
and travelling and other allowances payable, after consulting the Finance Committee;  
(n) to select the common seal for the University and to provide for the use of such seal;  
(o) to delegate any of its powers to the  Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice-Chancellors, Registrars, 
the Finance Officer or any other officer, employee  or authority of the University , or to a 
committee appointed by it;  
(p) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships; and  
(q) to exercise such oth er powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or 
imposed on it by the Act or the Statutes.  
(3) The Board of Management shall exercise all the powers of the University not otherwise 
provided for by the Act, Statutes, Ordinances and  the Regu lations for the fulfil ment of the objects of 
the University.  
8. Quo rum for a meeting of the Board of Management  
 Six members of the Board of Management shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Board.  
9. Power of the  Academic Council  
Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall in addition to all 
other powers vested in it under the Statutes, shall hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to g ive 
directions regarding methods of instruction, evaluation or research or improvement in academic 
standards;  
(b) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a 
reference from the Planning Board or a School of Studies  or the Board of Management and to 
take appropriate action thereon; and  20 
 (c) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances 
regarding the academic functioning of the University, including discipline, admissions, award of  
fellowships and studentships, fees and other academic requirements.  
10. The Planning Board  
(1) The Planning Board  shall consist of the more than ten members.  
(2) All the members of the Planning Board, other than the Vice -Chancellor, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Board to design and formulate appropriate 
programmes and activities of the University, and it shall, in addition, have the right to advise the 
Board of Management and the Academic Co uncil on any matter which it m ay deem necessary for the 
fulfilment of the objects of the University:  
Provided that in case there is any difference of opinion between the Planning Board and the 
Academic Council on any matter, it shall be referred to the Boa rd of Management whose decision 
shall be final.  
(4) The Planning Board may constitute such committees as may be necessary for planning and 
monitoring the programmes of the University.  
(5) The Planning Board shall meet at such intervals as it shall deem exp edient, but it shall meet at 
least twice in a year.  
11. The Finance Committee  
 (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of not more than seven members.  
 (2) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than the Vice -Chancellor, shall hold office 
for a term of three years from the dates on which they become members of the Committee.  
(3) Four members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the 
Committee.  
(4) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice a year to examine the accou nts and 
scrutinise the expenditure.  
(5) All proposals relating to revision of grade, upgradation of the scales and those items which are 
not included in the budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered 
by the Board of Manag ement.  
(6) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance 
Officer shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments, and thereafter 
submitted to the Board of Management within the overall ceiling fixed by the Committee.  
(7) The Finance Committee shall fix the limits for the total recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for the year, based on income and resources of the University, and no expenditure shall 
be incurred by the University in ex cess of the limits so fixed.  
12. Selection Committees  
(1) There shall be Selection Committee for making recommendations to the Board of 
Management for appointments to the posts of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff 
and heads of institu tions maintained by the University.  
(2) Each of the Selection Committees for appointment to the post of Professors, Readers, 
Lecturers and the academic staff shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) a Pro-Vice-Chancellor or the Director of the School concerned nominated by the                      
Vice -Chancellor;  
(c) a person nominated by the Visitor; and  21 
 (d) three experts not connected with the University to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor 
in suc h manner as may be specified in the Ordinances.  
(3) The quorum for a meeting of a Selected Committee shall be four, which will include at least 
two experts .  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee in making recommendations shall 
be laid down in the Ordinances.  
(5) If the Board of the Management is unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reason s for such non -acceptance and submit the case to the Visitor for 
final orders.  
13. Special mode  of appointment  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 12, the Board of Management may invite a 
person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept the post of a Professor or a 
Reader or equivalent academic post in the Uni versity on such terms and conditions as it may deem fit, 
and appoint the person to such post.  
(2) The Board of Management may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any 
other university or organisation for teaching or for undertaking a pr oject or any work on such terms 
and conditions as may be determined by the Board in accordance with the manner specified by the 
Statutes.  
14. Appointment for a fixed tenure  
The Board of Management may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in the Statutes for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it may deem fit.  
15. Recognised Teachers  
(1) The qualifications for recognition of persons working in other universities, Institutions or 
organisations as teachers shall  be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) The manner of recognising teachers, the period of recognition and withdrawal of recognition 
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
16. Committees  
(1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special committees as it may 
deem fit, and may appoint to such committees, persons who are not members of such authority.  
(2) Any committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject to 
the subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
17. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers and other academic staff of 
the University  
(1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall , in the absence of any 
contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as 
are specified in the Statutes and the Ordinances.  
(2) Every teacher and member of other academic staff of the University shall be appoin ted on a 
written contract, the form of which shall be specified in the Statutes.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
 18. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees of th e University  
All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff of the 
University, shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and 
conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes and the Ordinances.  
  22 
 19. Removal of employees of the University  
(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the academic staff 
or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or member  of the 
academic staff, and the authority competent to the appoint (hereinafter referred to as appointing 
authority) in the case of other employee, may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the 
academic staff or other employee under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Board of 
Management the circums tances in which the order was made.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any 
other terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Board of Management in respect of 
teachers and other academic staff , and the appointing authority, in respect of other employees, shall 
have the power to remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff, or as the case may be, other 
employee on grounds of misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Road of Management, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, 
shall not be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except 
for a good cause and after giving three months notice or on payment of three months ’ salary in lieu 
thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause 
(2) or clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a tea cher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect 
from the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under 
suspension at the time of his removal, such  removal shall take effect from the date on which he was 
placed under suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, 
member of the academic staf f or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months ’ notice in writing to the 
Board a Management or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by praying three months ’ 
salary in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving on e month ’s notice in writing to the 
Board of Management or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month ’s 
salary in lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is 
accepted by the Board of Management or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
20. Maintenance of discipline amongst students of the University  
(1) The powers regarding discipline and disciplinary action in regard to the students of the 
University shall vest with the Vice -Chancellor. The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his 
powers, as he may deem fit.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action as he may deem appropriate of the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in the exercise of his power, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled or 
rusticated for a specified period and not admitted to a course o r courses of study in the University or a 
recognised institution for a stated period, or be punished with a fine for an amount to be specified in 
the order, or debar him from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the University or a 
recognised institution for one or more years or that  the result of the student or students concerned in 
the examination or examinations in which he or she has appeared to be cancelled.  
(3) The heads of recognised institutions shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary 
powers over the student s in their respective institutions as may be necessary for proper conduct of 
such institution.  
--------------------------The Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1985  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Inland Waterways Authority of India.  
4. Conditions of service of members.  
4A. Disqualifications for appointment as member.  
5. Powers of Chairman and Vice -Chairman.  
5A. Meetings.  
6. Removal, etc., of members.  
7. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proce edings of the Authority.  
8. Secretary and other officers.  
9. Advisory Committees.  
10. Authority to act on business principles.  
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
11. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Central Government to the Authority.  
12. Contracts by the Authority.  
13. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority.  
CHAPTER IV  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY  
14. Functions of the Authority.  
15. Amendment of schemes.   
16. [Omitted. ] 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
17. Levy and collection of fees and charges.  
18. Grants and loans by the Central Government.  
18A. Borrowing powers of the Authority.  
19. Constitution of the Fund.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Budget.  
21. Investment of funds.  
22. Annual report.  
23. Accounts and audit.  
24. Annual report and auditors’ report to be laid before Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
26. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Authority.  
27. Application, etc., of certain laws.  
28. Power to enter.  
29. Delegation.  
30. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority.  
31. Members, officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants.  
32. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
33. Power of Central Government to supersede the  Authority.  
34. Power to make rules.  
35. Power to make regulations.  
36. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
37. Power to remove difficulties.  
38. Amendment of Act 49 of 1982.  
  3 
 THE INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 82 OF 1985  
[30th December, 1985.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of an Authority for the regul ation and development of 
inland waterways for purposes of shipping and navigation and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Inland Waterways Authority of 
India Act, 1985.  
(2) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appurtenant land ” means all lands appurtenant to a national waterway, whether demarcated 
or not;  
(b) “Authority ” means the Inland Waterways Authority of India constituted under section 3;  
(c) “channel ” means any waterway, whether natural or artificial;  
(d) “conservancy ” includes dredging, training, closure, diversion or abandoning channels;  
(e) “conservancy measures ” means measures for purposes of conservancy, but does not include 
measures for protection of banks against floods or for restricting banks which have become eroded 
mainly on account of reasons not connected with shipping and navigation ; 
(f) “infrastructure ” includes structures such as docks, wharves, jetties, landing stages, locks, 
buoys, inland ports, cargo handling equipment, road and rail access and cargo storage spaces, and the 
expression “infrastructural facilities ” shall be constr ued accordingly;  
(g) “member ” means a member of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(h) “national waterway ” means the inland waterway declared by section 2 of the Nati onal 
Waterway (Allahabad -Haldia Stretch of the Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly River) Act,                       
1982  (49 of 1982), to be a national waterway.  
Explanation. —If Parliament declares by law any other waterway to be a national waterway, then 
from the date on which such declaration tak es effect, such other waterway — 
(i) shall be deemed also to be a national waterway within the meaning of this clause; and  
(ii) the provisions of this Act shall, with necessary modifications (including modification for 
construing any reference to the commencement of this Act as a referenc e to the date aforesaid), 
apply to such national waterway;  
(i) “navigable channel ” means a channel navigable during the whole or a part of the year;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
  
                                                           
1. 27th October, 1986, vide notification  No. S.O. 763(E), dated 27th October , 1986, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (k) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act; and  
(l) “rules ” means rules made by the Cen tral Government under this Act.  
 
CHAPTER II  
INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Inland Waterways Authority of India. —(1) With effect 
from such date  as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this 
behalf, there shall be constituted for the purposes of this Act an Authority, to be called the Inland 
Waterways Authority of India . 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
1[(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman;  
(b) a Vice -Chairman;  
(c) not more than three full -time members; and  
(d) not mo re than three part -time members,  
to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.]  
(4) The Authority may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be 
determined by regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of 
the provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall ha ve the right to take part in the discussions of 
the Authority relevant to the purpose for which he has been associated, but  shall not be entitled to vote.  
4. Conditions of service of members .—The term of office and other conditions of service of the 
members shall be such as may be prescribed . 
2[4A. Disqualifications for appointment as member. —A person shall be disqualified for being 
appointed as a member, if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has b een removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a company owned or 
controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest in the Authority 
as is likely to affect prejudicially the  discharge by him of his functions as a member.]  
5. Powers of Chairman and Vice -Chairman. —(1) The Chairman of the Authority shall, in addition 
to presiding over the meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the 
Authority as may be delegated to him by the Authority and such other powers and duties as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Vice -Chairman of the Authority shall exercise and discharge such of the powers and duties of 
the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated  to him by the Authority .  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2001, s . 2, for sub-section  (3) (w.e.f. 1-7-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-2003 ). 5 
 1[5A. Meetings. —(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including the quorum thereat, as may 
be provided by regulat ions.  
(2) The Chairman or in his absence, the Vice -Chairman, or in the absence of both, such other member 
as is chosen by the members present at the meeting of the Authority shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All question s which come up before any meeting o f the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman or in 
his absence, the Vice -Chairman, or in the absence of both, the person presiding, shall have and exercise  a 
second or casting vote.]  
6. Removal, etc., of members .—(1) The Central Government may remove from the Authority any 
member who, in its opinion, — 
(a) refuses to act,  
(b) has become incapable to act,  
(c) has  so abused his office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public 
interest, or  
(d) is otherwise unsuitable to continue as a member.  
(2) The Central Government may suspend any member pending an inquiry against him.  
(3) No order of remov al under this section shall be made unless the member concerned has been 
given an opportunity to submit his explanation to the Central Government and when such order is passed, 
the seat of the member removed shall be declared vacant.  
(4) A member who has b een removed under this section shall not be eligible for re -appointment as a 
member or in any capacity under the Authority.  
7. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Authority. —No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
8. Secretary and other officers. —(1) The Authority may appoint the Secretary and such other 
officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge o f its functions under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the 
Authority shall be such as may be determined by regulations.  
9. Advisory Committees. —(1) Subject to any rules made in this beha lf, the Authority may from time 
to time constitute such Advisory Committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions.  
(2) Every Advisory Committee shall consist of such number of persons connected with shipping and 
navigation and al lied aspects as the Authority may deem fit.  
10. Authority to act on business principles .—In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the 
Authority shall act, so far as may be, on business principles.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40  of 2001, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2003 ). 6 
 CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
11. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Central Government to the Authority. —(1) As from 
such day  as the Central Government may, appoint by notification in the O fficial Gazette, — 
(a) all properties and other assets vested in the Central Government for the purpose s of Inland 
Water Transport Directorate, and administ ered by the Chief Engineer -cum-Administrator, Inland 
Water Transport Directorate, immediately before such day shall vest in the Authority;  
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be done by, with, or for the Central Government immediately before such day for 
or in connection with the purposes of Inland Water Transport Directorate shall be deemed to have 
been incurred; ent ered into and engaged to be done by, with, or for the Authority;  
(c) all non -recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Government for or in connection with 
the purposes of Inland Water Transport Directorate up to such day and declared to be capital 
expenditure by the Central Government shall, subject to such terms and conditions as may be 
determined by the Central Government, be treated as capital provided by the Central Government to 
the Authority;  
(d) all sums of money due to the Central Government  in relation to Inland Water Transport 
Directorate immediately before such day shall be deemed to be due to the Authority;  
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings with respect to any matter in relation to Inland Water 
Transport Directorate which having b een instituted by or against the Central Government are 
pending, or which could have been so instituted, immediately before such date shall on and after such 
date be continued or instituted by or against the Authority; and  
(f) every employee holding any of fice under the Central Government immediately before such 
day solely or mainly for or in connection with such affairs of Inland Water Transport Directorate as 
are relevant to the functions of the Authority under this Act shall be treated as on deputation w ith the 
Authority but shall hold his office in the Authority by the same tenure and upon the same terms and 
conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal 
benefits as he would have held such office, if t he Authority had not been constituted and shall 
continue to do so until the Central Government, either on its own motion or at the request of the 
Authority, recalls such employee to its service or until the Authority, with the concurrence of the 
Central Go vernment, duly absorbs such employee in its regular service, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that during the period of deputation of any such employee with the Authority, the 
Authority shall pay to the Central Government in respect of every such employee, s uch contribution 
towards his leave salary, pension and gratuity as the Central Government may, by order, determine:  
Provided further that any such employee, who has, in respect of the proposal of the Authority to 
absorb him in its regular service, intimate d within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Authority his intention of not becoming a regular employee of the Authority, shall not be absorbed by 
the Authority in its regular service.  
(2) If any dispute or doubt arises as to which of the p roperties, rights or liabilities of the Central 
Government have been transferred to the Authority or as to which of the employees serving under the 
Central Government are to be treated as on deputation with the Authority, under this section, such dispute 
or doubt shall be decided by the Central Government in consultation with the Authority and the decision 
of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the absorption of any employee by the Authority in its regular 
service under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law 
and no such claim shall be entertained by any court , tribunal or other authority.  7 
 12. Contracts by the Authority. —Subject to the provisions of section 13, the Authority shall be 
competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 
13. Mode of executi ng contra cts on behalf of the Authority. —(1) Every contract shall, on behalf of 
the Authority, be made by the Chairman or such other member or such officer of the Authority as may be 
generally or specially empowered in this behalf by the Authority and such  contracts or class of contracts 
as may be specified in the regulations shall be sealed with the common seal of the Authority:  
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the Central Government may, from time 
to time, by order, fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the Authority:  
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable property or for the lease of 
any such property for a term exceeding thirty years and no other contr act exceeding such value or amount 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has 
been previously approved by the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the form and man ner in which any contract shall be 
made under this Act shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(3) No contract which is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations shall be 
binding on the Authority.  
CHAPTER IV  
FUNCTION S AND POWERS OF THE AUTHORITY  
14. Functions of the Authority. —(1) The Authority may — 
(a) carry out surveys and investigations for the development, maintenance and better utilisation  of 
the national waterways and the appurtenant land for shipping and navigation and prepare schemes in 
this behalf;  
(b) provide or permit setting up of infrastructural facilities for national waterways;  
(c) carry  out conservancy measures and training works and do all other acts necessary for the 
safety and convenience of shipping and navigation and improvement of the national waterways;  
(d) control activities such as throwing rubbish, dumping or removal of materia l, in or from the 
bed of the national waterways and appurtenant land, in so far as they may affect safe and efficient, 
shipping and navigation, maintenance of navigable channels, river training and conservancy 
measures;  
(e) remove or alter any obstruction or impediment in the national waterways and the appurtenant 
land which may impede the safe navigation or endanger safety of infrastructural facilities or 
conservancy measures where such obstruction or impediment has been lawfully made or has become 
lawful by reason of long continuance of such obstruction or impediment or otherwise, after making 
compensation to person suffering damage by such removal or alteration;  
(f) provide for the regulation of navigation and traffic (including the rule of the road) on n ational 
waterways;  
(g) regulate the construction or alteration of structures on, across o r under the national waterways;  
(h) disseminate navigational meteorological information about national waterways;  
(i) ensure co -ordination of inland water transport on  national waterways with other modes of 
transport; and  
(j) establish and maintain pilotage on national waterways ; 
1[(k) enter into joint ventures concerning inland shipping by way of equity participation.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40  of 2001, s. 5 ( w.e.f. 1 -7-2003 ). 8 
 (2) The Authority may also — 
(a) advise  the Central Government on matters relating to inland water transport;  
(b) study the transport  requirement with a view to co -ordinating inland water transport with other 
modes of transport;  
(c) carry out hydrographic surveys and publish river charts;  
(d) assist, on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon, any State Government 
in formulation and implementation of scheme for inland water transport development;  
(e) develop consultancy services and provide such services, on such terms and condi tions as may 
be mutually agreed upon, in India and abroad in relation to planning and development of waterways 
for shipping and navigation or any facility thereat;  
(f) conduct research in matters relating to inland water transport including development of craft 
design, mechanisation of country crafts, technique of towage, landing and terminal facilities, port 
installations and survey techniques;  
(g) lay down standards for classification of inland waterways;  
(h) arrange programme of technical training for in land water transport personnel within and 
outside the country; and  
(i) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(3) Any dispute arising out of or concerning the compensation referred to in clause ( e) of               
sub-section ( 1) shall be determined according to the law relating to like disputes in the case of land 
required for public purposes.  
(4) Every scheme, prepared by the Authority to carry out functions under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), 
involving capital expenditure exceeding the amount as may be prescribed, shall be submitted to the 
Central Government for approval.  
(5) The Central Government may either approve the scheme submitted to it under sub -section ( 4) 
without modification or with such modifications as it may consider necessary or reject the scheme with 
directions to the Authority to prepare a fresh scheme according to such directions.  
15. Amendment of schemes. —The Authority shall not make any material change in the scheme 
approved under  sub-section ( 5) of section 14 without the prior approval of the Central Government.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “material change ” means an increase in the cost of the 
scheme by more than twenty per cent. of its cost or a change in the b enefit and cost ratio which either 
makes the cost component in the ratio exceeds the benefit or reduces the benefit component by more than 
twenty per cent.  
16. [Power to fix maximum and minimum rates for passenger fares and freight for            
goods. ]—Omitted by  the Inland Waterways Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 1993  (8 of 1994 ), s. 2               
(w.e.f. 7-1-1994 ). 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
17. Levy and collection of fees and charges. —(1) The Authority may, with the previous approval  of 
the Central Government, levy fees and charges at such rates as may be laid down by regulations made in 
this behalf for services or benefits rendered in relation to the use of the national waterways for the 
purposes of shipping, navigation, infrastructu ral facilities, including facilities for passengers and facilities 
relating to the berthing of vessels, handling of cargoes and storage of cargoes.  
(2) The fees and charges levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be collected in such manner as may be 
determined  by regulations.  9 
 18. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans of such 
sums of money as that Government may consider nece ssary.  
1[18A. Borrowing powers of the Authority. —The Authority may, in such manner and subject to 
such terms and conditions as may be determined by regulations, borrow money from any source by the 
issue of bonds, debentures or other instruments as it may t hink fit for discharge of all or any of its 
functions under the Act.]  
19. Constitution of the Fund. —(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Inland 
Waterways Authority of India Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any  grants and loans made to the Authority by the Central Government under section 18;  
(b) all fees and charges received by th e Authority under this Act; and  
(c) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and ot her employees of 
the Authority;  
(b) expenses of the Authority in the discharge of its functions under section 14; and  
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.  
20. Budget. —The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Authority and forward the same to the Central Government.  
21. Investment of funds. —The Authority may invest its funds (including any reserve fund) in the 
securities of the Central Government or in such oth er manner as may be prescribed.  
22. Annual report .—The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year 
as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
23. Accounts and audit. —The accounts of the Authority shall be maintained and audited in such 
manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed and the 
Authority shall furnish, to the Central Govern ment, before such date as may be prescribed, its audited 
copy of acco unts together with the auditors’  report thereon.  
24. Annual report and auditors’  report to be laid before Parliament. —The Central Government 
shall cause the annual report and  auditors’  report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, 
before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 25. Power of Central Government to issue directions. —(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from 
time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given opport unity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall  be final.  
26. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Authority. —Any land required by the Authority for 
discharging its functions under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose and such land 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2001, s. 6 (w.e.f.  1-7-2003 ). 10 
 may be acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the Land A cquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894 ) or 
of any o ther corresponding l aw for the time being in force.  
27. Appl ication, etc., of certain laws. —(1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the 
provisions of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908) and the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) 
and in particular nothing in this Act shall affect any jurisdiction, functions, powers or duties required to 
be exercise d, performed or discharged by —  
(a) the conservator of any port or by any officer or authority under the Indian Ports                  
Act, 1908 (15 of 1908) , or 
(b) the Board of Trustees for any major port or by any officer or authority under the Major Port 
Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) , 
in or in relation to any portion of an inland waterway (including the national waterway) falling within the 
limits of such port or major port.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of the Inland Vessels Act, 1917 (1 of 1917) or any 
other Central  Act (other than the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908) and t he Major Port Trusts           
Act, 1963 [ 38 of 1963 ]) or any State or provincial Act in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act with respect to shipping and navigation on any nati onal waterway  1***. 
28. Power to enter. —Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any person, generally or specially 
authorised by the Authority in this behalf, may, whenever it in necessary so to do for any of the purposes 
of this Act, at all reasonable t imes, enter  upon any land or premises and — 
(a) make any inspection, survey, measurement, valuation or inquiry;  
(b) take levels;  
(c) dig or bore into sub -soil; 
(d) set out boundaries and intended lines of work;  
(e) mark such level boundaries and lines by pl acing marks and cutting trenches; or  
(f) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed court or garden attached to a 
dwelling -house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof)  without previously giving such occu pier 
at least twenty -four hours’  notice in writing of his intention to do so.  
29. Delegation. —The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairman 
or any other member or to any officer of t he Authority, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, 
as may be specified in the order such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the powers under 
section 35) as it may deem necessary.  
30. Authentication of orders and other instrum ents of the Authority. —All orders and decisions 
of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised 
by the Authority in this behalf and all other instruments executed by the Authority shall be authenticat ed 
by the signature of an officer of the Authority authorised by t he Authority in this behalf.  
31. Members, officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants. —All members, 
officers and other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acti ng or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
32. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal p roceedings 
shall lie against the Government or any officer of the Government or any member, officer or employee of   
                                                           
1. Certain words  omitted by Act 8 of 1994, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7 -1-1994).  11 
 the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules 
or regulations made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Authority for any damage caused or likely 
to be caused by anything in good faith done or purported to be done under this Act or the rules or 
regulations, and in particular, it shall not be the res ponsibility of the Authority to provide for relief 
measures necessitated by floods or by breaches and failures of works.  
33. Power of Central Government to supersede the Authority. —(1) If, at any time, the C entral 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that  on account of a grave emergency, the Authority is unable to discharge the functions and 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Cent ral Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of which default the financial position of the Authority 
or the administration of any nationa l waterway has d eteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary i n the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Authority for such 
period, not exceeding six months, as may be specif ied in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing  a notification under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in     
clause (b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause 
why it should not be supersed ed and shall consider the explanations and objection, if any, of the 
Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Authority, — 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices a s such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central 
Government may direct;  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under           
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term, not exceeding six months, as it may 
consider necessary; or  
(b) reconstitute the Auth ority by fresh appointment and in such case any persons who vacated 
their offices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified for ap pointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the perio d of 
supersession, whether as originally specified under sub -section ( 1) or as extended under this sub -section, 
take action under clause ( b) of this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before such 
House of Parliament at the earliest opportu nity. 
34. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office and other conditions of service of th e members of  the Authority under 
section 4;  12 
 (b) the powers and duties of the Chairman and Vice -Chairman under section 5;  
(c) the matters with respect to the Advisory Committee referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(d) the amount required to be presc ribed under sub -section ( 4) of section 14;  
(e) the form in which, and the time at which, the Authority shall prepare its budget under    
section 20 and its annual report under section 22;  
(f) the manner in which the Authority may invest its funds under sec tion 21;  
(g) the manner in which the accounts of the Authority shall be maintained and audited under 
section 23;  
(h) the conditions and restrictions with respect to exercise of the power to enter under section 28 
and the matters referred to in clause ( f) of that section; and  
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be, 
or may be, made by rules.  
35. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the 
rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide  for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which and the purposes for which, the Authority may associate with itself any 
person under sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(b) the  terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the 
Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(c) the contracts or class of contracts which are to be sealed with the common seal of the 
Authority and the form and ma nner in which a contract may be made by the Authority;  
(d) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, any functions in relation to the 
matters referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 14 may be performed;  
(e) the rule of the road o n a national waterway;  
(f) the safe, efficient and convenient use, management and control of the infrastructures and 
infrastructural facilities;  
(g) the reception, porterage, storage and removal of goods brought on a national waterway, and 
the procedure to  be followed for taking charge of goods which may have been damaged before 
landing, or may be alleged to have been so damaged;  
(h) regulating, declaring and defining the docks, wharfs, jetties, landing stages on which goods 
shall be landed from vessels and  shipped on board vessels;  
(i) regulating the manner in which and the conditions under which the loading and unloading of 
vessels on a national waterway shall be carried out;  and 
(j) the exclusion from a national waterway of disorderly or other undesirable  persons and of 
trespassers ; 
1[(k) the terms and conditions for issue of bonds, debentures or other instruments;  
(l) the time, place and the rules of procedure with regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings including the quorum under sub -sectio n (1) of section 5A.]  
(3) Any regulation made under any of the clauses ( c) to ( j) of sub -section ( 2) may provide that a 
contravention thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40  0f 2001, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2003 ). 13 
 case of a continuing contraventio n with an additional fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every 
day during which such contravention continues after conviction fo r the first such contravention.  
36. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every regulation m ade 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the  expiry of the session  immediately fol lowing the session  or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both House s agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to  the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
37. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette,  make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
38. Amendment of Act 49 of 1982. —In the National Waterway (Allahabad -Haldia Stretch of the 
Ganga -Bhagirathi -Hooghly River) Act, 1982, — 
(a) in section 3, for the words “Central Government ”, the word “Union ” shall be substituted, and 
for the words “to the extent hereinafter provided ”, the words and figures “to the extent provided in the 
Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 ” shall be substituted;  
(b) sections 4 to 15 shall be omitted.  
 
--------------------------The Intelligence Organisations (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE INTELLIGENCE ORGANISATIONS (RESTRICTION OF RIGHTS) ACT, 1985  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc . 
4. Penalty.  
5. Offences to be cognizable . 
6. Power to amend Schedule . 
7. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE INTELLIGENCE ORGANISATIONS (RESTRICTION OF RIGHTS) ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 58 OF 1985  
[6th September , 1985 .] 
An Act to provide for the restriction of certain rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution in 
their application to the members of certain organisations established by the Central 
Government for purposes of intelligence or counter -intelligence so as to ensure the proper 
discharge of their duties an d the maintenance of discipline among them.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Intelligence 
Organisations (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1985.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Intelligence Organisation ” means any organisation established by the Central Government 
for purposes of intelligence or counter -intelligence and specified in the Schedule;  
(b) “member of an Intelligence Organisation ” means any person appointed to, or emplo yed in, 
any Intelligence Organisation;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Restrictions respe cting right to form association , freedom of speech, etc. —(1) No member of 
an Intelligence Organisation shall, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, political 
association or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, or raise funds for , or hold office in, or 
function in any other manner for, any other society, institution, association or organisation that is not 
recognised by the Central Government as part of the Intelligence Organisation of which he is a 
member or is not of a purely so cial, recreational or religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter, pamphlet, 
poster or other document except with the prior permission of the head of the Intelligence 
Organisation; or  
(d) except for purposes of official duty, contact, or communicate with any person on any matter 
relating to functioning, structure, personnel or organisational affairs o f the Intelligence Organisation  
of which he is a member;  
(e) use the name of the Intelligence Orga nisation of which he is a member for purposes not 
authorised by the head of the Intelligence Organisation or in any other manner except for purposes 
relating to the official work and functioning of the Organisation itself.  
Explanation. —If any question aris es as to whether any society, institution, association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section, the decision of 
the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
(2) No member of an Intellig ence Organisation, shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take 
part in any demonstration organised by any body of persons for any political purposes or for such other 
purposes as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. 9th December, 1985, vide notification No . S.O. 885(E), dated 9th December, 1985, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (ii). 3 
  4. Penalty .—Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of section 3 shall, without prejudice 
to any other action that may be taken against him, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand r upees, or with both.  
 5. Offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the C ode of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all offences punishable under section 4 shall be cognizable.  
 6. Power to amend Schedule .—(1) The Central Government may, be notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Schedule by including therein any other organisation established by the Central 
Government for purposes of intelligence or counter -intelligence or by omitting therefrom any 
organisation already specif ied therein and on the publication of the notification, such organisation shall be 
deemed to be specified in, or, as the case may be, omitted from, the Schedule.  
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
be laid before each House of Parliament.  
 7. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under t his Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of t he session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified f orm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
__________  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( a) and section 6( 1)] 
1. The Intelligence Bureau.  
2. The Research and Analysis Wing.  
1[3. Directorate General of Security .] 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No S.O. 208 (E), dated 12th March , 1987 .  
 
 
--------------------------The International Airports Authority (Amendment) Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1985  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Amendment of section 36 . 
3. Amendment of section 37 . 
4. Validation . 
 
  2 
 THE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 72 OF 1985  
[20th December , 1985.]  
An Act to amend the International Airports Authority Act, 1971.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follow: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the International Airports Authority (Amendment) Act, 1985.  
2. [Section s 2 and 3]. Rep by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001 (30 of 2001), s. 2 and the  
First Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
4. Validation .—(1)The International Airports Authority of India (Conditions of Service of the 
Chairman and other whole -time Members) Rules, 1973  (hereafter in this section referred to as the 1973 
Rules) published with the notification of the Government of India in the then Min istry of Tourism and 
Civil Aviation No. S.O. 717(E), dated the 29th November, 1973, shall be deemed to be, and to have 
always been, made under section 36 of the principal Act as amended by clause ( a) of section 2 of this Act, 
and accordingly, the 1973 Rule s shall not be deemed to be invalid or ever to have become invalid merely 
on the ground that they were made with retrospective effect.  
(2) Every order made or purporting to have been made by the Central Government under rule 7 of the 
1973 Rules before the date of commencement of this Act and any action or thing taken or done under 
such order shall be and shall be deemed always to have been as valid and effective as if such order had 
been included in and formed part of that rule.  
 
--------------------------The Judges (Protection) Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE JUDGES (PROTECTION) ACT, 1985  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definition.  
3. Additional protection to Judges . 
4. Saving.  
 
  2 
 THE JUDGES (PROTECTION) ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1985  
[6th September , 1985.]  
An Act for securing additional protection for Judges and others acting Judicially and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in th e Thirty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short  title and extent .—(1) This Act may be cal led the  Judges (Protection) Act,  1985.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “Judge” means not only every person who is o fficially designated as a 
Judge , but also every person — 
(a) who is empowered  by law to give in any legal proceeding a definitive judgment, or a 
judgment which, if not appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by 
some other authority, would be definitive; or  
(b) who is one of a body of persons which b ody of persons is empowered by  law to give such a 
judgment as is referred to in clause ( a). 
3. Additional protection to Judges. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force and subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), no court shall entertain or continue 
any civil or criminal proceeding against any person who is or was a Judge for any act, thing or word 
committed, done or spoken b y him when, or in the course of , acting or purporting to act in the discha rge 
of his official or judicial duty or function.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall debar or affect in any manner the power of the Central 
Government or the State Government or the Supreme Court of India or any High Court or any other 
authority under an y law for the time being in force to take such action (whether by way of civil, criminal, 
or departmental proceedings or otherwise) against any person who is or was a Judge.  
4. Saving .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogati on of, the provisions 
of any other law for the time being in force providing for protection of Judge s. 
 
 
--------------------------The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES, ACT, 1985  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Power to add to or omit from the list of psychotropic substances.  
 
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES AND OFFICERS  
4. Central Government to take measures for preventing and combating abuse of and illicit traffic in 
narcotic drugs, etc.  
5. Officers of Central Government . 
6. The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropie Substances Consultati ve Committee . 
7. Officers of State Government.  
 
CHAPTER IIA  
NATIONAL  FUND FOR  CONTROL OF  DRUG ABUSE  
7A. National Fund for Control of  Drug Abuse.  
7B. Annual report of activities financed under the Fund . 
 
 
CHAPTER III  
PROHIBITION, CONTROL AND REGULATION  
8. Prohibition of certain operations.  
8A. Prohibition of certain activities relating to property derived from offence . 
9. Power of Central Government to permit, control and regulate.  
9A. Power to control and regulate controlled substances . 
10. Power of State Government to permit, control and regulate . 
11. Narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, etc., not liable to distress or attachment . 
12. Restrictions over external dealings in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances . 
13. Special provisions relating to coca plant  and coca leaves for use in the preparation of flavouring 
agent . 
14. Special provision relating to cannabis . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
15. Punishment for contravention in relation to poppy straw . 
16. Punishment for contravention in relation to coca plant and coca leaves . 
17. Punishment for contravention in relation to prepared opium . 2 
 SECTIONS  
18. Punishment for contravention in relation to opium poppy and opium . 
19. Punishment for embezzlement of opium by cultivator . 
20. Punishment for contravention in relation to cannabis plant and cannabis . 
21. Punishment for contravention in relation to manufactured drugs and preparations . 
22. Punishment for contravention in relation to psychotropic substances . 
23. Punishment for illegal import in to India, export from India or transhipment of narcot ic drugs and 
psychotropic substances . 
24. Punishment for external dealings in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances in contravention 
of section 12 . 
25. Punishment for allowing premises, etc., to be used for commission of an offence . 
25A. Punishment for contra vention of orders made under section 9A . 
26. Punishment for certain acts by licensee or his servants.  
27. Punishment for consumption of any narcotic drug or psychotropic  substance . 
27A. Punishment for financing illicit traffic and harbouring offenders . 
27B. Punish ment for contravention of section 8A . 
28. Punishment for attempts to commit offences . 
29. Punishment for abetment and criminal conspiracy . 
30. Preparation . 
31. Enhanced punishment for offences after previous conviction . 
31A. Death penalty for certain offences after previous conviction . 
32. Punishment for offence for which no punishment is provided.  
32A. No suspension, remission or commutation in any sentence awarded under this Act.  
32B. Factors to be taken into account for imposing higher than the minimum punishment.  
33. Application of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and of the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958 . 
34. Security for abstaining from commission of offence.  
35. Presumption of culpable mental state.  
36. Constitution of Special Court.  
36A. Offences triable by S pecial Courts . 
36B. Appeal and revision . 
36C. Application of Code to proceedings before a Special Court . 
36D. Transitional provisions . 
37. Offences to be cognizable and non -bailable.  
38. Offences by companies.  
39. Power of court to release certain offenders on probati on. 
40. Power of court to publish names, place of business, etc., of certain offenders.  
 
 
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE  
41. Power to issue warrant and authori sation . 
42. Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest without warrant or authorisation.  
43. Power of seizure and arrest in public place . 
44. Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest in offences relating to coca plant, opium poppy and 
cannabis plant . 
45. Procedure where seizure of goods liable to confiscation not practicable . 
46. Duty of land holder to give information of illegal cultivation . 3 
 SECTIONS  
47. Duty of certain officers to give information of illegal cultivation.  
48. Power of attachment of crop illegally cultivated.  
49. Power to stop and search conveyance.  
50. Conditions under which search of persons shall be conducted.  
50A. Power to under take controlled delivery . 
51. Provisions of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to apply to warrants, arrests, searches and 
seizures.  
52. Disposal of persons arrested and articles seized.  
52A. Disposal of seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.  
53. Power to invest officers of certain departments with powers of an officer -in-charge of a police 
station.  
53A. Relevancy of statements under certain circumstances . 
54. Presumption from possession of illicit articles . 
55. Police to take charge of articles seized and d elivered . 
56. Obligation of officers to assist each other.  
57. Report of arrest and seizure.  
57A. Report of seizure of property of the person arrested by the notified officer . 
58. Punishment for vexatious entry, search, seizure or arrest . 
59. Failure of officer in duty or  his connivance at the contravention of the provisions of this Act . 
60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants, articles and conveyances to confiscation . 
61. Confiscation of goods used for concealing illicit drugs or substances . 
62. Confiscation of sale proceeds of illicit drugs or substances . 
63. Procedure in making confiscations . 
64. Power to tender immunity from prosecution . 
64A. Immunity from prosecution to addicts volunteering for treatment . 
65. [Omitted ]. 
66. Presumption as to documents in certain cases . 
67. Power to c all for information, etc . 
68. Information as to commission of offences . 
 
CHAPTER VA  
FORFEITURE OF ILLEGALLY ACQUIRED PROPERTY  
68A. Application . 
68B. Definitions . 
68C. Prohibition of holding illegally acquired property . 
68D. Competent authority . 
68E. Identifying illegally acquired property . 
68F. Seizure or freezing of illegally acquired property . 
68G. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter . 
68H. Notice of forfeiture of property . 
68-I. Forfeiture of property in certain cases . 
68J. Burden of proof . 
68K. Fine in lieu of forfeiture . 
68L. Procedure in relation to certain trust properties . 4 
 SECTIONS  
68M. Certain transfers to be null and void . 
68N. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal . 
68-O. Appeals . 
68P. Notice or order not to be invalid  for error in description . 
68Q. Bar of jurisdiction . 
68R. Competent authority and Appellate Tribunal to have powers of civil court . 
68S. Information to competent authority . 
68T. Certain officers to assist Administrator, competent authority and Appellate Tr ibunal . 
68U. Power to take possession . 
68V. Rectification of mistakes . 
68W. Findings under other laws not conclusive for proceedings under this Chapter . 
68X. Service of notices and orders . 
68Y. Punishment for acquiring property in relation to which proceed ings have been taken, under this 
Chapter . 
68Z. Release of property in certain cases . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
69. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
70. Central Government and State Government to have regard to international conventions while 
making rules . 
71. Power of Government to establish centres for identification, treatment, etc., of addicts and for 
supply of narcotic drug and psychotropic substances . 
72. Recovery of sums due to Government . 
73. Bar of jurisdiction . 
74. Transitional provisions . 
74A. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
75. Power to delegate . 
76. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
77. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament . 
78. Power of State Government to make rules . 
79. Application of the Customs Act, 1962 . 
80. Application of the Drugs and C osmetics Act, 1940 not barred . 
81. Saving of State and special laws . 
82. Repeal and savings . 
83. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  5 
 THE NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1985  
[16th September, 1985.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to narcotic drugs, to make stringent provisions 
for the control and regulation of operations relating to narcotic drug s and psychotropic 
substances 1[, to provide for the forfeiture of property derived from, or used in, illicit traffic 
in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, to implement the provisions of the 
International Conventions on Narcotic Drugs  and Psychotropic Substances] and f or matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixty Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, ext ent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2[and it applies also — 
(a) to all citizens of India outside India;  
(b) to all persons on ships and aircrafts registered in India,  
wherever they may be ]. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and diff erent dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for 
different States and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be 
construed in relation to any State as a reference to the coming into force o f that p rovision in that State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
4[(i) “addict ” means a person who has dependence on any narcotic drug or psychotropic 
substance;]  
(ii) “Board ” means the Central Board of Excise and Customs constituted under the Central 
Boards of Revenue  Act, 1963 (54 of 1963);  
(iii) “cannabis (hemp) ” means — 
(a) charas , that is, the separated resin, in whatever form, whether crude or purified, obtained 
from the c annabis plant and also includes concentrated preparation and resin known as  hashish oil 
or liquid hashish;  
(b) ganja , that is, the flowering or fruiting tops of the cannabis plant (excluding the seeds and 
leaves when not accompanied by the tops), by whatev er name they may be known or designated; 
and  
(c) any mixture, with or without any neutral material, of any of the above forms of cannabis 
or any drink prepared therefrom;  
(iv) “cannabis plant ” means any plant of the genus cannab is; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. 14th November, 1985, vide notification No. S.O. 821(E), dated 14th November, 1985, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
4. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 3, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  6 
 1[(iva) “Central Government factories” means factories owned by the Central Government or 
factories owned by any company in which the Central Government holds at least fifty -one per cent. of 
the paid -up share capital; ] 
(v) “coca derivative ” means — 
(a) crude cocaine, that i s, any extract of coca leaf which can be used, directly or indirectly, 
for the manufacture of cocaine;  
(b) ecgonine and all the derivatives of ecgonine from which it can be recovered;  
(c) cocaine, that is, methyl ester of benz oyl-ecgonine  and its salts; and  
(d) all preparations containing more  than 0.1 per cent. of cocaine;  
(vi) “coca leaf ” means — 
(a) the leaf of the coca plant except a leaf from which all ecgonine, cocaine and any other 
ecgonine a lkaloids have been removed;  
(b) any  mixture thereof with o r without any neutral material,  
but does not include any preparation containing not more  than 0.1 per cent. of cocaine;  
(vii) “coca plant ” means the plant of any spe cies of the genus Frythroxylon;  
2[(viia) “commercial quantity ”, in relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, means 
any quantity greater than the quantity specified by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette;  
(viib) “controlled delivery ” means the technique of allowing illicit or suspec t consignments of 
narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or substances substituted for them to 
pass out of, or through or into the territory of India with the knowledge and under the supervision of 
an officer empowered in this behal f or duly authorised under section 50A with a view to identifying 
the persons involved in the commission of an offence under this Act;  
(viic) “corresponding law ” means any law corresponding to the provisions of this Act; ] 
3[4[(viid)] “controlled substance ” means any substance which the Central Government may, 
having regard to the available information as to its possible us e in the production or manufac ture of 
narcotic drugs or psychot ropic substances or to the pro visions of any International Convention, by 
notification in the Offic ial Gazette, declare  to be a controlled substance; ] 
(viii) “conveyance ” means a conveyance of any description whatsoever and includes any aircraft, 
vehicle or vessel;  
 1[(viiia) “essential narcotic drug” means a narcotic drug notified by the Central Government f or 
medical and scientific use;]  
 3[5[(viiib)] “illicit traffic ”, in relation to narcotic drugs and p sychotropic substances, means — 
(i) cultivating any coca plant or gathe ring any portion of c oca plant;  
(ii) cultivating  the opi um poppy or any cannabis plant;  
(iii) engaging  in the production, manufacture, posse ssion, sale, purchase, trans portation , 
warehousing, conceal ment, use or consumption, im port inter -State, export inter -State, import into 
India, export from India or transhipment , of narcotic dr ugs or psychotropic substances;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-5-2014 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. Ins. by Act 2 o f 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
4. Clause ( viia) relettered as clause ( viid) thereof by Act 9 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
5. Clause  (viiia) relettered as clause ( viiib) thereof by Act 16 of 2014, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  7 
 (iv) dealing in any activities in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances other  than those 
referred to in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iii); or  
(v) handlin g or letting out any premises for the carrying on of any of the  activities referred to 
in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iv),  
other than those permitted under this Act, or any rule or order made, or any condition of any licence, 
term or authorisation iss ued, thereunder, and includes — 
(1) financing, directly or indirectly, any of  the aforementioned activities;  
(2) abetting or conspiring in the furtherance of or in support of doing any of the 
aforementioned activities; and  
(3) harbouring  persons engaged in any of the  afore -mentioned activities; ] 
(ix) “International Convention ” means — 
(a) the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 adopted by the United Nations 
Confere nce at New York in March, 1961;  
(b) the Protocol, amending the Convent ion mentioned in sub -clause ( a), adopted by the 
United Nations Confe rence at Geneva in March, 1972;  
(c) the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971 adopted by the United Nations 
Conference a t Vienna in February, 1971; and  
(d) any other international co nvention, or protocol or other instrument amending an 
international convention, relating to narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances which may be 
ratified or acceded to by India afte r the commencement of this Act;  
(x) “manufacture ”, in relation to narcoti c drugs or psyc hotropic substances, includes — 
(1) all processes other than production by which such drugs or substances may be obtained;  
(2) refining of such drugs or sub stances;  
(3) transformation of such drugs or substances; and  
(4) making  of preparation (otherwise than in a pharmacy on prescription) with or conta ining 
such drugs or substances;  
(xi) “manufactured drug ” means — 
(a) all coca derivatives, medicinal cannabis, opium derivatives and poppy straw concentrate;  
(b) any other narcotic substance or preparation which the Central Government may, having 
regard to the available information as to its nature or to a decision, if any, under any International 
Convention, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare  to be a manufactured drug,  
but does not include any narcotic substance or preparation which the Central Government may, having 
regard to the available information as to its nature or to a decision, if any, under any International 
Convention, by notification in the Official Gazette,  declare not to be a manufactured drug;  
(xii) “medicinal cannabis ”, that is, medicinal hemp, means any extract or tincture of cannabis  
(hemp);  
(xiii) “Narcotics Commissioner ” means the Narcotics Commissioner appointed under section 5;  
(xiv) “narcotic drug ” means coca leaf, cannabis (hemp), opium, popy straw and i ncludes all 
manufactured drugs;  
(xv) “opium ” means — 
(a) the coagulate d juice of the opium poppy; and  
(b) any  mixture, with or without any neutral material, of the coagulated juice of the opium 
poppy,  
but does not include any preparation containing not more than 0.2 per cent. of morphine;  8 
 (xvi) “opium derivative ” means — 
(a) medicinal opium, that is, opium which has undergone the processes necessary to adapt it 
for medicinal use in accordance with the requirements of the Indian Pharmacopoeia or any other 
pharmacopoeia notified in this behalf by the Central Government, whether in powder form or 
granulated or otherw ise or mixed with neutral materials;  
(b) prepared opium, that is, any product of opium obtained by any series of operations 
designed to transform opium into an extract suitable for smoking and the dross or other residue 
remaining after opium is smoked;  
(c) phenanthrene alkaloids, namely, morphine, cod eine, thebaine and their salts;  
(d) diacetylmorphine, that is, the alkaloid also known as dia -morphi ne or heroin and its salts; 
and 
(e) all preparations containing more than 0.2 per cent. of morphine or contai ning any 
diacetylmorphine;  
(xvii) “opium poppy ” means — 
(a) the plant of the specie s Papaver  somniferum L; and  
(b) the plant of any other species of Papaver  from which opium or any phenanthrene  alkaloid 
can be extracted and which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be opium popp y for the purposes of this Act;  
(xviii) “poppy straw ” means all parts (except the seeds) of the opium poppy after harvesting 
whether in their original form or cut, crushed or powdered and whether or not juic e has been 
extracted therefrom;  
(xix) “poppy straw concentrate ” means the material arising when poppy straw has entered into a 
process for the concentration of its alkaloids;  
(xx) “preparation ”, in relation to a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, means any one or 
more such drugs or substances in dosage form or any solution or mixture, in whatever phy sical state, 
containing one or  more such drugs or substances;  
(xxi) “Prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(xxii) “production ” means separation of opium, poppy straw, coca leaves or cannabis from the 
plant s from which they are obtained ; 
(xxiii) “Psychotropic substance ” means any substance, natural or synthetic, or any natural 
material or any salt or preparation of such substance or material included in the list of psychotropic 
substa nces specified in the Schedule;  
1[(xxiiia ) “small quantity ”, in relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, means any 
quantity lesser than the quantity specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette ;] 
(xxiv) “to import inter -State ” means to bring into a State or Un ion territory in India from another 
State or Union territory in India;  
(xxv) “to import into India ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means to 
bring into India from a place outside India and includes the bringing into any port or ai rport or place 
in India of a narcotic drug or a psychotropic substance intended to be taken out of India without being 
removed from the vessel, aircraft, vehicle or any other conveyance in which it is being carried.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause and clause ( xxvi), “India ” includes t he territorial 
waters of India;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  9 
 (xxvi) “to export from India ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means to 
take out of India to a place outside India;  
(xxvii ) “to expor t inter -State ” means to take out of a State or Union territory in India to another 
State or Union territory in In dia; 
(xxviii ) “to transport ” means to take from one place to another within the  same State or Union 
territory;  
1[(xxviiia) “use”, in relatio n to narcotic drugs and psycho tropic substances, means any kind of use 
except personal consump tion;]  
(xxix) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 197 4) have the meanings respectively ass igned to them in that Code.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clauses ( v), (vi), (xv) and ( xvi) the percentages in the case of liquid 
preparations shall be calculated on the basis that a preparation containing one per cent. of  a substance 
means a preparation in which one gram of substance, if solid, or one mililitre of substance, if liquid, is 
contained in every one hundred mililitre of the preparation and so on in proportion for any greater or less 
percentage:  
Provided that th e Central Government may, having regard to the developments in the field of methods 
of calculating percentages in liquid preparations prescribe, by rules, any other basis which it may deem 
appropriate for such calculation.  
3. Power to add to or omit from t he list of psychotr opic substances .—The Central Government 
may, if satisfied that it is necessary or exped ient so to do on the basis of — 
(a) the information and evidence which has become available to it with respect to the nature and 
effects of, and the ab use or the scope for abuse of, any substance (natural or synthetic) or natural 
material or any salt or preparation of such substance or material; and  
(b) the modifications or provisions (if any) which have been made to, or in, any International 
Convention with respect to such substance, natural material or salt or preparation  of such substance or 
material,  
by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, or, as the case may be, omit from, the list of psychotropic 
substances specified in the Schedule such su bstance or natural material or salt or preparation  of such 
substance or material.  
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES AND OFFICERS  
4. Central Government to take measures for preventing and combating abuse of and illicit 
traffic in narcotic drugs, etc .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall 
take all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of preventing and combating 
abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances a nd the illicit traffic therein 2[and for ens uring their 
medical and scientific use] . 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
measures which the Central Government may take under that sub -section include measures with respect 
to all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) coordination of actions by various officers, State Gove rnments and other authorities — 
(i) under this Act, or  
(ii) under any other law for the time being in force in connection with the enforcement  of the 
provisions of this Act;  
(b) obligations under  the International Conventions;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  10 
 (c) assistance to the concerned authorities in foreign countries and concerned international 
organisations  with a view to facilitating coordination and universal action for prevention and 
suppression of illicit traffic in narcotic dru gs and psychotropic substances;  
(d) identification, treatment, education, after care, rehabilitation and social re -integration o f 
addict s; 
1[(da) availability of narcotic drugs  and psychotropic substances for medical and scientific use;]  
(e) such other matters as the Central Government deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of 
securing the effective implementation of the prov isions of this Act and preventing and combating the 
abuse of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances  and illicit traffic therein.  
(3) The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do for the purposes of 
this Act, by order, published in the Official Gazette, constitute an authority or a hierarchy of authorities 
by such name or names as may be specified in the order for the purpose of exercising such of the powers 
and functions of the Central Government under this Act and for taking measures with respect to such of 
the matters referred to in sub -section ( 2) as may be mentioned in the order, and subject to the supervision 
and control of the Central Government and the provisions of such order, such authority or authorities may 
exercise the powers and take the measures so mentioned in the order as if such authority or authorities had 
been empowered by this Act to exercise those  powers and take such measures.  
5. Officers of  Central Government .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions  of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4, the Central Government shall appoint a Narcotics Commissioner and may also appoint such 
other officers with such designations as it thinks fi t for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Narcotics Commissioner shall, either by h imself or through officers subordinate to him, 
exercise all powers and perform all functions relating to the superintendence of the cultivation of the 
opium poppy and production of opium and shall also exercise and perform such other powers and 
functions a s may be entrusted to  him by the Central Government.  
(3) The officers appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the general control and direction 
of the Central Government, or, if so directed by that Government, also of the Board or any other aut hority 
or officer.  
6. The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropie Sub stances Consultative Committee .—(1) The Central 
Government may constitute, by notification in the Official Gazette, an advisory committee to be called 
“The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substan ces Consultative Committee ” (hereafter in this section 
referred to as the Committee) to advise the Central Government on such matters relating to the 
administration of this Act as are referred to it by tha t Government from time to time.  
(2) The Committee s hall consist of a Chairman and such other members, not exceeding twenty, as 
may be appoi nted by the Central Government.  
(3) The Committee shall meet when required to do so by the Central Government and shall have 
power  to regulate its own procedure.  
(4) The Committee may, if it deems it necessary so to do for the efficient discharge of any of its 
functions, constitute one or more sub -committees and may appoint to any such sub -committee, whether 
generally or for the consideration of any particular matter, any person (including a non -official) who is  
not a member of the Committee.  
(5) The term of office of, the manner of filling casual vacancies in the offices of and the allowances, 
if any, p ayable to, the Chairman and other members of the Committee, and the  conditions and restrictions 
subject to which the Committee may appoint a person who is not a member of the Committee as a 
member of any of its sub -committees, shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central 
Government.  
 7. Officers of Stat e Government .—(1) The State Government may appoint such officers with such 
designations as it thinks fi t for the purposes of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  11 
 (2) The officers appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the general control and direction 
of the State Gover nment, or, if so directed by that Government, also of any other authority or officer.  
1[CHAPTER IIA  
NATIONAL  FUND FOR  CONTROL OF  DRUG ABUSE  
7A. National Fund for Control of Drug Abuse .—(1) The Central Government may, by noti fication 
in the Official Gazette, constitute a Fund to be called the National Fund for Control of Drug Abuse 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Fund) and th ere shall be credited thereto — 
(a) an amount which the Ce ntral Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, provide;  
(b) the sale proceeds of any prope rty forfeited under Chapter VA;  
(c) any grants that may be mad e by any person or institution;  
(d) any  income from investment of the amounts credited to the Fund under the aforesaid 
provisions.  
2[(2) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the expenditure incurred in 
connect ion with the measures taken for — 
(a) combating illicit traffic in narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances or controlled substances;  
(b) controlling the abuse of narcotic dru gs and psychotropic substances;  
(c) identifying, tr eating, rehabilitating addicts;  
(d) preventing drug abuse;  
(e) educa ting public against drug ab use; 
(f) supplying drugs to addicts where such supply is a medical necessity.  
(3) The Central Government may constitute a Governing Body as it thinks fit to advise that 
Government and to sanction money out of the said Fund subject to the limit notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette.]  
(4) The Governing Body shall consist of a Chairman (not below the rank of an Additional Secretary 
to the Central Government) and such other members not exceeding six as the Central  Government may 
appoint.  
(5) The Governing Body shall have the power  to regulate its own procedure.  
7B. Annual report of activities financed under the Fund .—The Central Government shall, as soon 
as may be, after the end of each financial year, cause to be published in the Official G azette, a report 
giving an account of the activities financed under section 7A during the financial year, togethe r with a 
statement of accounts.]  
CHAPTER III  
PROHIBITION, CONTROL AND REGULATION  
8. Prohib ition of certain operations .—No person shall — 
(a) cultivate any coca plant or gather any portion of coca plant; or  
(b) cultivate the opium poppy or any cannabis plant; or  
(c) produce, manufacture, possess, sell, purchase, transport, warehouse, use, consume, import 
inter-State, export inter -State, import i nto India, export from India or tranship any narcotic drug or 
psychotropic substance,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 4 , for sub -section s (2) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  12 
 except for medical or scientific purposes and in the manner and to the extent provided by the provisions 
of this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder and in a case  where any such provision, imposes any 
requirement by way of licence, permit or authorisation also in accordance with the terms and conditions 
of such li cence, permit or authorisation:  
Provided that, and subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the 
prohibition against the cultivation of the cannabis plant for the production of ganja  or the production, 
possession, use, consumption, purchase, sale, transport, warehousing, import inter -State and export  
inter-State of ganja  for any purpose other than medical and scientific purpose shall take effect only from 
the date which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:  
1[Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply t o the export of poppy straw for decorative 
purposes.]  
2[8A. Prohibition of certain activities relating to  property derived from offence .—No person 
shall — 
(a) convert or transfer any property knowing that such property is derived from an offence 
committed u nder this Act or under any other corresponding law of any other country or from an act of 
participation in such offence, for the purpose of concealing or disguising the illicit origin of the 
property or to assist any person in the commission of an offence or to e vade the legal consequences; 
or 
(b) conceal or disguise the true nature, source, location, disposition of any property knowing that 
such property is derived from an offence committed under this Act or under any other correspondi ng 
law of any other c ountry; or  
(c) knowingly acquire, possess or use any property which was derived from an offence committed 
under this Act or under any other corresponding law of any other country.]  
9. Power of Central Government to permit, control and regulate .—(1) Subject  to the provisions 
of section 8, the Cen tral Government may, by rules — 
(a) permit and regulate — 
(i) the cultivation, or gathering of any portion (such cultivation or gathering being only on 
account of the Central Government) of coca plant, or the production, possession, sale, purchase, 
transport, import inter -State, export inter -State, use  or consumption of coca leaves;  
(ii) the cultivation (such cultivation being only on account of Central Government) of the 
opium poppy;  
(iii) the production and manufacture of opium and  production of poppy straw;  
3[(iiia) the possession, transport, import inter -State, export inter -State, warehousing, sale, 
purchase, consumption and use of poppy straw produced from plants from which no juice has 
been extracted through lancing; ] 
(iv) the sale of opium and opium derivatives from the Central Government factories for 
export from India or sale to State Government  or to manufacturing chemists;  
(v) the manufacture of manufactured drugs (other than prepared opium) but not including 
manufacture of medicinal opium or any preparation containing any manufactured drug from 
materials which the maker is lawfully entitled to  possess;  
3[(va) the manufacture, possession, transport, import inter -State, export inter-State, sale, 
purchase, consumption and u se of essential narcotic drugs:  
Provided that where, in respect of an essential narcotic drug, the State Government has 
granted licence or permit under the provisions of section 10 prior to the commencement of  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 5 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  13 
 the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 2014  (16 of 2014) , such 
licence or permit shall continue to be valid till the date of its expiry or for a period of twelve 
months from such comme ncement, whichever is earlier.]  
(vi) the manuf acture, possession, transport, import inter -State, export inter -State, sale, 
purchase, consumption or use of psychotropic substances;  
(vii) the import into India and export from India and transhipment of narcotic drugs and 
psychotro pic substances;  
(b) pres cribe any other matter requisite to render effective the control of the Central Government 
over any of the m atters specified in clause ( a). 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules  may— 
(a) empower  the Central Government to fix from time to time the limits within which licences 
may be given for the cultivation of the opium poppy;  
(b) require that all opium, the produce of land cultivated with the opium poppy, shall be delivered 
by the cultivators to  the officers authorised in this be half by the Central Government;  
(c) prescribe the forms and conditions of licences for cultivation of the opium poppy and for 
production and manufacture of opium; the fees that may be charged therefor; the authorities by which 
such licences may be granted, withheld, refused or cancelled and the authorities before which appeals 
against the orders of withholding, refusal or canc ellation of licences shall lie;  
(d) prescribe that opium shall be weighed, examined and classified  according to its quality and 
consistence by the officers authorised in this behalf by the Central Government in the presence of the 
cultivator at the time  of delivery by the cultivator;  
(e) empower the Central Government to fix from time to time the price  to be paid to the 
cultivators for the opium delivered;  
(f) provide for the weighment, examination and classification, according to the quality and 
consistence, of the opium received at the factory and the deductions from or additions (if any) to the 
stand ard price to be made in accordance with the result of such examination; and the authorities by 
which the decisions with regard to the weighment, examination, classification, deductions or 
additions shall be made and the authorities before which appeals ag ainst such decisions shall lie;  
(g) require that opium delivered by a cultivator, if found as a result of examination in the Central 
Government factory to be adulterated, may be confiscated by the offi cers authorised in this behalf;  
(h) prescribe the forms and conditions of licences for the manufacture of manufactured drugs, the 
authorities by which such licences may be granted and the fees th at may be charged therefor;  
1[(ha) prescribe the forms and conditions of licences  or permits for the manufacture, possession, 
transport, import inter -State, export inter -State, sale, purchase, consumption or use of essential 
narcotic drugs, the authorities by which such licence or permit may be granted and the fees that may 
be charged therefor;]  
(i) prescribe the forms and conditions of licences or permits for the manufacture, posse ssion, 
transport, import inter -State, export inter -State, sale, purchase, consumption or use of psychotropic 
substances, the authorities by which such licences or permits may be granted and the fees that may be 
charged therefor;  
(j) prescribe the ports and other places at which any kind of narcotic drugs or psychotropic 
substances may be imported into India or exported from India or transhipped; the form s and 
conditions of certificates, authorisations or permits, as the case may be, for such import, export or 
transhipment; the authorities by which such certificates, authorisations or permits may be granted and 
the fee s that may be charged therefor.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  14 
 1[9A. Power to control and reg ulate controlled substances .—(1) If the Central Government is of 
the opinion that, having regard to the use of any controlled substance in the production or manufacture of 
any narcotic drug or psychotropic subs tance, it is necessary  or expe dient so to do in the public interest, it 
may, by order, provide for regulating or prohibiting the production, manufacture, supply and distribution 
thereof and trade and commerce therein.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferr ed by sub -section ( 1), an order made 
thereunder may provide for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise, the  production, manufacture, 
possession, transport, import inter -State, export inter -State, sale, purchase, consumption, use, storage, 
distributio n, disposal or acquisition of any controlled substance. ] 
10. Power of State Government to permit, control and regulate .—(1) Subject to the provisions of 
section 8, the S tate Government may, by rules — 
(a) permi t and regulate — 
(i) the  possession, transport, import inter -State, export inter -State, warehousing, sale, 
purchase, cons umption and use of poppy straw  2[except poppy straw produced from plants from 
which no juice has been extracted through lancing] ; 
(ii) the possession, transpor t, import inter -State, export inter -State, sale, purchase, 
consumption and  use of opium;  
(iii) the cultivation of any cannabis plant, production, manufacture, possession, transport, 
import inter -State, export inter -State, sale, purchase, consumption or use of cannabis (excluding 
charas ); 
(iv) the manufacture of medicinal opium or any preparation c ontaining any manufactured 
drug from materials which the maker i s lawfully entitled to possess;  
(v) the possession, transport, purchase, sale, import inter -State, export int er-State, use or 
consumption of   3[manufactured drugs (other than prepared opium  and essential narcotic drugs)]  
and of coca leaf and any preparation co ntaining any manufactured drug;  
(vi) the manufacture and possession of prepared opium from opium lawfully possessed by an 
addict registered with the State Government on medical advice for his personal consumption:  
Provided that save in so far as may be expressly provided in the rules made under sub -clauses ( iv) 
and ( v), nothing in section 8 shall apply to the import inter -State, export inter -State, transport, 
possession, purchase, sale, use or consumption of manufactured drugs which are the property and in 
the possession of the Government:  
Provided further that such d rugs as are referred to in the preceding proviso shall not be sold or 
otherwise delivered to any person who, under the rules made by the State Government under the 
aforesaid sub -clauses, is no t entitled to their possession;  
(b) prescribe any other matter r equisite to render effective the control of the State Government 
over any of the m atters specified in clause ( a). 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may — 
(a) empower the State Government to declare any place to be a warehouse wherein it shall be the 
duty of the owners to deposit all such poppy straw as is legally imported inter -State and is intended 
for export inter -State or export from India; to regulate the safe custody of such poppy straw 
warehous ed and the removal of such poppy straw for sale or export inter -State or export from India; 
to levy fees for such warehousing and to prescribe the manner in which and the period after which the 
poppy straw warehoused shall be disposed of  in default of paym ent of fees;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 6 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “manufactured drugs other than prepared opium” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  15 
 (b) provide that the limits within which licences may be given for the cultivation of any cannabis 
plant shall be fixed from time to time by or under the orders of the State Government;  
(c) provide that only the cultivators licenced by the pr escribed authority of the State Government 
shall be authorised to engage in cultivation of any cannabis plant;  
(d) require that all cannabis, the produce of land cultivated with cannabis plant, shall be delivered 
by the cultivators to the officers of the S tate Govern ment authorised in this behalf;  
(e) empower the State Government to fix from time to time, the price to be paid to the cultivat ors 
for the cannabis delivered;  
(f) prescribe the forms and conditions of licences  or permits for the purposes specified in  
sub-clauses ( i) to ( vi) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) and the authorities by which such licences or 
permits may be granted and the fee s that may be charged therefor.  
11. Narcotic drugs and psychotropic substanc es, etc., not liable to distress o r attachment. — 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law or contract, no narcotic drug, psychotropic 
substance, coca plant, the opium poppy or cannabis plant shall be liable to be distrained or attached  by 
any person for the recovery of any money under any order or decree of any c ourt or authority or 
otherwise.  
12. Restrictions over external dealings in narcotic dr ugs and psychotropic substances .—No 
person shall engage in or control any trade whereby a n arcotic drug or psychotropic substance is obtained 
outside India and supplied to any person outside India save with the previous authorisation of the Central 
Government and subject to such conditions as may be imposed by that  Government in this behalf.  
13. Special provisions relating to coca plant and coca leaves for use in the preparation of 
flavouring agent .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 8, the Central Government may 
permit, with or without conditions, and on behalf of Government, the cultivation of any coca plant or 
gathering of any portion thereof or the production, possession, sale, purchase , transport, import inter -
State, export inter -State or import into India of coca leaves for use in the preparation of any flavouring 
agent which shall not contain any alkaloid and to the  extent necessary for such use.  
14. Special provision relating to cann abis.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 8, 
Government may, by general or special order and subject to such conditions as may be specified in such 
order, allow cultivation of any cannabis plant for industrial purposes only of obtaining fibre or seed or for 
horticultural purposes.  
CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
1[15. Punishment for contraventi on in relation to poppy straw .—Whoever, in  contravention of 
any provisions of this Act or any rule or order made or condition of a licence  granted thereunder, 
produces, possesses, transports, imports inter -State, exports inter -State, sells, purchases, uses or omits to 
warehouse poppy straw or removes or does any act in respect of warehoused p oppy straw shall be 
punishable, — 
(a) where the con travention involves small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to 2[one year] , or with fine which may extend to te n thousand rupees , or with both;  
(b) where the contravention involves quantity lesser than commercial quantity but  greater than 
small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years , and with fine 
which  may extend to one lakh rupees;  
(c) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shal l not be less than ten years but which may extend to twenty years , and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which  may extend to two lakh rupees:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 6, for sections 15 to 18 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 6, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  16 
 Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine exceeding 
two lakh rupees.  
16. Punishment for contravention in relation  to coca plant and coca leaves .—Whoever, in 
contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule  or order made or condition of licence granted 
thereunder, cultivates any coca plant or gathers any portion of a coca plant or produces, possesses, sells, 
purchases, transports, imports inter -State, exports inter -State or uses coca leaves shall be punishab le with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years , and with fine which  may extend to one 
lakh rupees.  
17. Punishment for contraventio n in relation to prepared opium .—Whoever, in contravention of 
any provision of this Act or any rule or  order made or condition of licence granted thereunder, 
manufactures, possesses, sells, purchases, transports, imports inter -State, exports inter -State or uses 
prepared opium shall be punishable, — 
(a) where the contravention involves small quantity, with r igorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to 1[one year] , or with fine which may extend to ten t housand rupees , or with both; or  
(b) where the contravention involves quantity lesser than commercial quantity but greater than 
small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years , and with fine 
which ma y extend to one lakh rupees; or  
(c) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than ten years but  which may extend to twenty years , and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which  may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine exceeding 
two l akh rupees.  
18. Punishment for contravention in relation to opium poppy an d opium .—Whoever, in 
contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made or condition of licence granted 
thereunder, cultivates the opium poppy or produces, manufact ures, possesses, sells, purchases, transports, 
imports inter -State, exports inter -State or uses opium shall be punishable, — 
(a) where the contravention involves small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to 2[one year] , or with fine which may extend to ten  thousand rupees, or with both;  
(b) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to twenty years , and shall also be liabl e 
to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees which may extend to t wo lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine exceeding 
two lakh rupees;  
(c) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to ten years and with fine 
which may extend to one lakh rupees.]  
19. Punishment for embez zlement of opium by cultivator .—Any cultivator licensed to cultivate 
the opium poppy on account of the Cen tral Government who embezzles or otherwise illegally disposes of 
the opium produced or any part thereof, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to twenty years and shall also be  liable to fine which 
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which  may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine exceeding two 
lakh rupees.  
20. Punishment for contravention in rela tion to cannabis plant and cannabis .—Whoever, in 
contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made or condition of  licence granted 
thereunder, — 
(a) cultivates any cannabis plant; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 7, for “s ix months” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  17 
 (b) produces, manufactures, possesses, sells, purchases, transports, imports inter -State, exports 
inter-State or uses c annabis,  
shall be punishable, — 
1[(i) where such contravention relates to clause ( a) with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten years , and shall also be liable to fi ne which may ex tend to one lakh 
rupees; and  
(ii) where such contraven tion relates to sub -clause ( b),— 
(A) and involves small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to 2[one year] , or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both;  
(B) and involves quantity lesser than commercial quantity but greater than small quantity, 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years , and with fine whic h 
may extend to one lakh rupees;  
(C) and involves commer cial quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a  term which shall 
not be less than ten years but which may extend to  twenty years and shall also be liable to 
fine which shall not be less  than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided  that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment,  impose a fine 
exceeding two lakh rupees.]  
3[21. Punishment for contravention in relation to manu factured drugs and preparations .—
Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or  order made or condition of licence 
granted thereunder, manufactures, possesses, sells,  purchases, transports, imports inter -State, exports 
inter-State or uses any  manufactured drug or any preparation containing any manufactured drug shall be  
punish able, — 
(a) where the contravention involves small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment  for a term which 
may extend to 4[one year] , or with fine which may extend to  ten thousand rupees, or with both;  
(b) where the contravention involves quantity, lesser tha n commercial quantity but  greater than 
small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which  may extend to t en years , and with fine 
which  may extend to one lakh rupees;  
(c) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with rigorous  imprisonm ent for a term 
which shall not be less than ten years but which  may extend to twenty years , and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be  less than one lakh rupees but which  may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to b e recorded in the judgment, impose a  fine exceeding 
two lakh rupees.  
22. Punishment for contravention in relation to psychotropic substan ces.—Whoever, in 
contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made or condition of  licence  granted 
thereunder, manufactures, possesses, sells, purchases, transports, import s inter-State, exports inter -State 
or uses any psychotropic substan ce shall be punishable, — 
(a) where the contravention involves small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment fo r a term which 
may extend to 5[one year] , or with fine which may extend to te n thousand rupees , or with both;  
(b) where the contravention involves quantity lesser than commercial quantity but  greater than 
small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a te rm which  may extend to ten years , and with fine 
which  may extend to one lakh rupees;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 7, for sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii) (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 9, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
3. Subs. by  Act 9 of 2001, s. 8, for sections 21 to 23 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 10, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
5. Subs. by s. 11,  ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  18 
 (c) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with rigorous  imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than ten years but which  may extend to twenty years , and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which  may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine exceeding 
two lakh rupees.  
23. P unishment for illegal import in to India, export from India or transhipment of narcotic 
drugs and  psychotropic substances .—Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act or any 
rule or order made or condition of licence or permit granted or certificate or authori sation issued 
thereunder, imports into India or exports from India or tranships any narcotic drug or psychotropic 
substance shall be punishable, — 
(a) where the contravention involves small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to  1[one year] , or with fine  which may extend to te n thousand rupees , or with both;  
(b) where the contravention involves quantity lesser than commercial quantity but greater than 
small quanti ty, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may ext end to ten years, and with fine  
which  may extend to one lakh rupees;  
(c) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to twenty years , and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two la kh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine exceeding 
two lakh rupees.]   
24. Punishment for external dealings in narcot ic drugs and psychotropic substances in 
contravention of section 12 .—Whoever engages in or controls any trade whereby a narcotic drug or a 
psychotropic substance is obtained outside India and supplied to any person outside India without the 
previous authorisation of the Central Government or otherwise than in accordance with the condition (if 
any) of such authorisation granted under section 12, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than ten years but which m ay extend to twenty years and shall also be liable 
to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but  may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine exceeding two 
lakh rupees.  
2[25. Punishment for allowing premises, etc., to be used  for commission of an offence .—
Whoever, being the owner or occupier or having the control or use of any house, room, enclosure, space, 
place, animal or conveyance, knowingly permits it to be used for the  commission by any other person of 
an offence punishable under any provision of this Act, shall be punishable with the punishment provided 
for that offence.]  
3[25A. Punishment for contravention o f orders made under section 9A .—If any person 
contravenes an order made under section 9A, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine which  may extend to one lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine exceeding one 
lakh rupees.]  
26. Punishment for certain acts by licensee or his servants .—If the holder of any licence , permit or 
authorisation granted under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder or any person in his em ploy and 
acting on his behalf — 
(a) omits, without any reasonable cause, to maintain accounts or to submit any return in 
accordance with the provisions of this Ac t, or any rule made thereunder;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 12, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1-5-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 9, for section 25 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 7 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  19 
 (b) fails to produce without any reasonable cause such licence, perm it or authorisation on demand 
of any officer authorised by the Central Government or State Government in  this behalf;  
(c) keeps any accounts or makes any statement which is false or which he knows or has reason to 
believe to be incorrect; or  
(d) wilfully  and knowingly does any act in breach of any of the conditions of licence, permit or 
authorisation for which a penalty is not prescribed  elsewhere in this Act,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three y ears or with fine  or with 
both.  
1[27. Punishment for consumption of any narcotic drug or psychotropic  substance .—Whoever, 
consumes any narcotic drug or psychotropic  substance shall be  punishable, — 
(a) where the narcotic drug or psychotropic substance consumed is cocaine,  morphine, diacetyl - 
morphine or any other narcotic drug or any psychotropic  substance as may be specified in this behalf 
by the Central Government by  notification in the Official Gazette, with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to twenty  thousand rupees; or 
with both; and  
(b) where the narcotic drug or psychotropic substance consumed is other than  those specified in 
or under clau se (a), with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand  rupees , or with both.]  
2[27A. Punishment for financing illicit tr affic and harbouring offenders .—Whoever indulges in 
financing, directly or indirectly, any , of the activities specified in sub -clauses ( i) to ( v) of clause ( viiia) of 
section 2 or harbours any person engaged in any of the aforementioned activities, shall be pun ishable with 
rigorous imprison ment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to twenty 
years and shall also be l iable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to 
two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment , impose a f ine exceeding two 
lakh rupees.]  
3[27B.  Punishment for contravention of se ction 8A .—Whoever contravenes the provision of 
section 8A shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
years but which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.]  
28.Punishment f or attempts to commit offences .—Whoever attempts to commit any offence 
punishable under this Chapter or to cause such offence to be committed and in such attempt does any act 
towards the commission of the offence shall be punishable with the punishment  provided for the o ffence.  
29. Punishment for ab etment and criminal conspiracy .—(1) Whoever abets, or is a party to a 
criminal conspiracy to commit, an offence punishable under this Chapter, shall, whether such offence be 
or be not committed in consequence of such abetment or in pursuance of such criminal conspiracy, and 
notwithstanding anything contained in section 116 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) , be punishable 
with the punis hment provided for the offence.  
(2) A person abets, or is a party to a criminal conspiracy  to commit, an offence, within the meaning of 
this section, who, in India, abets or is a party to the criminal conspiracy to the commission of any act in a 
place w ithout and beyond India which — 
(a) would constitute an offenc e if committed within India; or  
(b) under the laws of such place, is an offence relating to narcotic drugs or psychotropic 
substances having all the legal co nditions required to constitute  it such an offence the same as or 
analogous to the legal co nditions required to constitute  it an of fence punishable under this Chapter, if 
committed within India.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 10, for section 27 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 8 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
3. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  20 
 30. Preparation .—If any person makes preparation to do or omits to do anything which constitutes 
an offence punishable under any of the provisions of   1[sections 19,  24 and 27A  and for offences 
involving commercial quantity of any  narcotic drug or psychotropic substance and from the 
circumstances of the case]  it may be reasonably inferred that he was determined to carry out his intention 
to commit the offence but had been prevented by ci rcumstances independent of his will, he shall be 
punishable  with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one -half of the minimum 
term (if any), but which may extend to one -half of the maximum term, of imprisonment with which he 
would have been punishable in the event of his having committed such offence, and also with fine which 
shall not be less than one -half of the minimum amount (if any), of fine with which he would have been 
punishable, but which may extend to one -half of the maxim um amount of fine with which he would have 
ordinarily (that is to say in the absence of special reasons) been punishable, in the event aforesaid:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the Judgment, impose a higher fine.  
2[31. Enhanced  punishment for offences after previous conviction .—(1) If any person who  has 
been convicted of the commission of, or attempt to commit, or abetment of, or criminal  conspiracy to 
commit, any of the offences punishable under this Act is subsequently convicted of  the commission of, or 
attempt to commit, or abetment of, or criminal conspiracy to commit, an  offence punishable under this 
Act with the same amount of punishment shall be punished for the  second and every subsequent offence 
with rigorous impr isonment for a term which may extend to  3[one and one -half times of the maximum 
term]  of imprisonment , and also be liable to fine which shall extend to  4[one and one -half times of the 
maximum amou nt] of fine.  
(2) Where the person referred to in sub -section  (1) is liable to be punished with a minimum  term of 
imprisonment and to a minimum amount of fine, the minimum punishment for such  person shall be  
5[one and one -half times of the minimum term]  of imprisonment and 6[one and one -half times of the 
minimum amount]  of fine:  
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a fine  exceeding the 
fine for which a person is liable.  
(3) Where any person is convicted by a competent court of criminal jurisdiction outside India  under 
any corresponding law, such person, in respect of such conviction, shall be dealt with for  the purposes of 
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) as if he had been convicted by a court in India.]  
7[31A. Death penalty for certain  offences after previous conviction .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 31, if any person who has been convicted of the commission of, or attempt 
to commit, or abetment of, or criminal conspiracy to commit, any of the offences punishable under 
8[section 19, section 24, section 27 A and for offences involving commercial quantity of any narcotic drug 
drug or psychotropic substance] , is subsequently convicted of the commission of, or attempt to commit, 
or abetment of, or criminal conspiracy to co mmit, an offence relating to ,— 
(a) engaging in the production, manufacture, possession, transportation, import into In dia, export 
from India or tran shipment, of the narcotic drugs or  psychotropic substances speci fied under   
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 11, for certain words, figures and brackets (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for section 31 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 14, for “one -half of the maximum term” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “one -half of the maximum amount” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
5. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “one -half of the minimum term” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
6. Subs . by s. 14, ibid., for “ one-half of the minimum amount ” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
7. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 9 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
8. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 13, for “section 15 to section 25 (both inclusive) or section 27A ” (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  21 
 column ( 1) of the Table below and involving the quantity which is equal to  or more than the quantity 
indicated against each such drug or substance, as specified i n column ( 2) of the said Table:  
TABLE  
Particulars of narcotic drugs/ psychotropic substances  Quantity  
(1) (2) 
(i) Opium               .        .         .       .       .       .      .      .       .      .  10 kgs.  
(ii) Morphine          .        .         .       .       .       .      .      .       .      .  1 kg.  
(iii) Heroin              .        .         .       .       .       .      .      .       .      .  1 kg.  
(iv) Codeine            .        .         .       .       .       .      .      .       .      .  1 kg.  
(v) Thebaine          .        .         .       .       .       .      .      .       .      .  1 kg.  
(vi) Cocaine            .        .         .       .       .       .      .      .       .      .  500 grams  
(vii) Hashish            .        .         .       .       .       .      .      .       .      .  20 kgs.  
(viii) Any mixture with or without any neutral material of any of the 
above drugs  1[lesser of the quantity 
between the quantities 
given against the 
respective narcotic 
drugs or psychotropic 
substances mentioned 
above forming part of 
the mixture ] 
(ix) LSD, LSD -25 (+) - N, N -Diethyllyser  gamide (d -lysergic acid 
diethylamide)  500 grams  
(x) THC (Tetrahydrocannabinols, the following Isomers: 6a (10a),  
6a (7),7,8,9,10,9  (11) and their stereochemical variants)  500 grams  
(xi) Methamphetamine( + )-2-Methylamine -l-Phenylpropane  1,500 gram  
(xii) Methaqualone (2 -Methyl -3-0-tolyl-4-(3h—)quinazolinone ) 1,500 gram  
(xiii) Amphetamine ( +)-2-amino -1-phenylpropane  1,500 gram  
(xiv) Salts and preparations of the psychotropic substances mentioned in 
(ix) to (xiii)  1,500 gram;  
 (b) financing, directly or indirectly, any of the acti vities specified in clause ( a), 
2[shall  be punished with punishment which shall not be less than the punishment specified in section 31 or 
or with death].   
(2) Where any person is convicted by a competent court of criminal jurisdiction outside India under 
any law corresponding to the provisions of  3[section 19, section 24 or section 27A and for offences 
involving commercial quality of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance], such person, in respect of 
such conviction, shall be dealt with for the purposes of sub -section ( 1) as if he had been co nvicted by a 
court in India. ] 
32. Punishment for offence for w hich no punishment is provided .—Whoever contravenes any 
provision of this Act or any rule or order made, or any condition of any licence, permit or authorisation   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 13, for “1,500 grams” (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 15, for “shall be punishable with death” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 13, for certain words, figures and brackets (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  22 
 issued  thereunder for which no punishment is separately provided in this Chapter, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.  
1[32A. No suspension, remission or commutation in any sentence awarded  under this Act .— 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or any other 
law for the time being in force but subject to the provisions of section 33, no sentence awarded under this 
Act (other than section 27) s hall be suspended or remitted or commuted.]  
2[32B . Factors to be taken into account for imposing highe r than the minimum punishment .—
Where a minimum term of imprisonment or amount of fine is prescribed for any offence  committed under 
this Act, the court may, in addition to such factors as it may deem fit, take into  account the following 
factors for imposing a punishment higher than the minimum term of  imprisonment or amount of fine, 
namely: — 
(a) the use or threat of use of violence or arms by the offender ; 
(b) the fact that the offender holds a public office and that he has taken  advantage of that office in 
committing the offence;  
(c) the fact that the minors are affected by the offence or the minors are  used for the commission 
of an offence;  
(d) the fact that the offence is committed in an educational institution or social service facility or 
in the  immediate vicinity of such institution or faculty or in other place to which school children and  
students resort for educationa l, sports and social activities ; 
(e) the fact that the offender belongs to organised international or any other criminal group which 
is involved i n the commission of the offence ; and  
(f) the fact that the offender is involved in other illegal activities  facilitated by commission of the 
offence.]  
33. Application of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and of the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958 .—Nothing contained in section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974) or in the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (2 0 of 1958) shall apply to a person convicted of an 
offence under this Act unless such person is under eighteen years of age or that the offence for which 
such person is convicted is punishable under section 26 or section 27.  
34. Security for abstain ing fro m commission of offence .—(1) Whenever any person is convicted of 
an offence punishable under any provision of Chapter IV and the court convicting him is of opinion that it 
is necessary to require such person to execute a bond for abstaining from the commis sion of any offence 
under this Act, the court may, at the time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute a bond 
for a sum proportionate to his means, with or without sureties, for abstaining from commission of any 
offence under Chapter IV du ring such period not exceeding three years as it thi nks fit to fix.  
(2) The bond shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, in so far as they are applicable, 
apply to all matters connected with such bond as if it were a b ond to keep the peace ordered to be 
executed under section 106 of that Code.  
(3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the bond  so executed shall become void.  
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an appellate court or by the  High Court or 
Sessions Judge when exe rcising the powers of revision.  
35. Presum ption of culpable mental state .—(1) In any prosecution for an offence under this Act 
which requires a culpable mental state of the accused, the court shall presume the existenc e of such 
mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state 
with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 10 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 14 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  23 
 Explanation .—In this section “culpable mental state ” includes intention m otive, knowledge of a fact 
and belief in , or reason to believe, a fact.  
(2) For the purpose of this section ,  a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to exist 
beyond a reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of 
probability.  
1[36. Constitution of Speci al Court .—(1) The Government may, for the purpose  of providing 
speedy trial of the offences under this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute as many  
Special Court as may be necessary for such area or areas as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a single Judge who shall be appointed by the Government with 
the concurrence of the C hief Justice of the High Court.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, “High Court ” means the High Court of the State in which the 
Sessions Judge or the Additional Sessions Judge  of a Special Court was working immediately before  his 
appointment as such Judge.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special Court unless he is, 
immediately before such appointment, a Sessions Judge o r an Additional Sessions Judge.  
2[36A. Offe nces triable by Special Courts .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the  Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), — 
(a) all offences under this Act which are punishable with imprisonment for a term of more than 
three  years shall be triable only by the Special Court constituted for the area in which the offence has  
been committed or where there are more Special Courts than one for such area, by such one of  them 
as may be specified in this behalf by the Government;  
(b) where a person accused of or suspected of the commission of an offence under this Act is  
forwarded to a Magistrate under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 167 of the Code of  
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), such Magistrate may authorise th e detention of such  person in 
such custody as he thinks fit for a period not exceeding fifteen days in the whole where  such 
Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate and seven days in the whole where such Magistrate is an  
Executive Magistrate:  
Provided that in c ases which are triable by the Special Court where such  Magistrate considers — 
(i) when such person is forwarded to him as aforesaid; or  
(ii) upon or at any time before the expiry of the period of detention  authorised by him,  
that the detention of such perso n is unnecessary, he shall  order such person to be forwarded to the 
Special Court having jurisdiction;  
(c) the Special Court may exercise, in relation to the person forwarded to it under  clause ( b), the 
same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a  case may exercise under section 167 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), in relation to an accused person in such case who 
has been  forwarded to him under that section;  
(d) a Special Court may, upon perusal of police report of the fac ts constituting an offenc e under 
this Act or upon complaint made by an officer of the Central Government or a State Government  
authorised in his behalf, take cognizance of that offence without the accused being committed to  it for 
trial. 
(2) When trying an  offence under this Act, a Special Court may also try an offence other than  an 
offence under this Act with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973  
(2 of 1974), be charged at the same trial.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 11, for section 36 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 15, for section 36A (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  24 
 (3) Nothing contained in this section s hall be deemed to affect the special powers of the High  Court 
regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and  the High Court 
may exercise such powers including the power under cluase ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of that section as if the 
reference to “Magistrate ” in that section included also a reference to a  “Special Court ” constituted under 
section 36.  
 (4) In respect of persons accused of an offence punishable under section 19 or section 24 or  section 
27A or for offenc es involving commercial quantity the references in sub -section ( 2) of section 167 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)  thereof to “ninety days ”, where  they occur, shall be 
construed as reference to “one hundred and eighty days ”: 
Provided tha t, if it is not possible to complete the investigation within the said period of one  hundred 
and eighty days, the Special Court may extend the said period up to one year on the  report of the Public 
Prosecutor indicating the progress of the investigation and the specific  reasons for the detention of the 
accused beyond the said period of one hundred and eighty days.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),  the 
offences punishable under this Act with impriso nment for a term of not more than three years  may be 
tried summarily.]  
36B. Appeal and revision .—The High Court may exercise, so for as may be applicable, all the 
powers conferred by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Cod e of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 19 74) on a 
High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court 
of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.  
36C. Application of Code to proc eedings before a Speci al Court .—Save as otherwise provided in 
this Act, the provisions of the Cod e of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974), (including the provisions as 
to bail and bonds) shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said 
provisions , the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the person conducting a 
prosecution before a Special Court, shall be de emed to be a Public Prosecutor.  
1[36D. Transitional provisions .—(1) Any offence committed under this Act on or  after the  
commencement of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 1988 (2  of 1989), 
which is triable by a Special Court shall, until a Special Court is constituted under  section 36, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of  1974), be tried by a 
Court of Session.  
(2) Where any proceedings in relation to any offence committed under this Act on or after the  
commencement of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 1988 (2  of 1989)  
are pending before a Court of Session, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), such 
proceeding shall be heard and disposed of by the Court of Session:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect the power of the High Court  under 
section 407 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of  1974)  to transfer any case or class of cases 
taken cognizance by a Court of Session  under sub -section ( 1).] 
2[37. Offences to be cognizable and non -bailable .—(1) Notwith standing  anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Proce dure, 1973 (2 of 1974), — 
(a) every  offence punishable under this Act shall be cogni zable;  
(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for  3[offences under section 19 or section 24 or 
section 27A and also for offences involving commercial quantity]  shall be released on b ail or on his 
own bond unless — 
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application fo r such 
release, and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Ac t 9 of 2001, s. 16, for section 36D (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 12, for section 37 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
3. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 17, for “a term of imprisonment of five years or more under this Act”  (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  25 
 (ii) where the Publi c Prosecutor opposes the appli cation , the court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to 
commit any offence while on bail.  
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in clause ( b) of sub -section (1) are in addition to the 
limitations under the Cod e of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974)  or any other law for the time being in 
force on granting of bail.].  
38. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under Chapter IV has been committed by a 
company, every person, who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due dili gence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under Chapter IV has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivan ce of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other assoc iation of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
39. Power of court to release certain offenders on probation .—(1) When any addict is found guilty 
of an offence punishable under section 27  1[or for offences relating to small quantity of any narcotic drug 
or psychotropic substance]  and if the court by whi ch he is found guilty is of the opinion, regard being had 
to the age, character, antecedents or physical or mental condition of the offender, that it is expedient so to 
do, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the 
court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any imprisonment, with his consent, direct that he be 
released for undergoing medical treatment for de -toxification or de -addiction from a hospital or an 
institution maintained or recognis ed by Government and on his entering into a bond in the form 
prescribed by the Central Government, with or without sureties, to appear and furnish before the court 
within a period not exceeding one year, a report regarding the result of his medical treatme nt and, in the 
meantime, to abstain from the commission of any offence under Chapter IV.  
(2) If it appears to the court, having regard to the report regarding the result of the medical  treatment 
furnished under sub -section ( 1), that it is expedient so to do, the court may direct the release of the 
offender after due admonition on his entering into a bond in the form prescribed by the Central 
Government, with or without sureties, for abstaining from the commission of any offenc e under  
Chapter IV during such period not exceeding three years as the court may deem fit to specify or on his 
failure so to abstain, to appear before the court and receive sentence when called upon during such period.  
40. Power of court to publish names,  place of business, etc., of certain o ffenders .—(1) Where any 
person is convicted of any of the offences punishable under section 15 to section 25 (both inclusive), 
section 28, section 29 or section 30, it shall be competent for the court convicting the pe rson to cause the 
name and place of business or residence of such person, nature of the contravention, the fact that the 
person has been so convicted and such other particulars as the court may consider to be appropriate in the 
circumstances of the case, t o be published at the expense of such person in such newspapers or in such 
manner as the court may direct.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 18 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  26 
 (2) No publication under sub -section ( 1) shall be made until the period for preferring an appeal 
against the orders of the court has expired without any appeal having been preferred, or such appeal, 
having been p referred, has been disposed of.  
(3) The expenses of any publication under sub -section ( 1) shall be recoverable from the convicted 
person as if it we re a fine imposed by the court.  
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE  
1[41. Power to issue warrant and authorisation .—(l) A Metropolitan Magistrate or a  Magistrate of 
the first class or any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered by the  State Government in this 
behalf, may issue a warrant for the arrest of any person whom he has  reason to believe to have committed 
any offence punishable under this Act, or for the search,  whether by day or by night, of any building, 
conveyance or place in which he has reason to  believe any narcotic drug or psychotropic substa nce or 
controlled substance in respect of which  an offence punishable under this Act has been committed or any 
document or other article which  may furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or any illegally 
acquired property or any  document or othe r article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally 
acquired property  which is liable for seizure or freezin g or forfeiture under Chapter V A of this Act is kept 
or concealed:  
(2) Any such officer of gazetted rank of the departments of central exc ise, narcotics, customs,  revenue 
intelligence or any other department of the Central Government including the para -military  forces or the 
armed forces as is empowered in this behalf by general or special order by  the Central Government, or 
any such officer  of the revenue, drugs control, excise, police or any  other department of a State 
Government as is empowered in this behalf by general or special  order of the State Government if he has 
reason to believe from personal knowledge or  information given by any person and taken in writing that 
any person has committed an offence  punishable under this Act or that any narcotic drug or psychotropic 
substance or controlled  substance in respect of which any offence under this Act has been committed or 
any document or  other article which may furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or any 
illegally  acquired property or any document or other article which may furnish evidence of holding any  
illegally acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezin g or forfeiture under Chapter V A of this 
Act is kept or concealed in any building, conveyance or place, may authorise any officer  subordinate to 
him but superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or a constable to arrest such a person or  search a building, 
conveyance or  place whether by day or by night or himself arrest such a person  or search a building, 
conveyance or place.  
(3) The officer to whom a warrant under sub -section ( 1) is addressed and the officer who  authorised 
the arrest or search or the officer who is so authorised under sub -section ( 2) shall have  all the powers of 
an officer acting under section 42.  
42. Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest without warrant or authorisation .—(l) Any such 
officer (being an officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or c onstable) of the  departments of central 
excise, narcotics, customs, revenue intellegence or any other department of  the Central Government 
including para -military forces or armed forces as is empowered in this  behalf by general or special order 
by the Cent ral Government, or any such officer (being an  officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or 
constable) of the revenue, drugs  control, excise, police or any other department of a State Government as 
is empowered in  this behalf by general or special order of the State Government, if he has reason to 
believe  from  personal knowledge or information given by any person and taken down in writing  that any  
narcotic drug, or psychotropic substance, or controlled substance in respect of  which an offence  
punishable unde r this Act has been committed or any document or other  article which may furnish  
evidence of the commission of such offence or any illegally  acquired property or any document or  other 
article which may furnish evidence of holding  any illegally acquired pro perty which is liable  for seizure 
or freezing or forfeiture under  Chapter V A of this Act is kept or concealed in any  building, conveyance or 
enclosed  place,  may between sunrise and sunset ,— 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 19, for sections 41 to 43 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  27 
 (a) enter into and search any such building, conveyance or place;  
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove any obstacle  to such entry;  
(c) seize such drug or substance and all materials used in the manufacture thereof  and any other 
article  and any animal or conveyance which he has reason to  believe to be  liable to confiscation under  
this Act and any document or other  article which he has reason to believe may furnish evidence of  the 
commission of any offence punishable under this Act or furnish evidence of  holding any  illegally 
acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing  or forfeiture under Chapter V A of this Act; 
and 
(d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any person whom he has  reason to believe to 
have  committed any offence punishable under this Act:  
1[Provided that in respect of holder of a licence for manufacture of manufactured drugs or 
psychotropic substances or controlled substances granted under this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder, such power shall be exercised by an officer not below th e rank of sub -inspector:  
Provided further that] if such officer has reason to believe that a search warrant or  authorisation 
cannot  be obtained without affording opportunity for the concealment of  evidence or facility for the  
escape of an offender, he may  enter and search such building,  conveyance or enclosed place at any  
time between sunset and sunrise after recording the  grounds of his belief.  
(2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing under sub -section ( 1) or records  grounds 
for his beli ef under the proviso thereto, he shall within seventy -two hours  send a copy  thereof to his 
immediate official superior.  
43. Power of seizure and arrest in public place .—Any officer of any of the  departments  mentioned 
in section 42 may — 
(a) seize in any public place or in transit, any narcotic drug or psychotropic  substance or 
controlled  substance in respect of which he has reason to  believe an offence punishable under this Act 
has been committed, and, along  with such drug or substance, any animal or conv eyance or article  
liable to  confiscation under this Act, any document or other article which he has  reason to believe  
may furnish evidence of the commission of an offence  punishable under this Act or any document  or 
other article which may  furnish evidence  of holding any illegally acquired property which is  liable  for 
seizure or freezin g or forfeiture under Chapter V A of this Act;  
(b) detain and search any person whom he has reason to believe to have committed an offence  
punishable under this Act, and if su ch person has any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or  
controlled substance in his possession and such possession appears to him to be unlawful, arrest  him 
and any other person in his company.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expres sion “public place ” includes any  public 
conveyance, hotel, shop, or other place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public.]  
44. Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest in offences relating to coca plant, opium poppy 
and can nabis plant .—The provisions of sections 41, 42 and 43, shall so far as may be, apply in relation 
to the offence punishable under Chapter IV and relating to coca plant, the opium poppy or cannabis plant 
and for this purpose references in those sections to narcotic drugs, or  psychotropic substance  2[or 
controlled substance] , shall be construed as including references to coca plant, the opium poppy and 
cannabis plant.  
45. Procedure where seizure of goods liable t o confiscation not practicable .—Where it is not 
practicable to se ize any goods (including standing crop) which are liable to confiscation under this Act, 
any officer duly authorised under section 42 may serve on the owner or person in possession of the goods, 
an order that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise dea l with the goods except with the previ ous 
permission of such officer.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 16, for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 20 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  28 
 46. Duty of land holder to give information of illeg al cultivation .—Every holder of land shall give 
immediate information to any officer of the Police or of any of the departments mentioned in section 42 
of all the opium poppy, cannabis plant or coca plant which may be illegally cultivated within his land and 
every such holder of land who knowingly neglects to give such information, shall be liable to punishment.  
47. Duty of certain  officers to give info rmation of illegal cultivation .—Every officer of the 
Government and every panch, sarpanch and other village officer of whatever description shall give 
immediate information to any officer of the Police or of any of the departments men tioned in section 42 
when it may come to his knowledge that any land has been illegally cultivated with the opium poppy, 
cannabis plant or coca plant, and every such officer of the Government, panch, sarpanch and other village 
officer who neglects to give such information  shall be liable to punishment.  
48. Power of attachmen t of crop illegally cultivated .—Any Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or any Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State 
Government 1[or any officer of a gazetted rank empowered under section 42] may order attachment of 
any opium poppy, cannabis plant or coca plant which he has reason to believe to have been illegally 
cultivated and while doing so may pass such order (including an order to dest roy the crop) as he thinks fit.  
49. Power  to stop and search conveyance .—Any officer authorised  under section 42, may, if he has 
reason to suspect that any animal or conveyance is, or is about to be, used for the transport of any narcotic 
drug or psychotropic substance  2[or controlled substance] , in respect of which he suspects that any 
provision of  this Act has been, or is being, or is about to be, contravened at any time, stop such animal or 
conveyance, or, in the case of an aircraft, comp el it to land and — 
(a) rummage and search the conveyance or part thereof;  
(b) examine and search any goods on t he animal or in the conveyance;  
(c) if it becomes necessary to stop the animal or the conveyance, he may use all lawful means for 
stopping it, and where such means fail, the animal or th e conveyance may be fired upon.  
50. Conditions under which search  of persons shall be conducted .—(1) When any officer duly 
authorised under section 42 is about to search any person under the provisions of section 41, section 42 or 
section 43, he shall, if such person so requires, take such person without unnecessary delay to  nearest 
Gazetted Officer of any of the departments mentioned in section 42 or to the nearest Magistrate.  
(2) If such requisition is made, the officer may detain the person until he can bring him before the 
Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate referred to in  sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate before whom any such person is brought shall, if he sees 
no reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge the person but otherwise sh all direct that search be 
made.  
(4) No female shall be sea rched by anyone excepting a female.  
3[(5) When an officer  duly authorised under section 42 has reason to believe that it is not possible  to 
take the person to be searched to the nearest Gazetted Officer or Magistrate  without the possibility of the 
person to be searched parting with possession of  any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, or 
controlled substance or article  or document, he may, instead of taking such person to the nearest Gazetted  
Officer or Magistrate, proceed to search the person as prov ided under section100 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(6) After a search is  conducted under sub -section ( 5), the officer shall record the reasons for such  
belief which necessitated such search and within seventy -two hours send a copy  thereof to his immediate 
official superior.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 13 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 21 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  29 
 1[50A.  Power to under take controlled delivery .—The Director General of Narcotics Control 
Bureau constituted under sub -section ( 3) of section 4 or any other officer authorised  by him in this behalf, 
may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, undertake controlled delivery of any consignment 
to— 
(a) any destination in India;  
(b) a foreign country, in consultation with the competent authority of such foreign country to 
which such consignment is destined, in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
51. Provisions of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to apply to warrants, arrests, searches 
and seizures .—The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply, in so far 
as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, to all warrants issued and arrests, searches an d 
seizures made under this Act.  
52. Disposal of perso ns arrested and articles seized .—(1) Any officer arresting a person under 
section 41, section 42, section 43 or section 44 shall, as soon as may be, inform him of the grounds for 
such arrest.  
(2) Every person arrested and article seized under warrant issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 41 
shall be forwarded without unnecessary delay to the Magistrate by whom the warrant was issued.  
(3) Every person arrested and article seized under sub -section ( 2) of section 41, section 42, section 43 
or section 44 shall be forwarded  without unnecessary delay to — 
(a) the officer -in-charge of  the nearest police station, or  
(b) the offi cer empowered under section 53.  
(4) The authority or officer to whom any person or article is forwarded under sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3) shall, with all convenient despatch, take such measures as may be necessary for the 
disposal according to  law of such person or article.  
2[52A. Disposal of seized narcotic dru gs and psychotropic substances .—3[(1) The Central 
Government may, having regard to the hazardous nature, vulnerability to theft, substitution, constraint of 
proper storage space or any other relevant consideration, in respect of any narcotic drugs, psychotropic 
substances, controlled substances or conveyances, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such 
narcotic drugs, psychotropic subs tances, controlled substances or conveyance or class of narcotic drugs, 
class of psychotropic substances, class of controlled substances or conveyances, which shall, as soon as 
may be after their seizure, be disposed of by such officer and in such manner a s that Government may, 
from time to time, determine after following the p rocedure hereinafter specified. ] 
(2) Where any 4[narcotic drugs, psychotropic substance s, controlled substances or conveyances]  has 
been  seized and forwarded to the officer -in-charge of the nearest police station or to the officer 
empowered under section 53, the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall prepare an inventory of such 
4[narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances ] containing such detai ls 
relating to their description, quality, quantity, mode of packing, marks, numbers or such other identifying 
particulars of the 4[narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances ] or the 
packing in which they are packed, coun try of origin and other p articulars as the officer refe rred to in  
sub-section ( 1) may consider relevant to the identity of the 4[narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, 
controlled substances or conveyances ] in any proceedings under this Act and make an a pplication, to any 
Magistrate for the purpose of — 
(a) certifying the correctness o f the inventory so prepared; or  
(b) taking, in the presence of su ch magistrate, photographs of 5[such drugs, substances  or 
conveyances]  and certifying such photogra phs as true; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 23 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 14 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
3. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 17, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “narcotic drug or psychotropic substance” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014)  
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “such drugs or substances” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  30 
 (c) allowing to draw representative samples of such drugs or substances, in the presence of such 
magistrate and c ertifying the correctness o f any list of samples so drawn.  
(3) Where an application is made under sub -section ( 2), the Magis trate shal l, as soon as  may be, allow 
the application.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1972) or the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every court trying an offence under this Act, shall treat the 
innventory, the photographs of  1[narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances , controlled substances or 
conveyances]  and any list of samples drawn under sub -section ( 2) and certified by the Magistrate, as 
primary evidence in respect of such offence.]  
53. Power to invest officers of certain departments with powers of an officer -in-charge of a 
police station .—(1) The Central Government, after consultation with the State Government, may, by 
notification published in the Official Gazette, invest any officer of the department of central excise, 
narcotics, customs, revenue intelligence 2[or any other department of the Central Government including 
para-military forces or armed forces]  or any class of such officers with the powers of an officer -in-charge 
of a police station for th e investigation of the offences under this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, invest any officer of 
the department of drugs control, revenue or excise  3[or any other department]  or any class of such office rs 
with the powers of an officer -in-charge of a police station for the investigation of o ffences under this Act.  
4[53A. Relevancy of statemen ts under certain circumstances .—(1) A statement made and signed 
by a person before any officer empowered under sect ion 53 for the investigation of offences, during the 
course of any inquiry or proceedings by such officer, shall be relevant for the purpose of proving, in any 
prosecution for an offence under this Act, the truth of  the facts which it contains, — 
(a) when the person who made the statement is dead or connot be found, or is incapable of giving 
evidence , or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or whose presence cannot be obtained 
without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstanc es of the case, the court 
considers u nreasonable; or  
(b) when the person who made the statement is examined as a witness in the case before the court 
and the court is of the opinion that, having regard to the circumstances of the case, the statement 
should  be admitted in evidence in the inter est of justice.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to any proceedings 
under this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder, other than a proceeding before a court, as they 
apply in relation to a proceeding bef ore a court. ] 
5[54. Presumption from possession of illicit articles .—In trials under this Act, it may be presumed, 
unless and until the contrary is proved, that the accused has committed an offenc e under this Act in 
respect of — 
(a) any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance;  
(b) any opium poppy, cannabis plant or coca plant growing on any land which he has cultivated;  
(c) any  apparatus specially designed or any group of utensils specially adopted for the 
manufacture of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance; or  
(d) any materials which have undergone any process towards the manufacture of a narcotic  drug 
or psychotropic substance or controlled substance, or any residue left of the materials from which any 
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance has been manufactured,  
for the possession of which he fails to account satis factori ly]. 
 55. Police to take charge of  articles seized and delivered .—An officer -in-charge of a police station 
shall take charge of and keep in safe custody, pending the orders of the Magistrate, all articles seized 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s.17, for “narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 24, for “or Border Security Force” (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. Ins. by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
4. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s.  15 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
5. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 25, for section 54 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  31 
 under this Act within the local area of that  police station and which may be delivered to him, and shall 
allow any officer who may accompany such articles to the police station or who may be deputed for the 
purpose, to affix his seal to such articles or to take samples of and from them and all sampl es so taken 
shall also be sealed with a seal of the officer -in-charge of the police station.  
56. Obligation of  officers to assist each other .—All officers of the several departments mentioned 
in section 42 shall, upon notice given or request made, be legally bound to assist each other in carrying 
out the provisions of this Act.  
57. Report of arrest and seizure .—Whenever any person makes any arrest or seizure under this Act, 
he shall, within forty -eight hours next after such arrest or seizure, make a full report of all the particulars 
of such arrest or seizure to h is immediate official superior.  
1[57A.  Report of seizure of property of the person arre sted by the notified officer .—Whenever 
any officer notified under section 53 makes an arrest or seizure under this Act, and the provisions of 
Chapter VA apply to any person involved in the case of such arrest or seizure, the officer shall make a 
report of the illegally acquired properties of such person to the jurisdictional competent authority within 
ninet y days of the arrest or seizure ]. 
58. Punishment for vexatious en try, search, seizure or arrest .—(1) Any person empowered under 
section 42 or  section 43 or section 44 who — 
(a) without reasonable ground of suspicion enters or searches, or causes to be entered or searched, 
any building, conveyance or plac e; 
(b) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the property of any person on the pretence of seizing or 
searching for any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or other article liable to be confiscated 
under this Act, or of seizing any document or other article liable to be seized under section 4 2, section 
43 or section 44; or  
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily  detains, searches or arrests any person,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may 
extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Any person wilfully  and maliciously giving false information and so causing an arrest or a search 
being made under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years or with fi ne or with both.  
59. Failure of officer in duty or his conniva nce at the contravention  of the provisions of this 
Act.—(1) Any officer, on whom any duty has been imposed by or under this Act and who ceases or 
refuses to perform or withdraws himself from the duties  of his office shall, unless he has obtained the 
expres s written permission of his official superior or has other lawful excuse for so doing, be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fi ne or with both.  
2[(2) Any officer on  whom any duty has been imposed by or under this A ct or any person who has 
been given the custody of — 
(a) any addict; or  
(b) any other person who has been charged with an offence under this Act,  
and who wilfully  aids in, or connives at, the contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or 
order made thereunder, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than ten years but which may extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be 
less than one lakh rupees but which  may extend to two lakh rupees.  
Explanation .—For the purposes o f this sub -section, the expres sion “officer ” includes any person 
employed in a hospital or insti tution maintained or recognised by t he Government or a local autho rity 
under section 64A for pro viding de -addiction treatment.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 16, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  32 
 (3) No court shall take cogni zance of any offence under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) except on a 
complaint in writing made  with the previous sanction of the Central Government, or as the cas e may be, 
the State Government.  
60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants, articles and conveyances to c onfiscation .—1[(1) 
Whenever any offence punishable under this Act has been committed, the narcotic drug, psychotropic 
substance, controlled substance, opium poppy, coca plant, cannabis plant, materials, apparatus and 
utensils in respect of which or by means of which such offence has been committed, shall be liable to 
confiscation .] 
(2) Any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance  2[or controlled substances]  lawfully produced, 
imported inter -State, exported inter -State, imported into India, transported, manufactured, possessed, 
used, purchased or sold along with, or in addition to, any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance  2[or 
controlled substances ] which is liable to confiscation under sub -section ( 1) and the receptacles, packages 
and coverings in which any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance  2[or controlled substances ], materials, 
apparatus or utensils liable to confiscation under sub -section ( 1) is found, and the other contents, if any, of 
such receptacles or packages shall like wise be liable to confiscation.  
(3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any narcotic dru g or psychotropic substance  2[or 
controlled substances] , or any article liable to confiscation under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall 
be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the animal or conveyance proves that it was so used without 
the kno wledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person -in-charge of the 
animal or conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable precautions against such u se. 
61. Confiscation of goods used for conceali ng illicit drugs or substances .—Any goods used for 
concealing any 3[narcotic drug, psychotropic substance  or controlled substance]  which is liable to 
confiscation under this Act shall also be liable to confiscation.  
Explanation .—In this section “goods ” does not include conv eyance as a means of transport.  
62. Confiscation of sale proceeds of illic it drugs or substances .—Where any 4[narcotic drug,  
psychotropic substance  or controlled substance]  is sold by a person having knowledge or reason to 
believe that the drug or substance is liable to confiscation under this Act, the sale proceeds thereof shall 
also be liable to confi scation.  
63. Pro cedure in making confiscations .—(1) In the trial of offen ces under this Act, whether the 
accused is convicted or acquitted or discharged, the court shall decide whether any article or thing seized 
under this Act is liable to confiscation under section 60 or section 61 or section 62 and, if it decides that 
the ar ticle is so liable, it may order confiscation accordingly.  
(2) Where any article or thing seized under this Act appears to be liable to confiscation under section 
60 or section 61 or section 62, but the person who committed the offence in connection therew ith is not 
known or cannot be found, the court may inquire into and decide such liability, and may order 
confiscation accordingly:  
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article or thing shall be made until the expiry of one 
month from the date of se izure, or without hearing any person who may claim any right thereto and the 
evidence, if any, which he pr oduces in respect of his claim:  
Provided further that if any such article or thing, other than a narcotic drug, psychotropic substance   
5[controlled s ubstance] , the opium poppy, coca plant or cannabis plant is liable to speedy and natural 
decay, or if the court is of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of its owner, it may at any time 
direct it to be sold; and the provisions of this sub -section shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to 
the net proceeds of the sale.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 26, for  sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by s. 26, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “narcotic drug or psychotropic substance” (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “narcotic drug or psychotropic substance” (w.e.f. 2-10-2001).  
5. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  33 
 1*   *   *   *   * 
64. Power to te nder immunity from prosecution .—(1) The Central Government or the State 
Government may, if it is of opinion (the reasons for such opinion being recorded in writing) that with a 
view to obtaining the evidence of any person appearing to have been directly or indirectly concerned in or 
privy to the contravention of any of provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder it is 
necessary or expedient so to do, tender to such person immunity from prosecution for any offence under 
this Act or under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or under any other Central Act or State Act, as the 
case may be, for the time being in force, on condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the whole 
circumstances relating to such contravention.  
(2) A tender of immunity made to, and accepted by , the person concerned, shall, to the extent to 
which the immunity extends, render him immune from prosecution for any offence in respec t of which 
the tender was made.  
(3) If it appears to the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government, that any 
person to whom immunity has been tendered under this section has not complied with the conditions on 
which the tender was made or is wilfully concealing anythi ng or is giving false evidence, the Central 
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government, may record a finding to that effect and 
thereupon the immunity shall be deemed to have been withdrawn and such person may be tried for the 
offence in respe ct of which the tender of immunity was made or for any other offence of which he 
appears to have been guilty in c onnection with the same matter.  
2[64A. Immunity from prosecution to addi cts volunteering for treatment .— Any addict, who is 
charged with an offence punishable under section 27 or with offences involving small quantity of narcotic 
drugs or psychotropic substances, who voluntarily seeks to undergo medical treatment for de -addiction 
from a hospital or an instit ution maintained or recognised by the Government or a local authority and 
undergoes such treatment shall not be liable to prosecution under section 27 or under any other section for 
offences involving small quantity of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substa nces:  
Provided that the said immunity from prosecution may be withdrawn if the addict does not undergo 
the complete treatment for de -addiction.]  
65. [Power to make rules regulating disposal of confiscated articles and rewards ].—Omitted by the  
Narcotic Drug s and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 1989  (2 of 1989 ), s. 18  
(w.e.f. 29-5-1989 ).  
66. Presumption as to documents in cert ain cases .—Where any document — 
(i) is produced or furnished by any person or has been seized from the custody or control of any 
person, in either case, under this  Act or under any other law, or  
(ii) has been received from any place outside India (duly authenticated by such authority or 
person  and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government) in the course of 
investigation of any offence under this Act alleged to h ave been committed by a person,  
and such document is tendered in any prosecution under this Act in evidence against  him, or against him 
and any other person who is tried join tly with him, the court shall — 
(a) presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the signature and every other part of such 
document which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person or which the court may 
reason ably assume to have been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, is in 
that person ’s handwriting; and in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was executed or 
attested by the person by whom it purports to hav e been so executed or attested;  
(b) admit the document in evidence, notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such document 
is otherwise admissible in evidence;  
(c) examine any person acquainted with the facts and circumcontrar y is proved, the truth of  the 
contents of such document.  
                                                           
1. Sub-section ( 3) omitted by Act 9 of 2001, s. 29 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for section 64A (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  34 
 67. Powe r to call for information, etc .—Any officer referred to in section 42 who is authorised in 
this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government may, during the course of any enquiry in  
connection with the contravention of any provision of this Act, — 
(a) call for information from any person for the purpose of satisfying himself whether there has 
been any contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rule  or order made thereunder;  
(b) require any person to produce or deliver any document or thing use ful or relevant to the 
enquiry;  
(c) examine any person acquainted with the facts  and circumstances of the case.  
68. Informatio n as to commission of offences .—No officer acting in exercise of powers vested in 
him under any provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall be compelled to say 
whence he got any information as to the commission of any offe nce. 
1[CHAPTER VA  
2[FORFEITURE OF  ILLEGALLY ACQUIRED  PROPERTY ] 
68A. Application .—(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply only to the person s specified in 
sub-section ( 2). 
(2) The persons referred to in sub -section (1) are the following, namely: — 
(a) every person who has bee n convicted of an offence puni shable under this Act with 
imprisonment fo r a term of 3[ten]  years or more;  
(b) every person who has been convicted of a similar offence by a competent court of crimi nal 
jurisdiction outside India;  
(c) every person in respect of whom an order of detention has been made  under the Prevention of 
IIicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 (46 of 1988), or under the 
Jammu and Kashmir Prevention of IIicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 
1988;  
4[(cc) every person who has been arrested or against whom a warrant or authorisation of arrest 
has been issued for the commission of an offence punishable under this Act with imprisonment for a 
term of ten years or more, and every person who has been arrested o r against whom a warrant or 
authorisation of arrest has been issued for the commission of a similar offence under any 
corresponding law of any other country.]  
Provided that such order of detention has not been revoked on the report of the Advisory Board 
constituted under the said Acts or such order of detention has not been set aside by a c ourt of 
competent jurisdiction;  
(d) every person who is a relative of a person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) 
4[or clause ( cc)]; 
(e) every associat e of a person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) 4[or clause ( cc)];  
(f) any holder (hereafter in this clause referred to as the “present holder ”) of any proper ty which 
was at any time previo usly held by a person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) 4[or 
clause ( cc)]; unless the present holder or, as the case may be, any one who held such property after 
such person and before the present holder, is or was a transferee in good fa ith for adequate 
consideration.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 19 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 19, for “FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY DERIVED FROM, OR USED, IN ILLICIT TRAFFIC” 
(w.e.f. 1 -5-2014) . 
3. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 31, for “five” (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
4. Ins. by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  35 
 68B. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless the context othe rwise requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal 1[referred to in] section 68N;  
(b) “associate ” in relation to a person whose property is liable to be forfei ted under this Chapter, 
means — 
(i) any individual who had b een or is residing in the resi dential premises (including  
out-houses) of such person;  
(ii) any individual who had been or is managing the affairs or keepi ng the accounts of such 
person;  
(iii) any association of pers ons, body of individuals, part nership firm, or private company 
within the meaning of the Compa nies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), of which such person had been or is  
a member, partner or director;  
(iv) any individual who had been or is a member, partner or director of an association of 
persons, body of individuals, partnership firm or private company referred to in sub -clause ( iii) at 
any time when such person had been or is a member, partner or director of such association, 
body, partn ership firm or private company;  
(v) any person, who had been or is managing the affairs, or keeping the accounts, of any 
association of persons, body of individuals, partnership firm or private company r eferred to in 
sub-clause ( iii); 
(vi) the trustee of any trust, where, — 
(1) the trust ha s been created by such  person; or  
(2) the value of the assets contributed by such person (including the value of the assets, if 
any, contributed by him earlier) to the trust amo unts, on the date on which con tribution is 
made, to not less than twenty per ce nt. of the value of the as sets of the trust on that date;  
(vii) where the competent aut hority, for reasons to be reco rded in writing, considers that any 
properties of such person are held on his behalf by any o ther person, such other person;  
(c) “competent  authority ” means a n officer of the Central Gover nment auth orised by it under 
section 68D;  
(d) “concealment ” means the concealment or disguise of the nature, source, disposition, 
movement or ownership of property and includes the movement or conversion of such property by 
electronic tran smission or by any other means;  
(e) “freezing ” means temporarily prohibiting the transfer, conv ersion, disposition or movement of 
property by an order issued under section 68F;  
(f) “identifying ” includes establishment of proof that the pr operty was derived from, o r used in, 
the illicit traffic;  
(g) “illegally acquired proper ty”, in relation to any person to whom  this Chapter applies,  
means,  — 
(i) any property acquired by such person, whether bef ore or after the commencement of this 
Chapter, wholly or partly out of or by means of any income, earnings or assets derived or 
obtained from or attr ibutable to 2[the contravention of any provisions 3[of this Act  or the 
equivalent value of such property; or] ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 20 16, s. 227, for “for Forfeited Property constituted under” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 32, for “illicit traffic” (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s, 20, for “of this Act; or”  (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  36 
 (ii) any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Chapter, for a consideration, or by any means wholly or partly traceable to any property referred 
to in sub -clause ( i) or the income or earning fro m 1[such propert y or the equivalent value of such 
property; or]  
2[(iii) any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of 
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act, 2014, who lly or partly out of 
or by means of any income, earnings or assets the source of which cannot be proved, or the 
equivalent value of such property, ] 
and includes — 
(A) any property held by such person which would have been, in relation to any previous 
holder  thereof, illegally acquired property under this clause if such previous holder had not 
ceased to hold it, unless such person or any other person who held the property at any time after 
such previous holder or, where there are two or more such previous hol ders, the last of such 
previous holders is or was a transferee in good faith for adequate consideratio n; 
(B) any property acquired by such person, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Chapter, for a consideration, or by any means, wholly or par tly traceable to any property falling 
under item ( A), or th e income or earnings therefrom;  
3[(h) “property ” means any property or assets of every description, whether corporeal or 
incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, wherever located and includes deeds and 
instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets;]   
(i) “relative ” means — 
(1) spouse of the person;  
(2) brother or sister of the person;  
(3) brother or sist er of the spouse of the person;  
(4) any lineal ascenda nt or descendant of the person;  
(5) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the person;  
(6) spouse of a person referred to in sub -clause ( 2), sub -clause ( 3), sub -clause ( 4) or  
sub-clause ( 5); 
(7) any lineal descendant of a person referred to in sub -clause ( 2) or sub -clause ( 3); 
(j) “tracing ” means determining the nature, source, disposition, movement, title or ownership  of 
property;  
(k) “trust” inclu des any other legal obligation.  
68C. Prohibition of holdi ng illegally acquired property .—(1) As from the commencement of this 
Chapter, it shall not be lawful for any person to whom this Chapter applies to hold any illegally acquired 
property either by himself or through any other person on his behalf.  
(2) Where any person holds any illegally acq uired property in contravention of the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1), such property shall be liable to be forfeited to t he Central Government in accor dance with 
the provisions of this Chapter:  
4[Provided that no property shall be forfeited under this Chap ter if such property was acquired, by a 
person to whom this Act applies, before a period of six years from the date he was arrested or against 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 20, for “such property,” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
2. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
4. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 33, for the proviso (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  37 
 whom a warrant or authorisation of arrest has been issued for the commission of an offence punishable 
under this Act or from the date the order or detention was issued, as the case may be.]  
68D. Competent authority .—(1) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, authorise 1[any Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Central Excise]  or Commissioner 
of Income -tax or any other officer of the Central Government of equivalent rank to perform the functions 
of the competen t authority under this Chapter.  
(2) The competent authorities shall perform their functions in respect of such persons or classes of 
persons as the Central Gove rnment may, by order, direct.  
68E. Identifyi ng illegally acquired property .—2[(1) Every off icer empowered under section 53 and 
every officer -in-charge of a police station shall, or receipt of information is satisfie d that any person to 
whom this Chapter applies holds any illegally acquired property, he may, after recording re asons for 
doing so, proceed to t ake all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property.]   
(2) The steps referred to in sub -section ( 1) may include any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect 
of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in any bank or public financial 
institution  or any other relevant matters.  
(3) Any inquiry, investigatio n or survey referred t o in sub -section ( 2) shall be carried out by a n officer 
mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in accordance with such directions or guidelines as the competent authority 
may make or issue in this behalf.  
68F. Seizure or freezing of illegally acquired property .—(1) Where any officer conducting an 
inquiry or investigation under section 68E has reason to believe that any property in relation to which 
such inquiry or investigation is being conducted is an illegally acquired property and such property is 
likely to be con cealed, transferred or dealt with in any manner which will result in frustrating any  
procee ding relating to forfeiture of such property under this Chapter, he may make an order for seizing 
such property and where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an order that such 
property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with , except with the prior permission of the officer 
making such order, or of the competent authority and a copy of such order shall be served on the person 
concerned:  
Provided that the competent authority shall be duly informed of any order made under this s ub-
section and a copy of such an order shall be sent to the competent authority within forty -eight hours of its 
being made.  
(2) Any order made under sub -section ( 1) shall have no effect unless the said order is confirmed by an 
order of the competent auth ority within a period of  thirty days of its being made.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “transfer of pro perty ” means any disposition, 
conveyance, assignment, settlement, delivery, payment or other alienation of property and, without  
limiting the generali ty of the foregoing, includes — 
(a) the c reation of a trust in property;  
(b) the grant or creation of any lease, mortgage, charge, easement, licence, power, partnership or 
interest in property;  
(c) the exercise of a power of appointment of prope rty vested in any person, not the owner of the 
property, to determine its disposition in favour o f any person other than the don ee of the power; and  
(d) any  transaction entered into by any person with intent thereby to diminish directly or 
indirectly the value of his own property and to increase the value of the property of any other person.  
68G. Management of properties seize d or forfeited under this Chapter .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, appoint as many of its officers (not below 
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 16 of 2014, s. 21, for “any Collector of Customs or Collector of Central Excise” (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  
2. Subs.  by Act 9 of 2001, s. 34, for sub - section ( 1) (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  38 
 the rank of a Joint secretary to the Government) as it thinks fit, to perform the function s of an 
Administrator.  
(2) The Administrator appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall receive and manage the property in 
relation to which an order has been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 68F or under section 68 -I in 
such manner and subject to such cond itions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Adminis trator shall also take such measures, as the Cen tral Government may direct, to 
dispos e of the property which is for feited to the Central Government.  
68H. Notice of forfe iture of property .—(1) If, having regard to the value of the properties held by 
any per son to whom this Chapter applies, either by himself or through any other person on his behalf, his 
known sources of income, earnings or assets, and any other infor mation or material available to it as a 
result of a report from any officer making an investi gation under section 68E or otherwise, the competent 
authority has reason to believe (the reasons for such belief to be recorded in writing) that all or any of 
such properties are illegally acquired properties, it may serve a notice upon such person (herei nafter 
referred to as the person affected) calling upon him within a period of thirty days specified in the notice to 
indicate the sources of his income, earnings or assets, out of which or by means of which he has acquired 
such property, the evidence on w hich he relies and other relevant information and partic ulars, and to show 
cause why all or any of such properties, as the case may be, should not be declared to be illegally acquired 
properties and forfeited to the Central  Government under this Chapter.  
(2) Where a notice under sub -section ( 1) to any person specifies any property as being held on behalf 
of such person by any other  person, a copy of the noti ce shall also be  served upon such other person.  
1[Provided that no notice for forfeiture shall be ser ved upon any person referred to in clause ( cc) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 68A or relative of a person referred to in that clause or associate of a person 
referred to in that clause or holder of any property which was at any time previously held by a per son 
referred to in that clause.]  
2[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that in a case where the provisions of 
section 68J are applicable, no notice under this section shall be invalid merely on the ground that it fails to 
mention the evidence relied upon or it fails to establish a direct nexus between the property sought to be 
forfeited and any activity in contravention of the provisions of this Act.]  
68-I. Forfeitur e of property in certain cases .—(1) The competent authority may, a fter considering 
the explanation, if any, to the show cause notice issued under section 68H, and the materials available 
before it and after giving to the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any 
property specified in the notice t hrough any other person, to such o ther person also) a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question are  
illegally acquired properties:  
Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property 
specified in the notice through any other person such other person also) do es not appear before the 
compe tent authority or represent his case before it within a period of thirty days specified in the show 
cause notice, the competent autho rity may proceed to record a finding under this sub -section ex parte  on 
the basis o f evidence available before it.  
(2) Where the competent authority is satisfied that some of the properties referred to in the show 
cause notice ar e illegally acquired properties but is not able to identify specifically such properties, then, 
it shall be lawful for the competent authority to specify the properties which, to the best of its judgment, 
are illegally acquired properties and record a find ing acc ordingly under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Where the competent authority records a finding under this section to the effect that any prop erty 
is illegally acquired pro perty, it shall declare that such property shall, subject to the provisions of this 
Chapt er, stand forfeited to the Central Governm ent free from all encumbrances.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 35 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  39 
 1[Provided that no illegally acquired property of any person who is referred to in clause (cc) of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 68A or relative of a person referred to in that clause o r associate of a person 
referred to in that clause or holder of any property which was at any time previously held by a person 
referred to in tha t clause shall stand forefeited. ] 
(4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government under this Chapter, 
then, t he company shall, notwithstand ing anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or 
the articles of association of the company, forthwith register the Ce ntral Government as  the transferee of 
such shares.  
68J. Burden of  proof .—In any proceedings under this Chapter, the burden of proving that any 
property specified in the notice served under section 68H is not illegally acquired property s hall be on the 
person affected.  
68K. Fine in lieu of forfeiture .—(1) Where the compe tent autho rity makes a declaration that any 
property stands forfeited to the Central Government under section 68 -I and it is a case where the source of 
only a part of the illegally acquired property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the competent 
authority, it shall make an order giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine 
equal to the market v alue of such part.  
(2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub -section ( 1), the person aff ected  shall be given a 
reason able opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Where the person affected pays the fine due under sub -section ( 1), within such time as may be 
allowed in that behalf, the competent authority may, by order, revoke the declaration of forfeiture u nder 
section 68 -I and thereupon such  property shall stand released.  
68L. Procedure in relation to certain trust properties .—In the case of any person referred to in 
sub-clause ( vi) of clause ( b) of section 68B, if the competent author ity, on the basis of t he infor mation and 
materials available to it, has reason to believe (the reasons for such belief to be recorded in writing) that 
any property held in trust is illegally acquired property, it may serve a notice upon the author of the trust 
or, as the case m ay be, the contributor of the assets out of or by means of which such propery was 
acquired by the trust and the trustees, calling upon them within a period of thirty days specified in the 
notice, to explain the source of money or other assets out of or by means of which such property was 
acquired or, as the case may be, the source of money or other assets which were contributed to the trust 
for acquiring such property and thereupon such notice shall be deemed to be a notice served under section 
68H and all the other provisions of this C hapter shall apply accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section “illegally acquired property ”, in relation to any 
property held in trust, includes — 
(i) any  property which if it had continued to be held by the author of the trust or the contributor of 
such property to the trust would have been illegally a cquired property in rela tion to such author or 
contributor;  
(ii) any property acquired by the trust out of  any contri butions made by any person which would 
have been illegally acquired property in relation to such person had such person acquired such 
property out of such contributions.  
68M. Certain  transfers to be null and voi d.—Where after the making of an or der under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 68F or the issue of a notice under section 68H or under section 6 8L, any 
property refe rred to in the said order or notice i s transferred by any mode what soever such transfer shall, 
for the purposes of the proceedings u nder this Chapter, be ignored and if such p roperty is subsequently 
forfei ted to the Central Government under section 68 -I, then, the transfer of such property shall  be 
deemed to be null and void.  
2[68N. Cons titution of Appellate Tribunal .—The Appellate Tribunal constituted under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 12 of the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 36  (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 227, for section 68N (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).  40 
 Property ) Act, 1976  (13 of 1976) shall be the Appellate Tribunal for hearing appeals against the orders 
made under sectio n 68F,  section 68 -I, sub -section ( 1) of section 68K or section 68L.]   
68-O. Appeals .—(1) 1[Any officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 68E or any person 
aggrieved by an order of the competent authority ] made under section 68F, section 68 -I, sub-section ( 1) of 
section 68K or section 68L, may, within forty -five days from the date on which the order is served on 
him, prefer an ap peal to the Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the said period of forty -five days, 
but not after sixty days, from the date aforesaid if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient caus e from  filing  the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving an 
opportunity to the appellant to be heard, if he so desires, and after making such further inquiry as it deems 
fit, confirm, modify or set as ide the order appealed against.  
(3) The powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised an d discharged by Benches 
consisting of three members and constituted by the Chai rman of the Appellate Tribunal.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), where the Chairman considers it necessary 
so to do for the expeditious disposal of app eals under this section, he may constitute a Bench of two 
members and a Bench so constituted may exercise and discharge the powers and functions of the 
Appellate Tribunal:  
Provided that if the members of a Bench so constituted differ on any point or points, they shall state 
the point or points on which they differ and refer the same to a third member (to be specified by the 
Chairman) for hearing of such point or points and such point or points shall be decided according  to the 
opinion of that member.  
2[Provided further that if the office of the Chairman is vacant by reason of his death, resignation or 
otherwise, or if the Chairman is unable to discharge his duties owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, the Central Government may, by order, nomin ate any member to act as the Chairman until a new 
Chairman is appointed and assumes charge or, as the case may be, resumes his duties.]  
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.  
(6) On application to the Appellate Tribunal and on payment o f the prescribed fee, the Tribunal may 
allow a party to any appeal or any person authorised in his behalf by such party to inspect at any time 
during office hours, any relevant records and registers of the Tribunal and obtain a cert ified copy of any 
part t hereof.  
68P. Notice or order not to be in valid for error in description .—No notice issued or served, no 
declaration made, and no order passed, under this Chapter shall be deemed to be invalid by reason of any 
error in the description of the property or  person men tioned therein if such property or person is 
identifiable fro m the description so mentioned.  
68Q. Bar of jurisdiction .—No order passed or declaration made under this Chapter shall be 
appealable except as provided there in and no civil court shall  have jurisdiction in respect of any matter 
which the Appellate Tribunal or any competent authority is empowered by or under this Chapter to 
determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority  in respect of any action 
taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Chapter.  
68R. Competent authority and Appellate Tribunal to have powe rs of civil court .—The 
competent authority and the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying  a 
suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath ; 
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 37, for “any person aggrieved by an order of the comp etent authority” (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  41 
 (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy th ereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for examinati on of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
68S. Info rmation to competent a uthority .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law, the competent authority shall have power to require any officer or authority of the Central  
Govern ment or a State Government or a local authority to furnish information in relation to such  persons, 
points or matters as in the opinion of the competent authority will be useful for, or relevant t o, the 
purpose s of this Chapter.  
(2) Every officer referred to in section 68T may furnish suo motu  any information available with him 
to the competent authority if in the opinion of the officer such information will be useful to the competent 
authority fo r the purposes of this Chapter.  
68T. Certain officers to assist Administrator, competent autho rity and Appellate Tribunal .—
For the purposes of any proceedings under this Chapter, the following officers are hereby empowered and 
required to as sist the Administrator appointed under section 68G, competent authority and th e Appellate 
Tribunal, namely: — 
(a) officers o f the Narcotics Control Bureau;  
(b) officers of the C ustoms Department;  
(c) officers of  the Central Excise Department;  
(d) officer s of the Income -tax Department;  
(e) officers of enforcement appointed under the Foreign Exchange Reg ulation Act, 1973   
(46 of 1973);  
(f) officers of police;  
(g) officers of the Nar cotics Department;  
(h) officers of the Centra l Economic Intelligence Bureau;  
(i) officers of the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence;  
(j) such  other officers of the Central or State Government as are specified by the Central 
Government in this behal f by noti fication in the Official Gazette.  
68U. Power to take possession .—(1) Where any property has been declared to be forfeited to the 
Central Gov ernment under this Chapter, or where the person affected has failed to pay the fine due under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 68K within the time allowed therefor under sub -section ( 3) of that section, the 
competent authority may order the person affected as we ll as any other person who may be in possession 
of the property to surrender or deliver possession thereof to the Administrator appointed under section  
68G or to any person duly auth orised by him in this behalf within thirty days of the service of the orde r. 
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with an order made under sub -section ( 1), the 
Administrator may take possession of the property and may for that purpose use such force as may be 
necessary.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (2), the Administrator may, for the purpose of 
taking possession of a ny pro perty referred to in sub -section ( 1), requisition the service of any police 
officer to assist him and it shall be the duty of such officer t o comply with such requisition.  
68V. R ectification of mistakes .—With a view to rectifying any mistakes apparent from record, the 
competent authority or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, may amend any order made by it 
within a period of one y ear from the date of the order:  
Provided that if any such amendment is likely to affect any person prejudicially, it shall not be made 
without giving to such person a reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  42 
 68W. Findings under other laws not conclusive for proceedings under this Chapter .—No findin g 
of any officer or authority under any other law shall be conclusive for the purposes of any p roceedin gs 
under this Chapter.  
68X.   Service of notices and orders .—Any notice or order issued or made unde r this Chapter shall 
be served — 
(a) by tendering the notice o r order or sending it by regis tered post to the person for whom it is 
intended or to his agent;  
(b) if the notice or order cannot be serv ed in the manner provi ded in clause ( a), by affixing it on a 
conspicuous place in the property i n relation to which the notice or order is issued or made or on 
some conspicuous part of the premi ses in which the person for who m it is intended is known to have 
last resided or carried on business  or personally worked for gain.  
68Y. Punishment for acqui ring property in relation to which proceedings have  been taken,  
under this Chapter .—Any person who knowingly acquired, by any mode whatsoever, any property in 
relation to which proceedings are pending under this Chapter shall be punishable with imprisonment  for a 
term which may extend to five years and with fine which may e xtend to fifty thousand rupees. ] 
1[68Z.  Release of property in certain cases .—(1) Where the detention order of a detenu  is set aside 
or withdrawn, properties seized or frozen under this Chapter shall stand released.  
(2) Where any person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( cc) of sub -section ( 2) of section 
68A has been acquitted or discharged from the charges  under this Act or any other corresponding law of 
any other country and the acquittal was not appealed against or when appealed against, the appeal was 
disposed of as a consequence of which such property could not be forfeited or warrant of arrest or 
autho risation of arrest issued against such person has been withdrawn, then, property seized or frozen 
under this Chapter shall stand released.]  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
69. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or a State Government or any officer of the Central Government or of 
the State Government or any other person exercising any powers or discharging any functions or 
performing any duties under this Act, fo r anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act or any  rule or order made thereunder.  
70. Central Government and State Government to have regard to international conventions 
while making rules .—Wherever under this Act the Central Govern ment or the State Government has 
been empowered to make rules, the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
subject to other provisions of this Act, may while making the rules have regard to the provisions of the 
Single Convention on  Narcotic Drugs, 1961, the Protocol of 1972 amending the said Convention and of 
the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971 to which India is a party and to the provisions of any 
other international convention relating to narcotic drugs or psychotropic  substances to which India may 
become a party.  
71. Power of Government to establish centres for identification, treatment, etc., of addicts and 
for supply of narcotic dr ug and psychotropic substances .—(1) 2[The Government may establish, 
recognise  or approve as many centres as it thinks fit for identification, treatment, managemen ], education, 
after-care, rehabilitation, social re -integration of addicts and for supply, subject to such conditions and in 
such manner as may be prescribed, by the conce rned Government of any narcotic drugs and psychotropic 
substances to the addicts registered with the Government and to others where such  supply is a medical 
necessity.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 38 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 2014, s. 24, for “The Government may, in its discretion, establish as many centres  as it thinks fit for 
identification, treatment”  (w.e.f. 1 -5-2014).  43 
 (2) The Government may make rules consistent with this Act providing for the establishme nt, 
appointment, maintenance, management and superintendence of, and for supply of narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances from, the centres referred to in sub -section ( 1) and for the appointment, training, 
powers, duties and pe rsons employed in such ce ntres.  
72. Reco very of sums due to Government .—(1) In respect of any licence fee or other sum of any 
kind payable to the Central Government or to the State Government under any of the provisions of this 
Act or of any rule or order made thereunder, the offi cer of the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, who is empowered to require the payment of such sum, may deduct the 
amount of such sum from any money owing to the person from whom such sum may be recoverable or 
due or may recover  such amount or sum by attachment and sale of the goods belonging to such persons 
and if the amount of the same is not so recovered, the same may be recovered from the person or from his 
surety (if any) as if it w ere an arrears of land revenue.  
(2) When any person, in compliance with any rule made under this Act, gives a bond (other than a 
bond under section 34 and section 39) for the performance of any act, or for his abstention from any act, 
such performance or abstention shall be deemed to be a public duty within the meaning of section 74 of 
the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872); and upon breach of the conditions of such bond by him, the 
whole sum named therein as the amount to be paid in case of such breach may be recovered from him or 
from his sur ety (if any) as if it w ere an arrears of land revenue.  
73. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall entertain any suit or proceeding against any decision 
made or order passed by any officer or authority under this Act or under any rule made thereunder on any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) withholding, refusal or cancellation of any licence for the cultivation of the opium poppy;  
(b) weighment, examination and classification according to the quality and consistence of opium 
and any deductions from, or addition to, the standard price made in ac cordance with such 
examination;  
(c) confiscation of opium found to be adultera ted with any foreign substance.  
74. Transitional provisions .—Every officer or other employee of the Government exercising or 
performi ng, immediately before the commencement of this Act, any powers or duties with respect to any 
matters provided for in this Act, shall on such commencement, be deemed to have been appointed under  
the relevant provisions of this Act to the same post and wit h the same designation as he was holding 
immedi ately before such commencement.  
1[74A. Power of Central  Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions as it may deem necessary to a State Government regarding the carrying into execution of the 
provisions of this Act, and the State Government shall comply with such directions.]  
75. Power to delegate .—(1) The  Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
delegate, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the notification, such of its 
powers and functions under this Act (except the power to make rules) as it may deem necessary or 
expedient, to the Board or any other authority  or the Narcotics Commissioner.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, delegate, subject to such 
conditions and limitations as may be specified in the notification, such of its powers and functions under 
this Act (except the power to make rules) as it may deem necessary or expedient, to any authority  or 
officer of that Government.  
76. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of th is Act, 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carryin g out the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matter s, namely: — 
(a) the method by which percentages in the case of liquid preparations shall be calculated for the 
purposes of clauses ( v), (vi) (xiv) and ( xv) of section 2;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1989, s. 20 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  44 
 (b) the form of bond to keep the peace t o be executed under section 34;  
(c) the form of bond to be executed for release of an addict convict for medical treatment under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 39 and the bond to be executed by such convict before his release after due 
admonition under s ub-section ( 2) of that section;  
1[(ca) the manner i n which “controlled delivery ” under section 50A is to be undertaken;]  
(d) the authority or the person by whom and the manner in which a document received from any 
place outside India shall be authenticated under clause ( ii) of section 66;  
2[(da) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which properties shall be managed by 
the Administrator under sub-section ( 2) of section 68G;  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(dc) the fees which shall be paid for the inspection of the records and registers of the Appe llate 
Tribunal or for obtaining the certified copy of any part thereof under sub -section ( 6) of section 68 -O; 
(dd) the powers of a civil court that may be exercised by the competent authority and the 
Appellate Tribunal u nder clause ( f) of section 68R;  
(de) the disposal of all articles or thi ngs confiscated under this Act;  
(df) the drawing of samples and testing and analysis  of such samples;  
(dg) the rewards to be paid to the officer s, informers and other persons; ] 
(e) the  conditions and the manner in which narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances may be 
supplied for medical necessity to the addicts registered with the Central Government and to others 
under  sub-section ( 1) of section 71;  
(f) the establishment, appointment , maintenance, management and superintendence of centres 
established by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 71 and appointment, training, 
powers and duties of pe rsons employed in such centres;  
(g) the term of office of, the manner of fi lling casual vacancies of, and the allowances payable to, 
the Chairman and members of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Consultative 
Committee and the conditions and restrictions subject to which a non -member may be appointed to a 
sub-committe e unde r sub -section ( 5) of section 6;  
(h) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
77. Rules and notification s to be laid before Parliament .—4[Every rule made under this Act by the 
Central Government and every notification or order issued un der clause ( viia), clause ( xi), clause ( xxiiia ) 
of section 2, section 3, section 7A, section 9A and clause ( a) of section 27 shall be laid, as soon as may 
be, after it is made or issued ], before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification  in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or 
notification should not be made or issued, the rule or the notification shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any  such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done u nder that rule or 
notification.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 39 (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by  Act 2 of 1989,  s. 21 (w.e.f. 29 -5-1989).  
3. Clause ( db) omitted by Act 28  of 2016, s. 227 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2016).  
4. Subs. by Act 9 of 2001, s. 40, for certain words , brackets, figures and letter  (w.e.f. 2 -10-2001).  45 
 78. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carryin g out the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  conditions and the manner in which narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances shall be 
supplied for medical necessity to the addicts registered with the State Government and others under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 71;  
(b) the establishment, appointment, m aintenance, management, superintendence of centres 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 71 and appointment, training, powers and duties of 
persons employed in such centres;  
(c) any other matter which i s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before  the Legislature of that State.  
79. Applic ation of the Customs Act, 1962 .—All prohibitions and restrictions imposed by or under 
this Act on the import into I ndia, the export from India and transhipment of narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances shall be deemed to be prohibitions and restrictions imposed by or under the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) and the provisions of that Act  shall apply accordingly:  
Provided that, where the doing of anything is an offence punishable under that Act and under this Act, 
nothing in that Act or in this section shall prevent the offender from  being punished under this Act.  
80. Application of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 not barred .—The provisions of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940 (23 of 1940) or the rules made thereunder.  
81. Sa ving of State and special laws .—Nothing in this Act o r in the rules made thereunder shall 
affect the validity of any Provincial Act or an Act of any State Legislature for the time being in force, or 
of any rule made thereunder which imposes any restriction or provides for a punishment not imposed by 
or provi ded for under this Act or imposes a restriction or provides for a punishment greater in degree than 
a corresponding restriction imposed by or a corresponding punishment provided for by or under this Act 
for the cultivation of cannabis plant or consumption of, or traffic in, any narcotic drug or psychotropic 
substance within India.  
82. Repeal and saving s.—(1) The Opium Act, 1857 (13 of 1857), the Opium Act, 1878 (1 of 1878) 
and the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 ( 2 of 1930) are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstandi ng such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under any of the enactments repealed by sub -section ( 1) shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or tak en under the corres ponding provisions of 
this Act.  
83. Power to r emove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by  order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of thr ee years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid b efore the 
Houses of Parliament.  
  46 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See clause ( xxiii) of Section 2]  
LIST OF PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES  
Sl. 
No. International non -proprietary 
names  Other nonproprietary 
names  Chemical name  
1  DET  N, N -Diethyltryptamine  
2  DMHP  3-(1,2-Dimethylheptyl) -1-hydroxy -7, 
8, 9, 10 -tetrahydro 6, 6, 9 -trimethyl -
6H-dibenzo [b, d] pyran  
3  DMT  N, N -Dimethyltryptamine  
4 (+)-LYSERGIDE  LSD, LSD -25 (+)-N, N -Diethyllysergamide (d -
lysergic acid diethylamide)  
5  mescaline  3, 4, 5 -Trimethoxyphenethylamine  
6  parahexyl  3-Hexyl -1-hydrox y-7, 8, 9, 10 -
tetrahydro -6, 6, 9-trimethyl -6H-
dibenzo [b, d] pyran  
7 ETICYCLIDINE  PCE N-Ethyl -1-phenylcyclohexylamine  
8 ROLICYCLIDINE  PHP, PCPY  1-(1-phenylcyclohexyl) pyrrolidine  
9  psilocine, psilotsin  3-(2-Dimethylaminoethyl) -4-
hydroxyindole  
10 PSILOCYBINE   3-(2-Dimethylaminoethyl) -indol -4-yl 
dihydrogen  phosphate  
11  STP, DOM  2-Amino -1-(2, 5-dimethoxy -methyl) 
phenylpropane  
12 TENOCYCLIDINE  TCP 1-[1-(2-Thienyl) cydohexyl] piperidine  
13  THC  Tetrahydrocannabinols, the following 
isomers: Δ6a(10a), Δ6a(7), Δ7, Δ8, Δ9, 
Δ10, Δ9(11) and their stcreochemical  
variants  
14  DOB  2, 5-dimethoxyl -4-bromoamphetamine  
15  MDA  3, 4-methylenedioxyamphetamine  
16 AMPHETAMINE   (±)-2-Amino -1-phenylpropane  
17 DEXAMPHETAMINE   (+)-2-Amino -1-phenylpropane  
18 MECLOQUALONE   3-(o-Chlorophenyl) -2-methyl -4(3H) - 
quinazolinone  
19 METHAMPHETAMINE   (+)-2-Methylamino -1-phenylpropane  
20 METHAQUALONE   2-Methyl -3-0-tolyl-4-(3H) -
quinazoinone  
21 METHYLPHENIDATE   2-Phenyl -2(2-piperidyl) acetic acid, 
methyl ester  
22 PHENCYCLIDINE  PCP 1-(1-Phenylcyclohexyl) piperidine  
23 PHENMETRAZINE   3-Methyl -2-phenylmorpholine  
 47 
 Sl. 
No. International non -proprietary 
names  Other nonproprietary 
names  Chemical name  
24 AMOBARBITAL   5-Ethyl -5-(3-methylbutyl) barbituric 
acid 
25 CYCLOBARBITAL   5-(1-Cyclohexen -1-yl)-5-ethyl -
barbituric acid  
26 GLUTETHIMIDE   2-Ethyl -2-phenylglutarimide  
27 PENTAZOCINE   1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 -Hexahydro -6, 11 -
dimethyl -3-(3-methyl -2-butenyl) -2, 6-
methano -3 benzazocin -8-ol 
28 PENTOBARBITAL   5-Ethyl -5-(1-methylbutyl) barbituric 
acid 
29 SECOBARBITAL   5-Allyl -5-(1-methylbutyl) barbituric 
acid 
30 ALPRAZOLAM   8-Chloro -1-methyl -6-phenyl -4H-s-
triazolo [4, 3 -a] [1, 4] benzodiazepine  
31 AMFEPRAMONE   2-(Diethylamino) propiophenone  
32 BARBITAL   5, 5-Diethylbarbituric acid  
33 BENZPHETAMINE   N-Benzyl -N, α-dimethylphen ethyl -
amine  
34 BROMAZEPAM   7-Bromo-1, 3-dihydro -5-(2-pyridyl) -
2H-1, 4-benzodiazepin -2-one. 
35 CAMAZEPAM   7-Chloro -1, 3-dihydro -3-hydroxy -1-
methyl -5-phenyl -2-H-1, 4 benezo -
diazepin -2-one dimethyl carbamate 
(ester)  
36 CHLORDIAZEPOXIDE   7-Chloro -2-(methylamino )-5-phenyl -
3H-1, 4-benzodiazepine -4-oxide  
37 CLOBAZAM   7-Chloro -1-methyl -5-phenyl -1H-1, 5-
benzo diazepine, 2, 4 (3H, 5H) -dione  
38 CLONAZEPAM   5-(o-Chlorophenyl) -1, 3-dihydro -7-
nitro -2H-1, 4-benzodiazepin -2-one 
39 CLORAZEPATE   7-Chloro -2, 3-dihydro -2-oxo-5-phenyl -
1H, 4 -benzodiazepine -3-carboxylic 
acid 
40 CLOTIAZEPAM   5-(0-Chlorophenyl) -7-ethyl -1, 3-
dihydro -1-methyl -2H-thieno [2, 3 -e]-1, 
4-diazepine -2-one 
41 CLOXAZOLAM   10-Chloro -11b-(o-chlorophenyl) -2, 3, 
7, 11b -tetrahydro -oxazolo -[3, 2-d] [1, 
4] benzo diazepine -6 (5H) -one 
42 DELORAZEPAM   7-Chloro -5-(o-chlorophenyl) -1, 3-
dihydro -2H-1, 4-benzodiazepin -2-one 
 
    48 
 Sl. 
No. International non -proprietary 
names  Other nonproprietary 
names  Chemical name  
43 DIAZEPAM   7-Chloro -1, 3-dihydro -1-methyl -5-
phenyl -2H-1, 4-benzodiazepin -2-one 
44 ESTAZOLAM   8-Chloro -6-phenyl -4H-s-triazolo [4, 
3-a], [1, 4] benzodiazepine  
45 ETHCHLORVYNOL   Ethyl -2-chlorovinylethynylcarbinol  
46 ETHINAMATE   1-Ethylnylcyclohexanolcarbamate  
47 ETHYLLOFLAZEPATE   Ethyl 7-chloro -5-(o-fluorophenyl) -2, 
3-dihydro -2-oxo-1H-1, 4-benzo -
diazepine -3-carboxylate  
48 FLUDIAZEPAM   7-Chloro -5-(o-fluorophenyl) -1, 3-
dihydro -1-methyl -2H-1, 4-benzo -
diazepine -2-one 
49 FLUNITRAZEPAM   5-(o-Fluorophenyl) -1, 3-dihydro -1-
methyl -7-nitro -2H-1, 4-benzo -
diazepin -2-one 
50 FLURAZEPAM   7-Chloro -1-[2-(diethylamino) ethyl] -
5-(o-fluorophenyl) -1, 3-dihydro -2H-
1, 4-benzo -diazepin -2-one 
51 HALAZEPAM   7-Chloro -1, 3-dihydro -5-phenyl -1-(2, 
2, 2-trifluoroethyl) -2H-1, 4-benzo -
diazepin -2-one 
52 HALOXAZOLAM   10-Bromo -11b-(o-fluorophenyl) -2, 3, 
7, 11b -tetrahyd rooxazolo [3, 2 -d] [1, 
4] benzo diazepine -6, (5H) -one 
53 KETAZOLAM   11-Chloro -8, 12b -dihydro -2, 8-
dimethyl -12b-phenyl -4H-[1, 3] -
oxazino -[3, 2-d] [1, 4] 
benzodiazepine -4, 7(6H) -dione  
54 LEFETAMINE  
 SPA (—)-1-dimethylamino -1, 2diphenyl -
ethane  
55 LOPRAZOLAM   6-(o-Chlorophenyl) -2, 4-dihydro -2-
[(4 methyl -1-piperazinyl) metnylene] -
8-nitro -1H-imidazo [1, 2 -0] [1, 4] 
benzodiazepin -1-one 
56 LORAZEPAM   7-Chloro -5-(o-chlorophenyl) -1, 3-
dihydro -3-hydroxy -2H-1, 4-benzo -
diazepine -2-one 
57 LORMETAZEPAM   7-Chloro -5-(o-chlorophenyl) -1, 3-
dihydro -3-hydroxy -1-methyl -2H-1, 4-
benzcxiiazepine -2-one 
58 MAZINDOL   5-(P-Chlorophenyl) -2, 5-dihydro -3-
H-imidazo [2, 1-x] isoindol -5-01 
 
    49 
 Sl. 
No. International non -proprietary 
names  Other nonproprietary 
names  Chemical name  
59 MEDAZEPAM   7-Chloro -2, 3-dihydro -1-methyl -5-
phenyl -1H-1, 4-benzodiazepine  
60 MEPROBAMATE   2-Methyl -2-propyl -1, 3-propanediol 
dicarbamate  
61 METHYLPHENOBARBITAL   5-Ethyl -1-methyl -5-phenylbarbituric 
acid 
62 METHYPRYLON   3, 3-Diethyl -5-methyl -2, 4 piperidine -
dione  
63 NIMETAZEPAM   1, 3-Dihydro -1-methyl -7-nitro -5-
phenyl - 2-H-1, 4-benzodiazepin -2-
one 
64 NITRAZEPAM   1, 3-Dihydro -7-nitro -5-phenyl -2H-1, 
4-benzodiazepin -2-one 
65 NORDAZEPAM   7-Chloro -1, 3-dihydro -5-phenyl -1 
(2H) -1, 4-benzodiazepin -2-one 
66 OXAZEPAM   7-Chloro -1, 3-dihydro -3-hydroxy -5-
phenyl -2H-1, 4-benzodiazepin -2-one 
67 OXAZOLAM   10-Chloro -2, 3, 7, 11b-tetrahydro -2-
methyl -11b-phenyl -oxazolo [3, 2 -d] 
[1, 4] benzodiazepin -6 (5H) -one 
68 PHENDIMETRAZINE   (+)-3, 4-Dimethyl -2-phenyl -
morpholine  
69 PHENOBARBITAL   5-Ethyl -5-phenylbarbituric acid  
70 PHENTERMINE   £, £-Dimethylphenethylamine  
71 PINAZEPAM   7-Chloro -1, 3-dihydro -5-phenyl -1-(2-
propynyl) -2H-1, 4-benzodiazepin -2-
one 
72 PIPRADROL   1-1-Diphenyl -1-(2-piperidyl) -
methanol  
73 PRAZEPAM   7-Chlorol -(cyclopropylmethyl )-1,-3-
dihydro -5-phenyl )-2H-1, 4-benzo -
diazepin -2-one 
74 TEMAZEPAM   7-Chloro -1, 3-dihydro -3-hydroxy -1-
methyl -5-phenyl -2H-1-4-benzo -
diazepin -2-one 
75 TETRAZEPAM   7-Chloro -5-(cycloexen -1-yl)-1, 3-
dihydro -1-methyl -2H-1, 4-benzo -
diazepin -2-one 
76 TRIAZOLAM   8-Chloro -6-(o-chlorophenyl) -1-
methyl -4H-s-triazodo[4,3 -a] [1,4] 
benzodiazepine.  
77 Salts and Preparations of above .   
 
--------------------------The National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL CAPITAL R EGION PLANNING BOARD ACT, 1985  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  CAPITAL REGION  PLANNING  BOARD  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board.  
4. Composition of the Planning Committee.  
5. Power to co -opt, etc.  
6. Vacancies, etc. , not to invalidate proceedings of the Board or the Committee.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS  AND POWERS OF THE BOARD AND OF THE COMMITTEE  
7. Functions of the Board.  
8. Powers of the Board.  
9. Functions of the Committee.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE REGIONAL PLAN 
10. Contents of the Regional Plan.  
11. Surveys and studies.  
12. Procedure to be followed for the preparation of Regional Plan.  
13. Date of coming into operation of the Regional Plan.  
14. Modifications of the Regional Plan.  
15. Review and revision of the Regional Plan.  
CHAPTER V  
FUNCTIONAL PLANS, SUB-REGIONAL  PLANS AND PROJECT  PLANS  
16. Preparation of Functional Plans.  
17. Preparation of Sub -Regional Plan s. 
18. Preparation of Project Plans.  
19. Submission of Sub -Regional Plans to the Board.  
20. Implementation of Sub -Regional Plans, etc.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
SECTIONS  
21. Grants and loans by the Central Government.  
22. Constitution of the  Fund.  
23. Budget.  
24. Annual report.  
25. Accounts and audit.  
26. Annual report and auditors’ report to be laid before Parliament.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Act to have overriding effect.  
28. Power of the Central Government to give directions.  
29. Violation of Regional Plan.  
30. Technical assistance to the Board.  
31. Officers and employees of the Board.  
32. Power to delegate.  
33. Power of entry.  
34. Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of the Board to be public servants.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
36. Power to make rules.  
37. Power to make regulations.  
38. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
39. Dissolution of the Board.  
40. Acquisition of land and determination of rights in relation to land to be made by the 
Government of the participating State or Union territory.  
41. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
  
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION PLANNING BOARD ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 2 OF 1985  
[9th February , 1985 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of a Planning Board for the preparation of a plan for the 
development of the National Capital Region and for co -ordinating and monitoring the 
implementation of such plan and for evolving harmonized policies for the control of        
land-uses and development of infras tructure  in the National Capital  Region so as to avoid any 
haphazard development of that region and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient in the public interest to provide for the constitution of a Planning Board for 
the preparation of a plan for the development of the National Capital Region and for co -ordinating and 
monitoring the implementation of such plan and for evolv ing harmonized policies for the control of     
land-uses and development of infrastructure in the National Capital Region so as to avoid any haphazard 
development thereof;  
AND WHEREAS  Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with respect of any of the 
matters aforesaid, except as provided in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution;  
AND WHEREAS  in pursuance of the provisions of clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution, 
resolutions have been passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of the States of Haryana, Rajasthan and 
Uttar Pradesh to the effect that the matters aforesaid should be regulated in those States by Parliament by 
law; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the T hirty -fifth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Capital Region 
Planning Board Act, 1985.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of  October, 1984.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the National Capital Region Planning Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 3;  
(b) “Committee ” means the Planning Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(c) “counter -magnet area ” means an urban area selected by the Board under clause ( f) of     
section 8;  
(d) “Functional Plan ” means a plan prepared to elaborate one or more elemen ts of the Regional 
Plan;  
(e) “land” includes benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth or permanently 
fastened to anything attached to the earth;  
(f) “National Capital Region ” means the areas specified in the Schedule:  
Provided that the Central Government with the consent of the Government of the concerned 
participating State and in c onsultation with the Board, may,  by notification in the Official Gazette, 
add any area to the Schedule or exclude any area therefrom;  
(g) “participating States ” means the States of Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  4 
 (i) “Project Plan ” means a detailed plan prepared to implement one or more elements of the 
Regional Plan, Sub -Regional Plan or Functional Plan;  
(j) “Regional Plan ” means the plan prepared under this Act for the development of the National 
Capital Region and for the control of land -uses and the development of infrastructure in the National 
Capital Region;  
(k) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Board under th is Act;  
(l) “sub-region ” means such part of the National Capital Region as falls entirely within the limits 
of a participating State or the Union territory;  
(m) “Sub-Regional Plan ” means a plan prepared for a sub -region; and  
(n) “Union territory ” means the  Union territory of Delhi.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL  REGION  PLANNING BOARD  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board .—(1) The Central Government shall , by 
notification in the Official Gaz ette, constitute for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to  be called the 
National Capital Region Planning Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power , subject to the provisions of this Act, to contract and shall, by the said name, sue 
and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding twenty -one, as may be 
prescribed, and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise prov ide, the Board shall consist of the 
following members, namely: — 
(a) the Union Minister for Work s and Housing, who shall be the Chairman of the Board;  
(b) the Chief Minister of the State of Haryana;  
(c) the Chief Minister of the State of Rajasthan;  
(d) the Chief Minister of the State of Uttar Pradesh;  
(e) the Administrator of the Union territory;  
(f) eight members, to be nominated by the Central Government, on the recommendation of the 
participating States and the Administrator of the Union t erritory:  
Provided that not more than two members shall be nominated on the recommendation of a 
participating State, or, as the case may be, the Administrator of the Union territory;  
(g) three other members, of whom one shall be a person having knowledge and experie nce in 
town planning , to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(h) a full -time Member -Secretary of the Board , to be nominated by the Central Government from 
amongst officers of, or above, the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India:  
Provided  that no change shall be made in the composition of the Board by rules except with the 
consent of the Government of each of the participating States and of the Administrator of the Union 
territory.  
(4) The terms and conditions of office of the members nomi nated under clause ( f), clause ( g) or  
clause ( h) of sub -section ( 3) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
4. Composition of the Planning Committee .—(1) The Board shall, as soon as may be, after the 
commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee, to be called the Planning Committee, for assisting the 
Board in the discharge of its functions.  
  5 
 (2) The Committee shall consist of such members as may be prescribed and unless the rules made in 
this behalf otherwise provide, the Committee shall consist of the following members , namely: — 
(a) the Member -Secretary to the Board, who shall be the ex of ficio Chairman of the Committee;  
(b) the Joint Secretary to the Government of Ind ia in the Ministry of Works and Housing,          
in-charge of Housing and Urban Development , ex officio ; 
(c) Secretary -in-charge of Urban Development in each participating State and the Union territory, 
ex officio ; 
(d) the Vice -Chairman, Delhi Development Authority, ex officio ; 
(e) the Chief Planner, Town and Country Planning Organisation, New Delhi, ex officio ; and 
(f) the Chief Town Planner of each participating State, ex officio . 
5. Power to co -opt, etc .—(1) The Board or the Committee may, at any time and for such period as it 
thinks fit, co -opt any person or persons as a member or members of the Board or of the Committee.  
(2) A person co -opted under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise and discharge all the powers and functions 
of a member of the Board or of the Committee, as the case may be , but shall not be entitled to vote.  
6. Vacancies, etc. , not to invalidate proceedings of the Board or the Committee .—No act or 
proceeding of the Board of the Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board or  the 
Committee; or  
(b) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board  or of the Committee not affecting the merits of 
the case.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS  AND POWERS OF THE BOARD AND OF THE COMMITTEE  
7. Functions of the Board .—The functions of the Board shall be — 
(a) to prepare the Regional Plan and the Functional Plans;  
(b) to arrange for the preparation of Sub -Regional Plans and Project Plans by each of the 
participating States and the Union territory;  
(c) to co-ordinate the enforcement and implementation of the Regional Plan, Functional Plans, 
Sub-Regional Plans and Project Plans through the participating States and the Union territory;  
(d) to ensure proper and systematic programming by the participating Stat es and the Union 
territory in regard to project formulation , determination of priorities in the National Capital Region or 
sub-regions and phasing of development of the National Capital Region in accordance with stages 
indicated in the Regional Plan;  
(e) to arrange for, and oversee, the financing o f selected development projects i n the National 
Capital Region through Central and State plan fund s and other sources of revenue.  
8. Powers of the Board .—The powers of the Board shall include the powers to — 
(a) call for reports and information from the participating States and the Union territory with 
regard to preparation, enforcement and implementation of Functional Plans and Sub -Regional Plans;  
(b) ensure that the preparation, enforcement and implementation of  Functional Plan or            
Sub-Regional Plan, as the case may be, is in conformity with the Regional Plan;  
(c) indicate the stages for the implementation of the Regional Plan;  
(d) review the implementation of the Regional Plan, Functional Plan, Sub -Regional Plan and 
Project Plan;  6 
 (e) select and approve comprehensive projects, call for priority development and provide such 
assistance for the implementation of those projects as the Board may deem fit;  
(f) select, in consultation with the State Government concerned, any urban area, outside the 
National Capital Region having regard to its location, population and potential for growth, which may 
be developed in order to achieve the objectives of the Regional Plan; and  
(g) entrust  to the Committee such other functions as it may consider necessary to carry out the 
provisions of this Act.  
9. Functions of the Committee .—(1) The functions of the Committ ee shall be to assist the Boar d 
in— 
(a) the  preparation and co -ordinated implementation of the Regional Plan and the Functional 
Plans; and  
(b) scrutinising the Sub -Regional Plans and all Project Plans to ensure that the same are in 
conformity with the Regional Plan.  
(2) The Committee may also make such recommendation to the Board as it may think necessary to 
amend or modify any Sub -Regional Plan or any Project Plan.  
(3) The Committee shall perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Board.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE REGIONAL PLAN 
10. Contents of the Regional Plan .—(1) The Regional Plan shall be a written statement and shall be 
accompanied by such maps, diagrams, illustrations and descriptive matters, as the Board may deem 
appropriate for the purpose of explaining or illustrating the proposals c ontained in the Regional Plan and 
every such map, diagram, illustration and descriptive matter shall be deemed to be a part of the Regional 
Plan.  
(2) The Regional Plan shall indicate the manner in which the land in the National Capital Region shall 
be used , whether by carrying out development thereon or by conservation or otherwise, and such other 
matters as arc likely to have any important influence on the development of the National Capital Region 
and every such Plan shall include the following elements n eeded to promote growth and balanced 
development of the National Capital Region, namely: — 
(a) the policy in relation to land -use and the allocation of land for different uses;  
(b) the proposals for major urban settlement pattern;  
(c) the proposals for providing suitable economic base for future growth;  
(d) the proposals regarding transport and communications including railways and arterial roads 
serving the National Capital Region;  
(e) the proposals for the supply of drinking water and fo r drainage;  
(f) indication of the areas which require immediate development as “priority areas ”; and  
(g) such other matters as may be included by the Board with the concurrence of the participating 
States and the Union territory for the proper planning of the growth and balanced development of the 
National Capital Region.  
11. Surveys and studies .—For the preparation of the Regional Plan, the Board may cause such 
surveys and studies, as it may consider necessary, to be made by such person or group of persons  as it 
may appoint in this behalf and may also associate such experts or consultants for carrying out stud ies in 
relation to such specified  matters as may be determined by the Board.  
12. Procedure to be followed for the preparation of Regional Plan .—(1) Before preparing any 
Regional Plan finally, the Board shall prepare, with the assistance of the Committee, a Regional Plan in 
draft and publish it by making a copy thereof available for inspection and publishing a notice in such form 
and in such manner as may be prescribed, inviting objections and suggestions from any person with 
respect to the draft Regional Plan before such date as may be specified in the notice.  7 
 (2) The Board shall also give reasonable opportunities to every local authority, within whose  local 
limits any land touched by the Regional Plan is situate, to make any representation with respect to the 
draft Regional Plan.  
(3) After considering all objections, suggestions and representations that may have been received by 
the Board, the Board  shall finally prepare the Regional Plan.  
13. Date of coming into operation of the Regional Plan .—(1) Immediately after the Regional Plan 
has been finally prepared, the Board shall publish, in such manner as may be prescribed, a notice stating 
that the Regional Plan has been finally prepared by it and naming the places where a copy of the Regional 
Plan may be inspected at all reasonable hours and upon the date of first publication of the aforesaid 
notice, the Regional Plan shall come into operation.  
(2) The publication of the Regional Plan, after previous publication, as required by section 12, shall 
be conclusive proof that the Regional Plan has been duly prepared.  
14. Modifications of the Regional Plan .—(1) The Board may, subject to the provisions of           
sub-section ( 2), make such modifications in the Regional Plan as finally prepared by it, as it may think fit, 
being modifications which, in its opinion, do not effect important alterations in the character of the 
Regional Plan and which do n ot rela te to the extent of land -uses or the standards of population density.  
(2) Before making any modifications in the finally prepared Regional Plan, the Board shall publish a 
notice, in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, indicating therein the modifications which 
are proposed to be made in the finally prepared Regional Plan, and inviting , objections and suggestions 
from any person with respect to the proposed modifications before such date as may be specified in the 
notice and shall consider all  objections and suggestions that may be received by it on or before the date so 
specified.  
(3) Every modification made under this section shall be published in such manner as the Board may 
specify and the modifications shall come into operation either on t he date of such publication or on such 
later date as the Board may fix.  
(4) If any question arises whether the modifications proposed to be made are modifications which 
effect important alterations in the character of the Regional Plan or whether they rela te to the extent of 
land-uses or the standards of population density, it shall be decided by the Board whose decision thereon 
shall be final.  
15. Review and revision of the Regional Plan .—(1) After every five years from the date of coming 
into operation of  the finally prepared Regional Plan, the Board shall review such Regional Plan in its 
entirety and may, after such review, substitute it by a fresh Regional Plan or may make such 
modifications or alterations therein as may be found by it to be necessary.  
(2) Where it is proposed to substitute a fresh Regional Plan in place of the Regional Plan which was 
previously finally prepared or where it is proposed to make any modifications or alterations in the finally 
prepared Regional Plan, such fresh Plan or, as t he case may be, modifications or alterations, shall be 
published and dealt with in the same manner as if it were th e Regional Plan referred to in s ections 12    
and 13 or as if they were the modifications or alterations in the Regi onal Plan made under section 14 . 
CHAPTER V  
FUNCTIONAL PLANS , SUB-REGIONAL  PLANS AND  PROJECT  PLANS  
16. Preparation of Functional Plans .—After the Regional Plan has come into operation, the Board 
may prepare, with the assistance of the Committee, as many Functional Plans as may be necessary for the 
proper guidance of the partici pating States and of the Union t erritory.  
17. Preparation of Sub -Regional  Plans .—(1) Each  participating State shall prepare a Sub -Regional 
Plan for the sub -region within the State and the Union territory shall prepare a Sub -Regional Plan for t he 
sub-region within the Union t erritory.  
  8 
 (2) Each Sub -Regional P lan shall be a written statement and shall be accompanied by such maps, 
diagrams, illustrations and descriptive matters as the partici pating State or the Union t erritory may deem 
appropriate for the purpose of explaining or illustrating the proposals contained in such Sub -Regional 
Plan an d every such map, document, illustration and descriptive matter shall be deemed to be a part of the 
Sub-Regional Plan.  
(3) A Sub -Regional Plan may indicate the following elements to elaborate the Regional Plan at the 
sub-regional level, namely: — 
(a) reserv ation of areas for specific land -uses which are of the regional or sub -regional 
importance;  
(b) future ur ban and major rural settlements  indicating their area, projected population, 
predominant economic functions, approximate site and location;  
(c) road ne t-work up to the district roads and roads connecting major rural settlements;  
(d) proposals for the co -ordination of traffic and transportation , including terminal facilities;  
(e) priority areas at sub -regional level for which immediate plans are necessary ; 
(f) proposals for the supply of drinking water and for drainage; and  
(g) any other matter which is necessary for the proper development of the sub -region.  
18. Preparation of Project Plans .—A participating State, or the Union t erritory, may, by itself or in 
collaboration with one or more of the par ticipating States or the Union t erritory, as the case may be, 
prepare Project Plans for one or mor e elements of the Regional Plan,  Functional Plan or Sub -Regional 
Plan.  
19. Submission of Sub -Regional Plans to the  Board .—(1) Before publishing any Sub -Regional 
Plan, each participating State or, as the case may be, the Union territory, shall, refer such P lan to the 
Board to enable the Board to ensure that such Plan is in conformity with the Regional Plan.  
(2) The Board shall , after examining a Sub -Regional Plan, communicate, within sixty days from the 
date of receipt of such Plan, its observations with regard to the Sub -Regional Plan to the pa rticipating 
State or the Union t erritory by which such Plan was referred to it. 
(3) The participating State, or,  as the case may be, the Union t erritory, shall , after due consideration 
of the observations made by the Board, finalise the Sub -Regional Plan after ensuring that it is in 
conformity with the Regional Plan.  
20. Implem entation of Sub -Regional Plans, etc .—Each participating State, or,  as the case may be, 
the Union t erritory shall be responsible for the implementation of the Sub -Regional Plan , as finalised by it 
under sub -section ( 3) of s ection 19 , and Project Plan s prepa red by it.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
21. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums 
of money as that Government may consider necessary to enable the Board to carry out its functions under 
this Act.  
(2) The Central Government shall also, aft er due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this 
behalf, pay to the Board such other sums as may be necessary for meeting the salaries, allowances and 
other remuneration of the Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of the Board and such 
amounts as may be necessary to meet the other administrative expenses of the Board.  
22. Constitution of the Fu nd.—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National 
Capital Regional Planning Board Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government under section 21;  9 
 (b) all sums paid to the Bo ard by the part icipating States and the Union t erritory; and  
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government in consultation with the part icipating States and the Union t erritory.  
(2) The sums credited to the said Fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be applied for — 
(a) meeting the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Member -Secretary, officers 
and other employees of the Board and for meeting other administrative expenses of t he Board, so, 
however, that the total expenses shall not exceed the amount appropriated for this purpose under   
sub-section ( 2) of section 21;  
(b) conducting surveys, preliminary studies and drawing up of plans for the National Capital 
Region;  
(c) providi ng financial assistance to the participating States and the Union territory for the 
implementation of  Sub-Regional Plans and Project  Plans; and  
(d) providing financial assistance to the State concerned for the development of the           
counter -magnet area subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between such State 
and the Board.  
23. Budget .—The Board shall, in each financial year, prepare in such form and at such time as may 
be prescribed its budget for the next financial year and for ward the same to the Central Government at 
least three months prior to  the commencement of the next financial year.  
24. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare in each financial year its annual report in such form 
and at such time as may be prescribed , giving a full account of its activities during the financial year 
immediately preceding the financial year in which such report is prepared and forward, before such date 
as may be prescribed , copies thereof to the Central Government, the participating Sta tes and the Union 
territory.  
25. Accounts and audit .—The accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited in such manner 
as may be prescribed in consultation w ith the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and the Board 
shall furnish , to the Central  Government, before such date as may be prescribed , a copy of its audited 
accounts together with the auditors ’ report thereon.  
26. Annual report and auditors’ report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government 
shall cause the  annual report and the auditors’  report to be laid as soon as may be after their receipt , on the 
Table of each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two more successive se ssions.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by v irtue of any law other than this Act; or  in any decree or order of any c ourt, tribunal or 
other authority.  
28. Power of the Central Government to give direction s.—The Central Government may, from 
time to time, give such directions to the Board as it may think fit for the efficient administration of this 
Act and when any such direction is given, the Board shall carry out such directions.  
29. Violation of Regional Plan .—(1) On and from the coming into operation of the finally published 
Regional Plan, no dev elopment shall be made in the region which is inconsistent with the Regional Plan 
as finally published.  
(2) Where the Board is satisfied that any participating State or the Union territory has carried out, or 
is carrying out, any activity which amounts to a violation of the Regional Plan, it may, by a notice in 
writing, direct the concerned participating State or the Union territory, as the case may be, to stop such 
violation of the Regional Plan within such time as may be specified in the said notice and i n case of any 10 
 omission or refusal on the part of the concerned participating State or the Union territory to stop activity, 
withhold such financial assistance to the concerned participating State or the Union territory, as the Board 
may consider necessary.  
30. Technical assistance to the Board .—(1) The Central Government may direct its Town and 
Country Planning Organisation  to provide, on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon, 
such technical assistance to the Board as that Government may consider necessary and the Government of 
a participating State may direct the Town Planning Department of that Governmen t to make such 
technica l assistance to the Board as that  Government may consider necessary.  
(2) With a view to enabling the Committee to discharge its functions, the Board shall, out of the 
technical assistance received by it under sub -section ( 1) make ava ilable to the Committee such technical 
assistance as the Committee may require.  
31. Officers and employees of the Board .—(1) The Board may appoint such other officers and 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of the officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be 
determined by regulations.  
32. Power to delegate .—The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any 
function or power (other than the power to approve the Regional Plan and to make regulations), or duty 
which the Board may perform, exercise or discharge under this Act shall subject to such conditions, if 
any, as may be specified in the notification, be performed, exercise d or discharge d also by such person or 
persons as may be specified in the notification and where any such delegation of power is made the 
person or persons to whom such power is delegated shall perform, exercise or discharge those powers in 
the same manner  and to the same extent as if they were conferred on him or them directly by this Act and 
not by way of delegation.  
33. Power of entry .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf, any person generally or specially 
authorised by the Board in this behalf, may,  at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or premises and 
do such things thereon as may be necessary for the purpose of lawfully carrying out any works or for 
making any survey, examination or investigation, preliminary or incidental to the exercise of  any power 
or performance of any function by the Board under this Act:  
Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed courtyard or garden attached to 
a dwelling -house without previously giving the occupier thereof at least three days ’ notice in writing of 
his intention to do so.  
34. Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of the Board to be public servants .—The 
Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting 
to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the  Board or any member or any officer or any other employee of the Board including any 
other person authorised by the Board to exercise any power or to discharge any function under this Act, or 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
36. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for  all or any 
of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the composition and number of the members of the Board and of the Committee, as required 
by sub -section ( 3) of section 3 and sub -section ( 2) of section 4, respectively , to be prescribed;  
(b) the terms and conditions of the office of the members as required by sub -section ( 4) of  
section 3, to be prescribed;  11 
 (c) the form and manner in which notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 and sub -section ( 2) 
of section 14 shall be published;  
(d) the manner in which notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 13 shall be published;  
(e) the form in which and the time at which the Board shall prepare its budget under section 23 
and its annual report under section 24 and the manner in which the accounts of t he Board shall be 
maintained and audited under section 25;  
(f) the conditions and restrictions with respect to the exercise of the powers to enter under   
section 33 and other matters relating thereto; and  
(g) any other matters which is to be, or may be, p rescribed or in respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
37. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government , by notification in the Official Gazette , make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and 
the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the fol lowing matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which and the purposes for which the Board may associate with itself any 
person under section 11;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Board under          
sub-section ( 2) of section 31; and  
(c) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be, or may be, made by regulations.  
38. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the ses sion or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, as 
the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall th ereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
39. Dissoluti on of the Board .—(1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that the purposes for 
which the Board was established under this Act have been substantially achieved or the Board has failed 
in its objectives, so as to render the continued existence of the B oard in the opinion of the Central 
Government unnecessary, that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the 
Board shall be dissolved with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification; and the Board 
shall be de emed to be dissolved accordingly.  
(2) From the said date — 
(a) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in or realisable by the Board shall vest in, or 
be realisable by , the Central Government;  
(b) all liabilities which are enforceable against the Board shall be enforceable against the Central 
Government;  
(c) for the purpose of carrying out any development which has not been fully carried out by the 
Board and for the purpose of realising properties, fun ds and dues referred to in clause ( a) the 
functions of the Board shall be discharged by the Central Government.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the Central Government from 
reconstituting the Board in accordance with the provisi ons of this Act.  
  12 
 40. Acquisition of land and determination of rights in relation to land to be made by the 
Government of the participating State or Union territory .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that the acquisition of land or the determination of any right or interest in, or in relation to, any 
land or other property, where necessary to g ive effect to any Regional Plan,  Functional Plan,               
Sub-Regional Plan or Project Plan, shall be made by the Government of the concerne d participating State, 
or, as the case may be, the Union territory, in accordance with the law for the time being in force in that 
State or Union territory.  
41. Repeal and s aving .—(1) The National Capital Region Planning Board Ordinance,                  
1984 (Ord. 11 of 1984) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 (f)] 
The National Capital Region shall comprise the following areas: — 
1. Delhi  
The whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
2. Haryana  
(i) The whole of District of Gurgaon comprising the Tehsils of Gurgaon, Nuh and         
Ferozepur -Jhirka;  
(ii) The whole of District of Faridabad comprising the Tehsils of Ballabgarh, Palwal and Hathin;  
(iii) The whole of District of Rohtak comprising the Tehsils of Rohtak, Jh ajjar, Bahadurgarh, 
Meham and K osli; 
(iv) The whole of District of Sonepat  comprising the Tehsils of Sonepat and Gohana; and  
(v) Panipat Tehsil of District of Karnal and Rewari Tehsil of District of Mohindergarh.  
3. Uttar Pradesh  
(i) The whole of District of Bulandshahr comprising the Tehsils of Anupshahr, Bulandshahr, 
Khurja an d Sikanderabad;  
(ii) The whole of District of Meerut comprising the Tehsils of Meerut, Bagpat, Mawana and 
Sardhana; and  
(iii) The whole of District of Ghaziabad comprising the Tehsils of Ghaziabad and Hapur.  
4. Rajasthan  
(i) The whole of the following Tehs ils of Alwar District, namely, Behroor, Mandawar, 
Kishangarh and Tijara; and  
(ii) Part of Alwar Tehsil comprising the area bounded in the north by the Tehsil boundaries of 
Mandawar and Kishangarh, in the east of the boundaries of Tehsil Ferozepur -Jhirka  of District 
Gurgaon, Ha ryana and Alwar Tehsil, in the s outh by the Barah river right up to Umran lake in the 
west, and then following the southern boundaries of Umran lake up to the j unction of Umran lake and 
State  Highway from Alwar to Bairat and from th en on west by north -west across the ridge up to the 
junction of the Tehsil boundaries of Alwar and Bansur.  
Explanation. —Save as otherwise provided, reference to any district or tehsil in this Schedule shall be 
construed as a reference to the areas comprise d in that district or tehsil , as the case may be, on the 27th 
day of August, 1984, being the dat e on which the National Capital Region Planning Board Bill, 1984 was 
introduced in the House of the People.  
 
--------------------------The Pondicherry University Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE PONDICHERRY UNIVERSITY  ACT, 1985  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University.  
4. Objects.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Establishment of certain Schools.  
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. Visitor.  
10. Chief Rector.  
11. Officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor.  
14. Directors.  
15. Deans of Schools.  
16. The Registrar . 
17. The Finance Officer.  
18. Other officers.  
19. Authorities of the University.  
20. The Court.  
21. The Executive Council.  
22. The Academic Council.  
23. The Planning Board.  
24. Other authorities of the University.  
25. Power to make Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made.  
27. Ordinances.  
28. Regulations.  
29. Annual report.  
30. Annual accounts.  
31. Conditions of service of employees.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  2 
 SECTIONS  
33. Right to appeal.  
34. Provident and pension funds.  
35. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
36. Constitution of committees.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies.  
38. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
40. Mode of proof of University record.  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
42. Transitional provisions.  
43. Completion of courses of studies in colleges and institutions affiliated to the University.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE PONDICHERRY UNIVERSITY ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 53 OF 1985  
[4th Septembe r, 1985 .] 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the Union territory of 
Pondicherry and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Pondicherry University         
Act, 1985.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are desig nated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(d) “Chancellor ” and “Vice -Chancellor ” mean, respectively, the Chancellor and Vice -Chancellor 
of the University;  
(e) “College ” means a College maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University;  
(f) “Court ” means the Court of the University;  
(g) “Department ” means a Department of Studies, and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(h) “Director ” means any of the Directors ref erred to in clauses ( 3), (4) and ( 5) of section 11;  
(i) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University, and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(j) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, College 
or Institution, provided, maintained or recognised by the University;  
(l) “Institution ” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitt ed to 
the privileges of the University;  
(m) “Principal ” means the Head of a College or an Institution, and includes where there is no 
Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, and, in the absence of the 
Principal or actin g Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(n) “recognised institution ” means an institution of higher learning recognised by the University;  
(o) “recognised teachers ” means such persons as are recognised by the Univer sity for the purpose 
of imp arting instruction  in a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the University;  
(p) “School ” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(q) “Statutes ”, “Ordinances ” and “Regulations ” mean , respectively, the Statutes, Ordinances and 
Regulations of the University for the time being in force;  
                                                           
1. 16th October, 1985, vide notification  No. S.O. 751(E),  dated 14th October, 19 85, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (r) “teachers of the University ” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting  research in the University or in any College 
or Institution maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(s) “University ” means the Pondicherry University.  
3. The University .—(1) There  shall be established a University by the name of “Pondicherry 
University ”. 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Pondicherry and it may also establish campuses at 
such other places within its jurisdiction as it may deem fit.  
(3) The first Cha ncellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the 
Executive Council and the Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or 
members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are here by constituted by a body 
corporate by the name of “Pondicherry University ”. 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects .—The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance knowledge by 
providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem fit and by the 
example of its corporate life, and, in particular, to make special pro visions for studies in French and for 
integrated courses for humanity and science in the educational programmes of the University and to take 
appropriate measures for promoting inter -disciplinary studies and research in the University.  
5. Powers of the Uni versity .—The University shall ha ve the following powers, namely :— 
(1) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the  University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provision for research  and for the advancement  and dissemination of 
knowledge ; 
(2) to provide for and organise studies  in French;  
(3) to grant, subject to such conditions  as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees  or other academic distinctions on the basis of exa minations, evaluation or any  
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas,  certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient  cause;  
(4) to organise and to undertake  extra -mural studies and extension serv ices; 
(5) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(6) to provide, instruction, including  correspondence and such other courses, to such persons as 
are not members of the  University, as it may determine;  
(7) to institute Principalships,  Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships  and other teaching or 
academic posts  required by the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships,  
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other posts;  
(8) to recog nise an Institution of  higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to  withdraw such recognition;  
(9) to recognise persons for imparting  instruction in any College or I nstitution admitted to the 
privileges of the  University;  
(10) to appoint persons working in any other university or organisation as teachers of the 
University for a  specified period;  
(11) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(12) to co -operate or collaborate or assoc iate with any other university or authority or institution  
of higher learning in such manner and for  such purposes as the University may determine;  5 
 (13) to establish such campuses, special centres, specialised  laboratories or other units for 
research  and instruction  as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the  furtherance of its 
objects;  
(14) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(15) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(16) to make provision for research and advisory services; and for  that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions or bodies as the University may deem necessary;  
(17) to admit to its privileges Colleges and Institutions not  maintaned  by the University; to 
withdraw all or any of those privileges in  accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes; and to  recognise Halls not maintained by the University and to withdraw any such  
recognition;  
(18) to declare a College,  an Institution or a Department as an  autonomous College or an 
Institution or a Department, as the case may be;  
(19) to determine standards for admission into the University, which  may include ex amination, 
evaluation or any  other method of testing;  
(20) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(21) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and  to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(22) to make special arrangements in respect of women student s as the  University may consider 
desirable;  
(23) to regulate and enforce discipline among the employees and  students of the University and 
take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the  University to be necessary;  
(24) to make arran gements for promoting the health and general welfare  of the employees;  
(25) to receive donations and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of  any property, movable or 
immovable, including trust and endowment properties for  the purposes of the University;  
(26) to borrow, with the approval of the  Central Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for  the purposes of the University;  
(27) to do all such other acts and  things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainmen t of all or  any of the objects of the University.  
6. Establishment of certain Schools .—The University shall also establish a School for studies in 
Eastern and Western Thought to be known as “Sri Aurobindo School of Eastern and Western Thought ” 
and another School for studies in Tamil language and literature to be known as “Subramania Bharati 
School of Tamil Language and Literature ”. 
7. Jurisdiction .—(1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend  to the whole of the  Union 
territory of Pondicherry : 
Provided that the University may, at the request of the Administrator of the Union territory of the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands or of the Union territory of Lakshadweep and with the prior approval of 
the Central Government, extend its jurisdiction to those  territories.  
(2) No college or institution situated within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the University shall 
be compulsori ly affiliated to the University  and affiliation shall be granted by the University only to such 
colleges or institutions a s may agree to accept the Statutes and Ordinances.  
(3) Any college or institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall cease to be associated 
with, or be admitted t o the privileges of, any other u niversity.  
(4) No college or institution situated within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the University , but 
not admitted to its privileges, shall be associated with, or be admitted to the privileges of, any other 6 
 university except with the previous approval of the Administrator of the Un ion territory in which such 
college or institution is situated.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed .—(1) The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste, or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
admitted therein, as a teacher or student, or to hold any office therein, or to graduate thereat : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the weaker sections of the people and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes.  
(2) French nationals of Indian origin  who have been permitted to long -term residence in the Union 
territory of Pondicherry under the provisions of the Treaty of Cession shall also be eligible for admission 
to the University.  
Explanation. —Treaty of Cession has the meaning assigned to it in the  Pondicherry (Administration) 
Act, 1962 (49 of 1962).  
9. Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment, and of any College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and also of the examinations, teaching and 
other work conducted or done by  the University and to cause an  inquiry to be made in like manner in 
respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University , Colleges or 
Institutions.  
(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice of his intention to c ause an inspection or inquiry to  be 
made, — 
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University, 
College or Institution maintained by it, or  
(b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect o f a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the University,  
and the University or the management, as the case may be, shall have the r ight to make such 
representations to the Visitor, a s it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in                
sub-section (2). 
(5) Where any inspection or inqu iry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University or the 
management, as the case may be, shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to 
be present and be heard at such inspection or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may, if th e inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancel lor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry, and the Vice -Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive Council the views of the Visitor 
with such advice as the Visitor may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the privileges of t he University, address the management concerned through the               
Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such 
advice as he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Executive Council or the manageme nt, as the case may be, shall co mmunicate through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry.  7 
 (9) Where the Executive C ouncil or the management does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or management, issue such directions a s he may think fit 
and the Executive Council or management, as the case may be, shall comply with such directions . 
(10) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the Univers ity which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or 
Ordinances : 
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the University to show cause why 
such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time,  he shall consider 
the same.  
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. Chief Rector .—The Administrator of the  Union territory of Pondicherry shall be the Chief Rector 
of the University.  
11. Officers of the University .—The following shall be  the officers of the University :— 
(1) The Chancellor;  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) The Director of Studies, Educational Innovations and Rural Reconstruction;  
(4) The Director of Culture and Cultural Relations;  
(5) The Director of Physical Education, Sports, National Service and Students Welfare;  
(6) The Deans of Schools;  
(7) The Registrar;  
(8) The Finance Officer; and  
(9) Such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for conferring 
degrees.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and  academic officer of the University, and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the act ion taken by him on such matter : 
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opin ion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final : 
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor u nder this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse t he action taken by the   
Vice -Chancel lor. 8 
 (4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or Ordinances.  
14. Directors .—The Directors shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. Deans of S chools .—Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perf orm such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authentic ate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authorities of the University: — 
(1) The Court;  
(2) The Executive Council;  
(3) The Academic Council;  
(4) The Boards of Schools;  
(5) The Planning Board; and  
(6) Such o ther authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University.  
20. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the followi ng powers and functions, 
namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of th e Executive Council, the term of  office of its membe rs and its powers and 
duties shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and Ordinances, co-ordinate and 
exercise general  supervision over the academic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of  its members and its powers and 
duties shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Planning Board .—(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Planning Board, which 
shall be an authority of the University.  9 
 (2) The constitution of the Planning Board, term of office of its members and its powers and duties 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. Other authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Boards of 
Schools and of such other authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the 
University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the election and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, the 
filling of vacancies of me mbers, and all other matters relative to those authorities and other bodies for 
which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teacher s of the University and other academic staff and their emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and other academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specified period for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of servic e of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing seniority of service of employees;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of disput e between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the establishment and recognition of Students ’ Union or associations of teachers, academic 
staff or other employees;  
(k) the participation of students in the affairs of the University;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the institution of fellowhips, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(o) the maintenance of discipline among the students;  
(p) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Halls, Colleges and Institutions;  
(q) the condi tions under which Colleges and I nstitutions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such privileges;  
(r) the delegation o f powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University; and  
(s) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, provided by the Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to  in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, 
powers or co nstitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  10 
 (3) Every new Statute o r addition to the Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assen t of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a statute amending or repealing  an existing Statute shall have  no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1) during the period of three 
years immediately aft er the commencement of this Act : 
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he m ay consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
27. Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diploma s, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examin ations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions of award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and of appointment and the duties of 
examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of special courses of stud ies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Special Centres, specialised 
laboratories and other Committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities including 
learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necssary  for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;  
(p) the supervision and management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the privileges of the 
University; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vic e-Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  11 
 28. Regulations .—The authorities of the Univers ity may make Regulations consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be prescribed by 
Statutes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual  report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, w hich shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid b efore both Houses of 
Parliament.  
30. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The annual accounts when audited shall be published in the Gazette of India and a copy of the 
accounts together with the repo rt of the Comptroller and Auditor -General shall be submitted to the Court 
and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts, together with the report of the Comptroller and Auditor -General, 
shall also be submitted to the C entral Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
31. Conditions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee shall be appointed under a written 
contract which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished to the employee 
concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member app ointed by 
the Executive Council, one m ember nominated by the employee  concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor. The decision of the Tribnal shall be final , and no suit shall lie in any c ivil c ourt in respect of 
the matters decided by the Tribunal. Every such request shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration 
upon the terms of this section within the meani ng of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940).  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolutio n of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appea ring at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders  or copy  of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the de cision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal  of Arbitration and the pro visions  of                      
sub-section ( 2) of section 31 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
33. Right to appeal. —Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the 
University or of the Principal or the management of any College o r Institution, as the case may be, and 
thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  12 
 34. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such pension or provident fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Centra l Government may 
declar e that the provision of  the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
35. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person h as been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
36. Constitution of committees .—Where any authority of  the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint committees, such committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other person (if any) as the authority in each case may 
think  fit. 
37. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the Univer sity shall be filled, as soon a s conveniently may be, 
by the person or body who appointed, elected or co-opted the member whose place has become vacant 
and the person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or 
body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
38. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
39. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Sta tutes or the Ordinances.  
40. Mode of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by t he 
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding 
or resolution, documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein whe re the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any 
other law for the time being in force.  
41. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficul ty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedi ent for remov ing the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
42. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Execu tive Council shall consist of n ot more than thirty members 
and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold office f or a 
term of three years;  13 
 (d) the first Academic Council shall be constituted on the expiry of a period of six months from 
the commencement of this Act and during the said period of six months, the powers of the Academic 
Council shall be performed by the P lanning Board constituted under section 23;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and shall hold o ffice for a term of three years : 
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated 
shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or nomin ated would 
have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
43. Completion of cour ses of studies in colleges and i nstitutions affiliated to the University .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in the Statutes or the Ordinances, any student  of a 
college or institution, who, immediately before the admission of such college or institution to the 
privileges of the Pondicherry University, was studying for a degree, diploma or certificate of the 
University of Madras, the University of Calicut or the Andhra University, shall be permitted by the 
Pondicherry University to complete his course s for that degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may be, 
and the Pondicherry University and such college or institution shall provide for the instructions a nd 
examination of such student in accordance with the syllabus of studies of the respective University.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances a nd Regulations to be published i n the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance  or Regul ation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification  in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
 
THE  SCHEDULE  
[See section 26( 1)] 
THE STATUTES  OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a  term of five years from the dat e on which he enters 
upon his office and shall be eligible for re-appointmen t for not more than another term : 
Provided  that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall  continue in office 
until his successor is appoi nted and enters upon his office : 
Provided  further that the Visitor may direct that a Vice -Chancellor, whose term of office  has expired, 
shall continue in  office for such period, not exceeding a total  period of one year, as may be specified in 
the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 2), a person appointed a s Vice -Chancellor shall, if 
he completes the age of sixty -five years during the  term of his office or any extension thereof, retire from 
office.  
  14 
 (4) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Vic e-Chancellor shall be as 
follows :— 
(i) There shall be paid to the Vice -Chancellor a salary of three thousand rupees per  mensem and 
he shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished  residence throughout his term of 
office and no charge shall fall on the  Vice -Chancellor personally  in respect of the maintenance of 
such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall not be entitled to the benefits of the University Provident Fund : 
Provided that where an employee of — 
(a) the University or College or Institution maintained by , or affiliated to, it; or  
(b) any other University or College or Institution maintained by, or affiliated to,  that 
University,  
is appointed as Vice -Chancellor, he shall be allowed to continue to contribute to  the provident fund to 
which he is a subscriber,  and the contribution of the  University shall be limited to what he had been 
contributing immediately before  his appointment as the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowances at such rates as  may be fixed 
by the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancel lor shall be entitled to leave on full pay for one -eleventh of  the period spent 
by him on active  service.  
(v) The Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled, on medical grounds or otherwise, to  leave without 
pay for a period not exceeding three months during the term of his  office : 
Provided  that such leave may be converted into leave on full pay to the extent to which  he is 
entitled to leave under sub -clause  (iv). 
(5) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or  otherwise or if he 
is unable to perform the duties owing to absence, illness or  any other cause, the senior -most Director shall  
perform the duties of the  Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the existing  
Vice -Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
2. Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  
Chairman of the Court, the Executive  Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee, and 
shall, in the  absence of the Chancellor, preside at the Convocations of the University held  for conferring 
degrees. The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at,  and to address, any meeting of any 
authority or other body of the Uni versity,  but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of 
such authority or body.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes,  the Ordinances and the 
regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all powers necessary to ensure such observance.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened  meetings of the 
Court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the  Finance Committee.  
3. Directors. —(1) (a) The Director  of Studies, Educational Innovations and Rural Reconstruction 
shall  be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the Selection  Committee 
constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried  officer of the University.  
(b) The emoluments and other conditions of ser vice of the Director of Studies,  Educational 
Innovations and Rural Reconstruction shall be such as may be  prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(c) The Director of Studies, Educational Innovations and Rural Reconstruction shal l hold office for a 
term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his  office or until he attains the age of sixty -five 
years, whichever is earlier.  15 
 (d) Subject to the general supervision of the Academic Council, the Director of  Studies, Educatio nal 
Innovation s and Rural Reconstruction shall be responsible  for organising studies, educational innovations 
and academic programmes of the  University.  
(e) The Director of Studies, Educational Innovations and Rural Reconstruction shall  have such 
powers and perform such functions in his field as may be determined or  delegated to him by the 
Academic Council and the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) (a) The Director of Culture and Cultural Relations shall be appointed by the  Executive Council on 
the recommendation of th e Selection Committee constituted  for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(b) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Director of Culture and  Cultural Relations 
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(c) The Director of Culture and Cultural Relations shall hold office for a term of  five years from the 
date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains  the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier.  
(d) Subject to the general  supervision of the Vice -Chancellor, the Director of  Cultu re and Cultural 
Relations shall — 
(i) co-ordinate teaching and research on the Indian culture and its relations with  the cultures of 
other countries;  
(ii) organise  dissemination, through various media, of the cultural treasures in the  field of art, 
literature and music;  
(iii) be responsible for relationship with institutions and agencies of culture of  India and abroad.  
(3) (a) The Director of Physical Education, Spo rts, National Service and Student Welfare  shall be 
appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the  Selection Committee constituted for 
the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(b) The emoluments and other  conditions of service of the Director of Physical  Education, Sports, 
National Service and Student Welfare shall be such as may be  prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(c) The Director of Physical Education, Sports, National Service and Student Welfare  shall hold  
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon  his office or until he attains the age 
of sixty -five years, whichever is  earlier.  
(d) The Director of Physical Education, Sports, National Services and Student  Welfare shall            
co-ordinate the activities of the University in respect of physical  education, sports, national service and 
student welfare and other activities  that involve student participation in community development.  
(e) The Director of Physical Education, Sports, Na tional Service and Student Welfare  shall have such 
other powers and perform such other functions in his field as  may be determined or delegated to him by 
the Executive Council and the  Vice -Chancellor.  
4. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall  be such as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided  that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the ag e of sixty years : 
Provided  further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty  years, continue in 
office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his  office or until the expiry of a period of one 
year, whichever is earlier.  
(3) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason  of illness, absence, 
or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his  office, the duties of the office shall be performed 
by such person as the  Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(4) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of  the employees, 
excluding teachers and academic staff, as may be specified in the  orders of the Executive Council and to 16 
 suspend them pending inquiry, to  administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure or the  withholding of increment : 
Provided  that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given  a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be  taken  in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar  imposing any of 
the penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the powers of the  Registrar is 
called for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry,  make a report to the Vice -Chancellor  
along with his recommendations : 
Provided  that an appeal shall lie  to the Executive Council against an order of the  Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty . 
(5) The Registrar shall be ex offi cio Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic  Council and 
the Boards of Schools, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any  of these authorities. He shall be    
ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(6) It shall be the duty of the Registrar, — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of  the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the  Academic 
Council, the Boards of Schools, the Boards of Studies, the Boards of  Examiners and of any 
committees appointed by the authorities of the University;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Cou ncil, the  Academic 
Council, the Boards of Schools, and of any committees appointed by the  authorities of the University;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council and  the Academic 
Council;  
(e) to arrange for and superin tend the examinations of the University in accordance  with the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the  authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued; and the minutes of  such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the  University, sign      
powers -of-attorney and verify pleadings or depute his  representative for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances  or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Executive  Council or the                  
Vice -Chancel lor. 
5. Finance Officer. —(1) The Finance Officer shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer  shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided  that a Finance Officer shall retire on a ttaining the age of sixty years : 
Provided  further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of  sixty years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon  his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(3) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is,  by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties  of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the  Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(4) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but  shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  17 
 (5) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise  general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise  it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other Financial functions as may be assigned to him by the  Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by  the Statutes or the Ordi nances : 
Provided  that the Finance Officer shall not incur any expenditure or make any investment  exceeding 
ten thousand rupees without the previous approval of the Executive  Council.  
(6) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall— 
(a) hold and manage the properly and investments of the University including trust  and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and  non-recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all m oneys are  expended on the purposes for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the  University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the stat e of the cash and bank balances and on the state  of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of  collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are  maintained up-to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and  other cons umable materials in all offices,  
Special Centres, specialised  laboratories,  Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) call for explanation for unauthorised expend iture and for other financial  irregularities and 
suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office,  Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained  by the 
University , and information or returns that he may consider necessary for  the performance of his 
duties.  
(7) The receipt of the Finance Officer or of the person or persons duly authorised  in this behalf by the 
Executive Council for any money payable to the University  shall be sufficient discharge for payment of 
such money.  
6. Deans of Schools of Studies. —(1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the 
Vice -Chancellor from  among the Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shall be  
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty  years sha ll cease to hold office as such : 
Provided  further that if at any time there is no Professor in a School, the  Vice -Chancellor, or a 
Director authorised by the Vice -Chan cellor in this behalf,  shall exercise the powers of the Dean of the 
School.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness,  absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the  duties of the offic e shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancellor  may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the  conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School.  The Dean shall have such other 
functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the  Boards of Studies 
or committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not  have the right to vo te thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  18 
 7. Heads of Departments. —(1) In the case of Departments which have more than one Professor, the 
Head of the  Department shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of  the    
Vice -Chancellor from among the Professors.  
(2) In the case of Departments where there is only one Professor, the Executive  Council shall have the 
option to appoint, on the recommendation of the  Vice -Chancellor, either the Professor or a Reader as the 
Head of the Departmen t: 
Provided  that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader to decline the offer of  appointment as the Head 
of the Department.  
(3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a  period of three 
years and shall be eligible f or re-appointment.  
(4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of  office.  
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
8. Proctors. —(1) Every Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation  
of the Vice -Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as  may be assigned to him 
by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) Every Pro ctor shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible  for re -appointment.  
9. Librarian. —(1) Every Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  
recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he  shall be a whole -time 
officer of the University.  
(2) Every Librarian shal l exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be  assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  
10. Meetings of the Court. —(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed 
by the  Executive Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect  of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the wo rking of  the University  during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipts and  expenditure, the balance -sheet, as audited, and the 
financia l estimates for the  next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expend iture, the balance -sheet and the  financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of  the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Twelve members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
(5) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the  Vice -Chancellor, 
or, if there is no Vice -Chancellor, by the senior -most Director , or if there is no Director, by the  Registrar.  
11. Quorum for mee tings of the Executive Council. —Five members of the Executive Council shall 
form a quorum for a meeting of the  Executive Council.  
12. Powers and functions of the Executive Council.—(1) The Executive Council shall have the 
management and administration of the  revenue and property of the University and the conduct of all 
administrative  affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinance, the  Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the  following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of  such posts 
and define the duties and conditions of service of Professors,  Readers, Lecturers and other academic 
staff and Principals of Colleges and  Institutio ns maintained by the University : 
Provided  that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the numb er, 
qualifications and the emoluments of teachers and academic staff otherwise than  after consideration 
of the recommendations of the Academic Council;  19 
 (ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may  be necessary, 
and P rincipals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the  University on the recommendation of 
the Selection Committee constituted for the  purpose and to fill up temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary pos ts and to make  appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University, other than the  Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the  discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the  Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business  and all other 
admin istrative affairs of the University, and for that purpose, to  appoint such agents as it may think 
fit; 
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for  a year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income,  in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities as it shall, from time to time, think  fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of  varying such inves tments from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf  of the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus  and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances of  the employees 
and students of the University, who may, for any reason feel  aggrieve d; 
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to  fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting  the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use  of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence and  discipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Directors, the  Registrar or the 
Finance Officer  or such other employee or authority of the  University or to a committee appointed by 
it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; and  
(xviii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred  or 
imposed on it by the Act, or the Statutes.  
13. Quorum for me etings of the Academic Council. —Nine  members of the Academic Council 
shall form a quorum for a meeting of the  Academic Council.  
14. Powers of the Academic Council. —Subject  to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the 
Academic Council shall, in  addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e the following powers, 
namely:— 
(a) to exercise general supervision ove r the academic policies of the University and  to give 
directions regarding methods of instructions, co -operative teaching  among Colleges and Institutions, 
evaluation of research or improvements in  academic standards;  20 
 (b) to bring about inter -School co -ordination, to establish or appoint committees or  boards, for 
taking up projects on an inter -school basis;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or  on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council and to take appropriate  action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the  Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline,  residences, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees concessions,  corporate life and attendance.  
15. The Planning Board. —(1) The Planning Board shall consist o f the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) all Directors;  
(c) two nominees of the Chancellor;  
(d) five members of the Academic Council nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(e) two officers of the University nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the Chairman of the Planning Board and the Director  of Studies, 
Educational Innovations  and Rural Reconstruction shall act as the  Secretary to the Planning Board and he 
shall convene the meetings of the  Planning Board after consultation with the Vice -Chancellor.  
(3) The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the University an d shall be 
responsible for — 
(a) reviewing the educational programmes offered by the University;  
(b) organising the structure of education in the University so as to provide  opportunities to 
students to offer different combinations of subjects  appropriate f or the development of personality 
and skills for useful work in  society;  
(c) creating an atmosphere and environment conducive to value oriented education;  and 
(d) developing new teaching -learning processes which will combine the lectures,  tutorials, 
seminars, demonstrations, self -studies and collective practical  projects.  
(4) The Planning Board shall have the power to advise on the development of the  University and 
review the progress of implementation of programmes so as to  ascertain whether they are  on the lines 
recommended by it and shall also have  the power to advise the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council on any matter  in connection therewith.  
(5) The Academic Council and the Executive Council shall be bound t o consider the 
recommendations made by the Planning Board and shall implement such of the  recommendations as are 
accepted by it.  
(6) Such of those recommendations of the Planning Board as have not been accepted by  the Executive 
Council or the Academic Council under sub -section ( 6) shall  be submitted by the Vice -Chancellor, along 
with the recommendations of the  Executive Council or the Academic Council, to the Visitor for advice 
and the  advice of the Visitor shall be implemented by the Executive Council or the  Academic Council, as 
the cas e may be.  
16. Scho ols of studies and Departments. —(1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as 
may be specified by the  Ordinances.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board. The members of the first School Board  shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and shall hold office for a period  of three years.  
(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such  meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  21 
 (5) (a) Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the  Ordinances.  
(b) No Department shall be established or a bolished except by the Statutes : 
Provided  that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council,  establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the  University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
(c) Each Department shall consist o f the following members, namely: — 
(i) teachers  of the Department;  
(ii) persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School or Deans of the Schools;  
(iv) honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the  provisions of 
the Ordinances.  
17. Boards of Studies. —(1) Each Department shall have two Boards of Studies, one for              
Post-graduate Studies  and the other for Under -graduate  Studies.  
(2) The constitution of a Board of Post -Graduate Studies and the term of office of  its members shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) The functions of a Board of Post -graduate Studies shall be to approve subjects  for research for 
various degr ees and other requirements of research degrees and  to recommend to the concerned School 
Board in the manner prescribed by the  Ordinances: — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for post -graduate courses, but  excluding 
research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of pos t-graduate teaching and  research : 
Provided  that the above functions of a Board of Post -graduate Studies shall, during the  period of three 
years immediately a fter the commencement of the Act, be  performed by the Department.  
(4) The constitution and functions of a Board of Under -graduate Studies and the term  of office of its 
members shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
18. Finance Committee. —(1) The Finance Committee shall consist o f the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) A Director appointed by the Executive Council;  
(iii) Three persons nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall  be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(iv) Three persons nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the  Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall  hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of  dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice every year to examine t he accounts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  22 
 (6) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by  the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration  and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(7) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure  and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and  resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include  the proceeds of loans).  
19. Selection Committees. —(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendation s 
to the Executive  Council for appointment to the posts of Director, Professor, Reader, Lecturer,  Librarian 
and Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the  University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of  the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a Director (if any)  appointed by the  Executive Council, a nominee of 
the Visitor and the persons  specified in the corresponding entr y in column 2 of the said Table : 
 
TABLE  
 
1 2 
Director  Not less than three eminent persons, not in the service of the University or 
members of the Executive Council or Academic Council to be 
nominated by the Executive Council out of the panel of not less than 
six names recommended by the Academic Council for t heir s pecial 
knowledge of, or interest in, the subjects with which the Director to 
be appointed will be concerned.  
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned, if he is a Professor.  
(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the 
Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the 
subject with which the Professor will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The H ead of the Department concerned.  
(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the 
Executive Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the 
subject with which the  Reader or Lecturer will be concerned.  
Libra rian (i) Two persons not in the service of the University, who have special 
knowledge of the subject of Library Science/ Library Administration 
to be nominated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) One person not in  the service of the University, nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
Principal of College or 
Institution maintained by 
the University  Three persons not in the service of  the University of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Academic 
Council for their special knowledge of, or interest in , a subject in 
which instruction is being provided by the College or Institution.  
NOTE  1.—Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the  Head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  23 
 NOTE 2.—The Professor to be nominated shall be a Professor concerned with the  speciality for which 
the selectio n is being made and that the Vice -Chancellor  shall consult the Head of the Department and the 
Dean of School before  nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, the senior -most Director, shall preside  at the meetings of a 
Selection  Committee.  
(4) The meetings of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor  or in his 
absence, by the senior -most Director.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations  shall be laid 
down in the Ord inances.  
(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by a  Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the  Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be mad e in the manner in dicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy i s for a duration longer than one  academic session, it  shall be filled 
on the advice of the  Selection Committee in accordance with the  procedure ind icated in the foregoing 
clauses : 
Provided  that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that  in the interests of work it is  necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary  basis by a local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause  (ii) for a period not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to  such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee  consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the V ice-Chancellor : 
Provided  that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the  Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two  nominees of the Vice -Chancellor : 
Provided  further that in case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by  death or any 
other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the  Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the  Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appoin ted temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular  Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service  on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local  Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or  permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
20. Special mode of appointment. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 19, the 
Executive Council may  invite a person of high academic distinction and professiona l attainments to  
accept a post of Professor or Reader or any other academic post in the  University, as the case may be, on 
such terms and conditions as it deems fit,  and on the person agreeing to do so, appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Council ma y appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working  in any other 
university or organisation for undertaking a joint project in  accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
21. Appointment for a fixed tenure. —The Executive Council may appoint  a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure  laid down in Statute 19 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.  
22. Recognised teachers. —(1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by  the Or dinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as  may be laid down 
in the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a  selection 
committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the  Ordinances.  24 
 (4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by Ordinances made in  that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not  less than         
two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw recognition  from a teacher : 
Provided  that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given  to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may  be specified  in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until  his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them, have  been considered by the Academic Council.  
(6) Any person aggri eved by an order of withdrawal u nder clause ( 5) may, within  three months from 
the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the  Executive Council which may pass such 
orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
23. Committees. —Any authority of the University may appoint as ma ny standing or special 
committees as  it may deem fit,  and may appoint to such committees persons who are not members  of such 
authority. Any such committee may deal with any subject delegated to it  subject to subsequent 
confirmation by the authority appointing.  
24. Terms and cond itions of service of University teachers. —(1) All the teachers of the University 
shall, in the absence of any agreement to the  contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service 
as specified in the  Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher of the University shall be appointed on a written contract, the  form of which shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances. A copy of the contract  shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
25. Seniority lists. —(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Sta tutes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority,  such seniority shall be 
determined according to the length of continuous service  of such person in his grade, and, in accordance 
with such other principles as  the Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect of  each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of the Statutes apply, a complete  and up-to-date seniority list in accordance with the 
provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular  grade or the relative 
seniority o f any person or persons is otherwise in doubt,  the Registrar may,  on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such  person, submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall  
be final.  
26. Removal of te achers.—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, or a 
member of the  academic staff, the Vice -Chancellor may, if he thinks fit, by order in writing,  place the 
teacher under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive  Council the circumstan ces in which 
the order was made : 
Provided  that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion , that the circumstances  of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the  academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of his contract of service or of  his appointm ent, 
the Executive Council shall be entitled to remove a teacher or  a member of the academic staff on the 
ground of misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council shall not be entitled to remove a  teacher or a member of 
the academic staff except for good cause and after giving  three months’  notice in writing or on payment 
of three months ’ salary in lieu of  notice.  
(4) No teacher or a member of the academic staff shall be removed under clause ( 2) or under      
clause ( 3) until he has been given a r easonable opportunity of showing  cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher or a member of the academic staff shall require a  two-thirds majority of 
the members of the Executive Council present and voting.  25 
 (6) The removal of a teacher or a member of the academic staff shall take effect  from the date on 
which the order of removal is made : 
Provided  that where a teacher or a member of the academic staff is under suspension at  the time of his 
removal, the removal shall take effect from the date on which he  was placed under suspension.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a teacher or a member of the  academic staff 
may resign by giving th ree months’  notice in writing to the  Executive Counc il or on payment to  the 
University of three months’  salary in  lieu thereof.  
27. Removal of employees other t han teachers of the University. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the terms of his contract of service or of  his appointment, an employee, other than a teacher 
or a member of the academic  staff, may be removed by the authority which is competent to appoint the  
employee — 
(a) if he is of unsound mind or is a deaf -mute or suffers from contagious leprosy;  
(b) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(c) if he has been convicted by a c ourt of law of any offence involving moral  turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six  months;  
(d) if he is  otherwise guilty of misconduct : 
Provided that no employee shall be  removed from his office unless a resolution to that effect is passed 
by the  Executive Council by a majority of two -thirds of its members present and voting.  
(2) No employee shall be removed under clause ( 1) until he has been given a  reasonable opportunity 
of showi ng cause against the action proposed to be taken  in regard to him.  
(3) Where the removal of such employee is for a reason other than that specified in  sub-clause ( c) or 
sub-clause ( d) of clause ( 1), he shall be given thr ee months’ notice in writing or paid  three months’  salary 
in lieu of such notice.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, an employee, not being a  teacher or a member 
of the academic staff , shall be entitled to resign, — 
(i) if he is a permanent employee,  only after giving three months’  notice in writing  to the 
appointing authority or payin g to the University three month’  salary in  lieu thereof;  
(ii) if he is not a permanent employ ee, only after giving one month’ s notice in  writing to the 
appointing author ity or pay ing to the University one month s’ salary in lieu thereof : 
Provided  that such resignation shall take effect from the date on which the resignation  is accepted by 
the appointing authority.  
28. Honorary degrees. —(1) The Executive Council may, on the  recommendation of the Academic 
Council and by  a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members  present and 
voting, make proposals to the Visitor for th e conferment of honorary degrees : 
Provided  that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own, make such  proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than  two-thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous  sanction of the Visitor, any honorary deg ree 
conferred by the University.  
29. Withdrawal of degrees, etc. —The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less  than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or  academic 
distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any  person by the Universit y for good 
and sufficient cause : 
Provided  that n o such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given  to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be  specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his  objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have  been considered by the Executive Council.  26 
 30. Maintenance of discipline among stude nts of the Univer sity.—(1) All powers relating to 
discipline and disciplinary action in relation to  students of the University shall vest in the                   
Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to  a Proctor and to 
such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of  discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the  maintenance of d iscipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in the exercise of his  powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled, or  rusticated, 
for a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of  study in a College, Institution or 
Department of the University for a stated  period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be specified in 
the order, or  be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the  University, 
College, Institution or a Department for one or more years, o r that  the results of the student or students 
concerned in the examination or  examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Heads of Special Centres, Deans of  Schools of Studies 
and Heads of teac hing Departments in the University shall  have the authority to exercise all such 
disciplinary powers over the students in  their respective Colleges, Institutions, Special Centres, Schools 
and teaching  Departments in the University as may be necessary for the proper conduct of such  Colleges, 
Institutions Special Centres, Schools and teaching in the Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Principals and other  persons specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline a nd proper conduct  shall be made by the University. The 
Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Heads  of Special Centres, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of 
teaching  Departments in the University may also make the supplementary rules as they deem  necess ary 
for the aforesaid purposes. Every student shall be supplied With a  copy of the rules made by the 
University and a copy of the supplementary rules  shall be supplied to the students concerned.  
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required  to sign a declaration  to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the  Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University.  
31. Maintenance of discipline a mong students of Colleges, etc. —All powers relating to discipline 
and disciplinary action in relation to students of  a College or an Institution, not maintained by the 
University, shall vest in the  Principal of the College or Institution, as the case may be, in accordance with  
the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.  
32. Adm ission of Colleges,  etc., to th e privileges of the University. —(1) Colleges and other 
Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the  University may be admitted to such privileges of the 
University as the Executive  Council may decide on t he fol lowing conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every such College or Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing  Body, 
consisting of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive  Council and including among 
others, two teachers of the University to  be nominated by the Executive Council and three 
representatives of the teaching  staff of who m the Principal of the College o r Institution shall be one. 
The procedure for appointment of members of the Governing Body and other matters  affecting the 
manageme nt of a College or an Institution shall  be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided  that the said condition shall not apply in the case of Colleges and Institutions  
maintained by Government which shall, however have an Advisory Committee  consisting of not 
more than fifteen persons which shall consist of, among  others, three teachers including the Principal 
of the College or Institution,  and two teachers of the University nominated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) Every such College or Institution shall satisfy the Executive Council on the  following matters, 
namely :— 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of  their service;  
(c) the arrangements f or the residence, welfare, discipline and supervision of  students;  27 
 (d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of the  College or 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the standards of  University 
education.  
(iii) No College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University  except on the 
recommendation of the Academic Council made after considering the  report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by th e Academic  Council.  
(iv) Colleges and Institutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the  University shall be 
required to intimate their intention to do so in writing so  as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year  from which permission applied for is to have effect.  
(v) A College or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of the  Executive 
Council and the Academic Council, suspend instruction in any subject  or course of study which it is 
authorised  to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the teaching staff and Principals of Colleges or Institutions  admitted to the 
privileges of the University shall be made in the man ner prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided  that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions maintained  by 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of  every College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be  laid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to  Colleges and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the University shall  be inspected at least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appoint ed by the Academic Council, and the repo rt of 
that Committed shall be submitted to  the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the 
Executive Council with  such recommendations as it may deem fit to make. The Executive Council, after  
considering th e report and the recommendations, if any, of the Academic Council, shall forward a copy of 
the report to the Governing Body of the College or  Institution with such remarks, if any, as it may deem 
fit, for suitable action.  
(5) The Executive Council may, after consulting the Academic Council, withdraw any  privileges 
granted to a College or Institution, at any time it considers that  the College or Institution does not  satisfy 
any of the conditions on the  fulfilment of which the College or Institution was ad mitted to such 
privileges : 
Provided  that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the College  or 
Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the  Executive Council why such action 
should not be taken.  
(6) Subject  to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as may be considered necessary;  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of Colleges and Institutions to the privileges  of the University 
and for the withdrawal  of those privileges.  
33. Convocations. —Convocations  of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other 
purposes shall be  held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
34. Acting Chairman of meetings. —Where  no provision is made for a President or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of  any authority of the University or any committee of such authority or when the  
President or Chairman so provided for is absent , the members present shall elect  one from among 
themselves to preside at suc h meeting.  
  28 
 35. Resignation. —Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the  Academic Council or any other authority of the University or any committee of  such 
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the  resignation shall take effect as soon as 
such letter is received by the  Registrar.  
36. Disqualifications. —(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a 
member of any  of the author ities of the University — 
(a) if he is of unsound mind or is a deaf -mute or suffers from contagious leprosy;  
(b) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(c) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral  turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for  not less than six  months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of  the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred  for the decision of the Visitor and 
his decision shall be final and no  suit or  other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
37. Residence condi tion for membership and office. —Notwithstanding  anything contained in the 
Statutes, no person who is not ordinarily resident in  India shall be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any  authority of the University.  
38. Membership , of authorities by virtue  of membership of other bodies. —Notwithstanding  
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any po st in the  University or is a member of any 
authority or body of the University in his  capacity as a member of a particular authority or body or as the 
holder of a  particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as  he continues 
to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder  of that particular appointment, as the 
case may be.  
39. Alumni Association. —(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by  the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for  election unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year  prior to the date of the election and is a gradu ate of 
the University of at least five years’  standing : 
Provided  that the condition relatin g to the completion of one year’ s membership shall not  apply in the 
case of the first election.  
40. Students ’ Council.—(1) There shall be constitute d in the University, a Students’  Council for 
every academic year , consisting of: — 
(a) the Director of Physical Education, Sports , National Service and Students’ Welfare who shall 
be the Chairman of the Students’  Council;  
(b) all students who  have won prizes in the previous academic year in the fields of  studies, fine 
arts, sports and extension work;  
(c) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in  studies, 
sports, extra -curricular activities and all -round d evelopment of personality : 
Provided  that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter  concerning 
the University before the Students’  Council if so permitted by the  Chairman, and he shall have the 
right to participate in the discussions at any  meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students’  Council shall be to make suggestions to the  appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of  studies, students’  welfare and  other matters of 
importance in regard to the  working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  29 
 (3) The Students’  Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in  the beginning of 
that year.  
41. Ordinances how made. —(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 27 may 
be amended,  repealed or added to at one time by the Executive Council in the manner  specified below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in section 27, other than  those enumerated in 
clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the  Executive Council unless a draft of such 
Ordinance has been proposed by the  Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have pow er to amend any draft of any Ordinance  proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal  or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in  whole or in part, together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may  suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance  proposed by the 
Academic Council, he Academic Council may consider the question  afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a major ity of not less  than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total  number of members of the Academic Council, he draft may be sent back to the  Executive 
Council which shall either adopt if or refer it to the Visitor whose  decisi on shall be final. 
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect  immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor  within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power  to direct the University within four 
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to  suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as 
soon as possible,  inform the Executive Council about his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The  
Visitor may, after rece iving the comments of the University, either withdraw the  order suspending the 
Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall  be final.  
42. Regulations. —(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, and the Statutes and the Ordinances: — 
(a) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of  members 
required to form a quorum;  
(b) providing for all mat ters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(c) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees  appointed by 
them and not provided  for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations provi ding for the giving  of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the  business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the  proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify,  of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such  Regulation.  
43. Delegation of powers. —Subject  to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes , any officer or 
authority of the  University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or  person under 
his or its respective control and subject to the condition that  overall responsibility for the exercise of the 
powers so delegated shall  continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
 
--------------------------The Tea Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Sick Tea Units) Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE TEA COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF SICK TEA UNITS)         
ACT, 1985                                                                                                                                         
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                             
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE SICK TEA UNITS OF  THE TEA COMPANIES  
3. Acquisition of rights of tea companies in respect of sick tea units.  
4. General effect of vesting . 
5. Tea companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities . 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
6. Payment of amount.  
7. Payment of further  amount . 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE SICK TEA UNITS OF THE TEA COMPANIES  
8. Management, etc., of the sick tea units of the tea companies.  
9. Duty of persons in charge of management of the sick tea units to deliver all assets, etc.  
10. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TEA COMPANIES  
11. Continuance of employees.  
12. Provident fund and other funds.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
13. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
14. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
15. Certain powers of the Tea Trading Corporation.  
16. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
17. Priority of claims.  
18. Examination of claims.  
19. Admission or rejection of claims.  
20. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner.  2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Disbursement of amounts to the tea companies.  
22. Undisbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited with the general revenue account.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Act to have overriding effect.  
24. Assumption of liability.  
25. Management to continue to vest in certain persons until alternative arrangements have been 
made.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Tea Trading Corporation.  
27. Penalties.  
28. Offences by companies.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Tea companies not to be wound up by the court.  
31. Delegation of powers.  
32. Power to make rules.  
33. Power to remove difficulties.  
34. Repeal and saving.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE TEA C OMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF SICK TEA UNITS)         
ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1985  
 [28th May,  1985.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the sick tea units specified in the First 
Schedule and the right, title and interest of the tea companies in respect of the said tea units 
with a view to securing proper reorganisation and management of  such tea units so as to 
subserve the interests of the general public by augmenting the production and manufacture of 
different varieties of tea which are essential to the needs of the economy of the country and 
for matters connected therewith or incidenta l thereto.  
WHEREAS  the sick tea units specified in the First Schedule had been engaged in the production and 
manufacture  of different varieties of tea;  
AND WHEREAS the management of the said tea units was taken over by the Central Government under 
the Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953);  
AND WHEREAS the Central Government had invested large sums of money with a view to ma king the 
said tea units viable;  
AND WHEREAS further investment of large sums of money is necessary for reorganising and 
rehabilitating the said tea  units;  
AND WHEREAS the acquisition by the Central Government of the said tea units is necessary to enable 
it to invest such large sums of money and to protect the large investments already made and also the 
interests of the workmen employed therein by pro per reorganisation and management of the said tea units 
and thereby to augment the production and manufacture of different varieties of tea which  are essential to 
the needs  of the economy of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :—  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Tea Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer o f Sick Tea Units) Act, 1985.  
(2) It sha ll be deemed to have come into force  on the 8th day of April, 1985.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date of commencement of this Act;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 13;  
(c) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “sick tea unit ” means a tea unit, specified in column ( 2) of the First Schedule, the management 
of which had, before the appointed day, been taken over by the Central Government under the Tea 
Act, 1953 (29 of 1953);  
(f) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision of t his Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of that provision and different dates may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(g) “tea companies ” means the companies (being companies as defin ed in the C ompanies        
Act, 1956 [ 1 of 1956 ]) specified in column ( 3) of the First Schedule;  4 
 (h) “Tea Trading Corporation ” means the Tea Trading Corporation of India Limited, a company 
incorporated and registere d under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Tea Act,                    
1953 (29 of 1953), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act;  
(j) words and expressions used herein and not defined either in this Ac t or in the Tea Act,       
1953 (29 of 1953), but defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to t hem in the Companies Act, 1956.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE SICK  TEA UNITS OF THE TEA COMPANIE S 
3. Acquisition of rights of tea companie s in respect of sick tea units. —(1) On the appointed day, 
every sick tea unit and the right, title and interest of every tea company in relation to its sick tea units or, 
as the case may be, sick tea unit shall, by  virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and v est in, the Central 
Government.  
(2) Every sick tea unit which stands vested in the Central Government by virtue of sub -section ( 1) 
shall, immediately after it has so vested, stand transferred to, and vested i n, the Tea Trading Corporation.  
4. General effect of vesting. —(1) Every sick tea unit shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, 
lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, including lands, 
buildings, worksh ops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve 
funds, investments, book debts and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as 
were, immediately before the appointed day, in the ownership, possession, power or control of the tea 
company concerned, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other 
documents of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include the liabilities specified 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 24.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Tea Trading Corporation under                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, 
obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all other incumbrances affecting them and any attachment, 
injunction, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority restricting the use of such properties in 
any manner or appointing any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such properties shall be 
deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Tea Trading Corporation 
and every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shall 
give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of 
such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property refer red to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole  or in part, out of the amounts directed to be given under sections 6 and 7 to 
the tea company concerned but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable 
against any property which has vested in the Tea Trading Corporation.  
(5) Any  licence or other instrument granted to a tea company in relation to its sick tea unit which has 
vested in the Tea Trading Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 at any time before the appointed 
day and in force immediately before that day shall co ntinue to be in force on and after such day in 
accordance with its tenor in relation to and for the purposes of such sick tea unit, and that Corporation 
shall be deemed to be substituted in such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instr ument 
had been granted to such Corporation and such Corporation shall hold it for the remainder of the period 
for which the tea company would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatev er nature, in relation to any 
matter specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 24, in respect of the sick tea unit of any tea company which 
has vested in the Tea  Trading Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, instituted or preferred by or 5 
 against th at company, is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be , in any way, 
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the sick tea unit of such tea company or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding ma y be continued, prosecuted or enforced 
by or against the Tea Trading Corporation.  
5. Tea companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities. —Subject to the other provisions of this 
Act, every liability, other than the liability specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 24, of a tea company in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of that company and shall be 
enforceable against it and not against the Tea Trading Corporation.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
6. Payment of amount.—Every tea company shall be given, by the Central Government, for the 
transfer to and vesting in that Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the sick tea unit or, as the 
case may be, each sick tea unit of that company and the right, title and interest of that company in relation 
to such sick tea unit, in cash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, such amount as is specified 
against the name of that sick tea unit in column ( 4) of the First Schedule.  
7. Payment of further amount. —(1) Eve ry tea company shall be given, by the Central Government, 
per annum, for the deprivation of the management of its sick tea unit, an amount as is specified against 
the name of that sick tea unit in column ( 5) of the First Schedule, for the period commencing  on the date 
on which the management of such sick tea unit was taken over in pursuance of the order made by the 
Central Government under the provisions of the Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953) and ending on the appointed 
day. 
(2) Every amount specified in columns  (4) and ( 5) of the First Schedule shall carry simple interest at 
the rate of four per cent. per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the 
date on which the payment of such amount is made by the Central Government to the Commis sioner.  
(3) The amounts determined in relation to any tea company in accordance with the provisions of   
sub-section ( 2) shall be given by the Central Government to the tea company in addition to the amounts 
specified in columns ( 4) and ( 5) of the First Sc hedule against that company.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE SICK TEA UNITS OF THE TEA COMPANIES  
8. Management, etc., of the sick tea units of the tea companies. —The Tea Trading Corporation or 
any person which that Corporation may, by order in writing, specify, shall be entitled to exercise the 
powers of general superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and business of a 
sick tea unit, the right, title and interest of the tea company in relation to which have vested in th e 
Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, and do all such things as the tea company of the sick tea 
unit is authorised to exercise and do.  
9. Duty of persons in charge of management of the sick tea units to deliver all assets,           
etc.—(1) On the vesting of the management of the sick tea units of the tea companies in the Tea Trading 
Corporation, the persons in charge of the management of such sick tea units immediately before such 
vesting shall be bound to deliver to the Tea Trading Corporatio n all assets, books of account, registers and 
all other documents in their custody relating to such sick tea units.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Tea Trading Corporatio n and the said Corporation may also, if it is considered necessary 
so to do, apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the 
management of the sick tea units of the tea companies shall be conducted or in relation to any other 
matter arising in the course of such management.  
10. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession. —(1) Any person who has, on 
the appointed day, in his possession or under his control any assets, books, documents or other papers 
relating to any sick tea unit owned by a tea company which has vested in the Tea Trading Corporation 
under this Act shall be lia ble to account for the said assets, books, documents and other papers to the Tea 6 
 Trading Corporation and shall deliver them up to that Corporation or to such person or persons as that 
Corporation may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Tea Trading Corporation may take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for securing 
possession of the sick tea units of the tea companies which have vested in that Corporation under this Act.  
(3) Every tea company shall, within such period as the Tea Trading Corporation may al low in this 
behalf, furnish to that Corporation a complete inventory of all property and assets, as on the appointed 
day pertaining to its sick tea unit, which have vested in that Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of           
section 3, and for this purpo se, the Corporation shall afford to such company all reasonable facilities.  
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TEA COMPANIES  
 11. Continuance of employees. —(1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed in any sick tea unit of any of the tea companies shall become, on and from the appointed 
day, an employee of the Tea Trading Corporation and shall hold office or service under that Corporation, 
with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other  matters as would have been 
admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment under that Corporation is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of 
service are duly altered  by that Corporation.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947),  or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any sick tea unit of an y tea company, to the Tea Trading Corporation, shall not entitle such officer or 
other employee to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority . 
 12. Provident fund and other funds. —(1) Where a tea company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or other funds for the benefit of persons employed in a sick tea unit 
owned by it, the monies relatable to its employees whos e services have become transferred by or under 
this Act to the Tea Trading Corporation shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, to the 
credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare fund or other funds, stand transferred to, an d 
vest in, the Tea Trading Corporation.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Tea Trading  Corporation, shall be 
dealt with by that Corporation in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
 13. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments. —(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable under sections 6 and 7 to the tea companies, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government m ay appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that  person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of  the Consolidated Fund of India.  
  7 
 14. Payment by the Central Governmen t to the Commissioner. —(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay in cash to the Commissioner, for payment to every 
tea company, — 
(a) an amount equal to the amounts or amount specified against the name of that company in 
column ( 4) of the First Schedule; and  
(b) a further amount equal to the amounts or amount specified against the name of that company 
in column ( 5) of the First Schedule.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and th e said deposit account shall be o perated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of each of the tea companies 
in relation to which payment has been made to him under this Act.  
(4) Interest accruing on th e amount in relation to a tea company standing to the credit of the depo sit 
account referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall enure to t he benefit of such tea company.  
15. Certain powers of the Tea Trading Corporation. —(1) The Tea Trading Corporation shall be 
entitled to receive, up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due to any tea 
company in relation to its sick tea unit which has vested in the Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 3, and realised after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period 
prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Tea Trading Corporation may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every 
payment made by that Corporation, after the appointed day, for discharging any liability of a tea 
company, not being any liability specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 24, in relation to any sick tea unit 
owned by it in respect of any period prior to the appointed day; and every such claim shall have priority, 
in accordance wi th the priorities attaching under this Act to the matter in relation to which such liability 
has been discharged by the Tea Trading Corporation.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of a tea company in relation to any sick tea 
unit o wned by it in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged 
on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities of that company.  
16. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. —1[(1)] Every person having a claim against a tea 
company with regard to any of the matters specified in the Second Schedule, pertaining to any sick tea 
unit owned by it, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified 
date:  
Provided that if the Commissi oner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
2[(2) Notwithstanding anything con tained in sub -section ( 1), all the claims preferred before the 
Commissioner after the period or the further period specified in that sub -section but on or before the 27th 
day of July, 1989, shall be deemed to have been validly preferred.]  
17. Priority of c laims.—The claims made under section 16 shall have priorities in accordance with 
the following principles, namely: — 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and so on;  
                                                           
1. Section 16 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 56 of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -12-1991).  
2. Ins .by s. 2,  ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -12-1991).  8 
 (b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but if the 
amount paid to the Commissioner under this Act is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall 
abate in equal proportions and be paid accordingly; and  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in t he immediately higher 
category.  
18. Examination of claims. —(1) On receip t of the claims made under section 16, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Second Schedule and examine the same 
in accordance with such order.  
(2) If on an examination of the claims against a tea company, t he Commissioner is of the opinion that 
the amount paid to him under this Act for payment to such company is not sufficient to meet the liabilities 
specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to examine any claim in respect of such lower 
categ ory. 
19. Admission or rejection of claims. —(1) After examining the claims against a tea company, with 
reference to the priorities set out in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before 
which every claimant against the tea company sh all file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days’  notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major parts of the country 
and one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commissioner may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every cla imant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the period specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the tea company concerned an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject  the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power  to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and pr oduction of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavit;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 19 74). 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against such decision to the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office 
of the tea company concerned is situated and ever y such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less 
than two Judges of that High Court.  
20. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner. —After admitting a claim against a tea company 
under this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person 
or persons to whom such amount is due and on such payment, the liability of such tea company in respect 
of such claim shall stand discharged.  9 
 21. Disbursement of amounts to the tea companies. —(1) If out of the monies paid to him in 
relation to a tea company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the Second 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to such tea company.  
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other property possessed by a tea company 
has vested in the Tea Trading Corporation under this Act but such machinery, equipment or other 
property does not belong to such tea company, it shall be lawful for that Corporation to continue to 
possess such machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which 
they were possessed by such tea company immediately before the appointed day.  
22. Undisbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited wi th the general revenue account. —Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wound up, to the gener al revenue account of the Central 
Government, but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order, if any, fo r payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Act to have overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law  for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
24. Assumption of liability. —(1) Where any liability of a tea company arising ou t of any item 
specified in Category I of the Second Schedule is not discharged fully by the Commissioner out of the 
amounts paid to him under this Act, the Commissioner shall intimate in writing to the Central 
Government the extent of the liability which r emains undischarged and that liability shall be assumed by 
the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct the Tea Trading Corporation to take over the 
liability assumed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), and on receipt of such direction, it 
shall be the duty of that Corporation to discharge such liability.  
25. Management to continue to vest in certain persons until alternative arrangements have been  
made.—Notwithstanding the vesting under this Act of a sick tea unit of any tea company in the Tea 
Trading Corporation — 
(a) any person who has been managing the affairs of such sick tea unit before the date on which 
that unit had so vested shall, until alternative arrangements have been made by the Tea Trading  
Corporation for the management of such unit, continue to manage the affairs of the unit, as if such 
person had been authorised by the Tea Trading Corporation, to manage such unit;  
(b) such person shall, until alternative arrangements have been made by the  Tea Trading 
Corporation, continue to be authorised to operate, in relation to the sick tea unit of such tea company, 
any account of such unit in any bank as if he had been authorised by the Tea Trading Corpo ration to 
operate such account.  
26. C ontracts to  cease to have effect unless ratified by the Tea Trading Corporation. —Every 
contract entered into by any tea company in relation to any sick tea unit owned by it which has vested in 
the Tea Trading Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, for any se rvice, sale or supply and in 
force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period of one hundred and 
eighty days from the appointed day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of that 
period, ratifi ed in writing by the Tea Trading Corporation, and in ratifying such contract, the Tea Trading 
Corporation may make such alterations or modifications therein as it may think fit:  
  10 
 Provided that the Tea Trading Corporation shall not omit to ratify a contrac t and shall not make any 
alteration or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Tea Trading Corporation; and  
(b) except  after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
27. Penalties. —Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of a sick tea unit owned 
by any tea company wrongfully withholds such property from the Tea Trading Corporation; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains any property formin g part of, a sick tea unit 
owned by any tea company; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Tea Trading Corporation or any person or body of 
persons specified by that Corporation, any document or inventory relating to a sick tea unit owned by  
any tea company, which may be in his posses sion, custody or control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Tea Trading Corporation or any person or body of persons specified by 
that Corporation, any assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his p ossession, custody 
or control relating to a sick tea unit owned by any tea company; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of a sick tea unit owned by any tea 
company or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reason  to believe to be false or 
grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
28. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence punishable under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or th at he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committe d with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer  of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer  shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individ uals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Protection  of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Tea Trading 
Corporation or other person authorised by that Government or Corporation for anything which is in good 
faith done  or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any of its officers or 
other employees or the Tea Trading Corporation or any officer or other person authorised  by that 
Corporation for any damage caused or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to b e done under this Act.  11 
 30. Tea companies not to be wound up by the court. —No proceeding for the winding up of a tea 
company, the righ t, title and interest in relation to a sick tea unit owned by which have vested in the Tea 
Trading Corporation under this Act or for the appointment of a receiver in respect of the business of the 
sick tea unit shall lie or be proceeded with in any court e xcept with the con sent of the Central 
Government.  
31. Delegation of powers. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section and   
sectio ns 32 and 33, may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, contr ol and supervision of the Central Government.  
32. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the manner in which the monies in any providen t fund or other fund, referred to in              
sub-section ( 2) of section 12, shall be dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon a s may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately followin g the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done 
under that rule.  
33. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
34. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Tea Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Sick Tea Units) 
Ordinance, 1985 (3 of 1985), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the cor respon ding provisions of this Act.  
 12 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2 (e) and ( g), 6, 7 and 14 (1)] 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the sick tea unit  Name of the tea company  Amount 
(Rupees 
in lakhs)  Further 
amount 
(Rupees)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1. Pashok Tea Estate  Messrs Pashok Tea Company Limited,                
10, Pollock Street, Calcutta.  26.03  7,640  
2. Looksan Tea Estate  Messrs Pashok Tea Company Limited,      
10, Pollock Street, Calcutta.  100.15  9,340  
3. Vah-Tukvar Tea Estate  Messrs Sashi  Tara Tea Company Private 
Limited, Darjeeling.  25.82  4,940  
4. Potong Tea Estate  Messrs Moon Moon Tea Company (Private) 
Limited, 5, Clive Raw, Calcutta.  16.35  3,460  
_______ __ 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 16, 18 (1), 19(1), 21(1) and 24 (1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES  
 
Category I — 
Employees’ dues on account of unpaid salaries, wages, provident fund, Employees’ State Insurance 
contribution or premium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India and any other amounts due to 
employees in respect of any period whether before or after the management of the sick tea units had been 
taken over by the Central Government.  
Category II — 
Land  revenue,  taxes, cesses, rural employment cess, electricity duty,  or other dues to the State  
Government and Local Authoritie s in respect of any period whether before or after the management of the  
sick tea units had been taken over by the Central Government.  
Category III — 
Loans and other financial accommodation, together with interest, provided by the Central 
Government as well  as similar accommodation provided by commercial banks and public financial 
institutions during any period after the management of the sick tea units had been taken over by the 
Central Government.  
Category IV — 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to  the Central Government, in respect of any period 
whether before or after the management of the sick tea units had been taken over by the Central 
Government.  
  13 
 Category V — 
Secured loans obtained by any tea company for the purposes of its sick tea unit from  nationalised 
banks, Tea Board constituted under the Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953), and public financial institutions 
during any period before the management of that sick tea unit had been taken over by the Central 
Governmen t. 
Category VI — 
Any other credit av ailed of by any tea company for trade or manufacturing purposes with respect to 
its sick tea unit, during any period before the management of that sick tea unit had been taken over by the 
Central Government.  
